AN INVESTIGATION 

OF 

THE LAWS OF THOUGHT, 

ON WHICH ARE FOUNDED 

THE MATHEMATICAL THEORIES OF LOGIC AND 
PROBABILITIES. 


GEORGE BOOLE, LL. D. 

PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN QUEEN’S COLLEGE, CORK. 



JOHN RYALL, LL.D. 

VICE-PRESIDENT AND PROFESSOR OF GREEK 


IN QUEEN’S COLLEGE, CORK, 
THIS WORK IS INSCRIBED 


IN TESTIMONY OF FRIENDSHIP AND ESTEEM 



PREFACE. 


The following work is not a republication of a former treatise by the Author, 
entitled, “The Mathematical Analysis of Logic.” Its earlier portion is indeed 
devoted to the same object, and it begins by establishing the same system of 
fundamental laws, but its methods are more general, and its range of applica- 
tions far wider. It exhibits the results, matured by some years of study and 
reflection, of a principle of investigation relating to the intellectual operations, 
the previous exposition of which was written within a few weeks after its idea 
had been conceived. 

That portion of this work which relates to Logic presupposes in its reader a 
knowledge of the most important terms of the science, as usually treated, and 
of its general object. On these points there is no better guide than Archbishop 
Whately’s “Elements of Logic,” or Mr. Thomson’s “Outlines of the Laws of 
Thought.” To the former of these treatises, the present revival of attention to 
this class of studies seems in a great measure due. Some acquaintance with the 
principles of Algebra is also requisite, but it is not necessary that this application 
should have been carried beyond the solution of simple equations. For the study 
of those chapters which relate to the theory of probabilities, a somewhat larger 
knowledge of Algebra is required, and especially of the doctrine of Elimination, 
and of the solution of Equations containing more than one unknown quantity. 
Preliminary information upon the subject-matter will be found in the special 
treatises on Probabilities in “Lardner’s Cabinet Cyclopaedia,” and the “Library 
of Useful Knowledge,” the former of these by Professor De Morgan, the latter 
by Sir John Lubbock; and in an interesting series of Letters translated from 
the French of M. Quetelet. Other references will be given in the work. On 
a first perusal the reader may omit at his discretion, Chapters X., XIV., and 
xix., together with any of the applications which he may deem uninviting or 
irrelevant. 

In different parts of the work, and especially in the notes to the concluding 
chapter, will be found references to various writers, ancient and modern, chiefly 
designed to illustrate a certain view of the history of philosophy. With respect 
to these, the Author thinks it proper to add, that he has in no instance given 



PREFACE. 


IV 


a citation which he has not believed upon careful examination to be supported 
either by parallel authorities, or by the general tenor of the work from which 
it was taken. While he would gladly have avoided the introduction of anything 
which might by possibility be construed into the parade of learning, he felt it 
to be due both to his subject and to the truth, that the statements in the text 
should be accompanied by the means of verification. And if now, in bringing 
to its close a labour, of the extent of which few persons will be able to judge 
from its apparent fruits, he may be permitted to speak for a single moment 
of the feelings with which he has pursued, and with which he now lays aside, 
his task, he would say, that he never doubted that it was worthy of his best 
efforts; that he felt that whatever of truth it might bring to light was not a 
private or arbitrary thing, not dependent, as to its essence, upon any human 
opinion. He was fully aware that learned and able men maintained opinions 
upon the subject of Logic directly opposed to the views upon which the entire 
argument and procedure of his work rested. While he believed those opinions to 
be erroneous, he was conscious that his own views might insensibly be warped 
by an influence of another kind. He felt in an especial manner the danger of that 
intellectual bias which long attention to a particular aspect of truth tends to 
produce. But he trusts that out of this conflict of opinions the same truth will 
but emerge the more free from any personal admixture; that its different parts 
will be seen in their just proportion; and that none of them will eventually be 
too highly valued or too lightly regarded because of the prejudices which may 
attach to the mere form of its exposition. 

To his valued friend, the Rev. George Stephens Dickson, of Lincoln, the 
Author desires to record his obligations for much kind assistance in the revision 
of this work, and for some important suggestions. 

5, Grenville-place, Cork, 

Nov. 30th. 1853. 



CONTENTS. 

O 

CHAPTER I. 

Nature and Design of this Work, 1 

CHAPTER IP 

Signs and their Laws, 17 

CHAPTER III. 

Derivation of the Laws, 28 

CHAPTER IV. 

Division of Propositions, 37 

CHAPTER V. 

Principles of Symbolic Reasoning, 48 

CHAPTER VI. 

Of Interpretation, 59 

CHAPTER VII. 

Of Elimination, 74 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Of Reduction, 87 


v 



CONTENTS. 


vi 


CHAPTER IX. 

Methods of Abbreviation, 100 

CHAPTER X. 

Conditions of a Perfect Method, 117 

CHAPTER XI. 

Of Secondary Propositions, 124 

CHAPTER XII. 

Methods in Secondary Propositions, 137 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Clarke and Spinoza, 143 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Example of Analysis, 169 

CHAPTER XV. 

Of the Aristotelian Logic, 174 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Of the Theory of Probabilities, 187 

CHAPTER XVII. 

General Method in Probabilities, 194 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

Elementary Illustrations, 211 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Of Statistical Conditions, 227 

CHAPTER XX. 

Problems on Causes, 247 

CHAPTER XXI. 

Probability of Judgments, 293 

CHAPTER XXII. 

Constitution of the Intellect, 311 



NOTE. 


In Prop. II., p. 261, by the “absolute probabilities” of the events x,y,z.. is 
meant simply what the probabilities of those events ought to be, in order that, 
regarding them as independent, and their probabilities as our only data, the 
calculated probabilities of the same events under the condition V should be 
p,g,r.. The statement of the appended problem of the urn must be modified 
in a similar way. The true solution of that problem, as actually stated, is 
p' = cp , q' = cq, in which c is the arbitrary probability of the condition that 
the ball drawn shall be either white, or of marble, or both at once. -See p. 270, 
CASE II.* 

Accordingly, since by the logical reduction the solution of all questions in 
the theory of probabilities is brought to a form in which, from the probabil- 
ities of simple events, s, t, &c. under a given condition, V, it is required to 
determine the probability of some combination, A, of those events under the 
same condition, the principle of the demonstration in Prop. IV. is really the 
following:- “The probability of such combination A under the condition V must 
be calculated as if the events s, t, &c. were independent, and possessed of 
such probabilities as would cause the derived probabilities of the said events 
under the same condition V to be such as are assigned to them in the data.” 
This principle I regard as axiomatic. At the same time it admits of indefinite 
verification, as well directly as through the results of the method of which it 
forms the basis. I think it right to add, that it was in the above form that the 
principle first presented itself to my mind, and that it is thus that I have always 
understood it, the error in the particular problem referred to having arisen from 
inadvertence in the choice of a material illustration. 



Chapter I 


NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. 


1. The design of the following treatise is to investigate the fundamental laws of 
those operations of the mind by which reasoning is performed; to give expression 
to them in the symbolical language of a Calculus, and upon this foundation to 
establish the science of Logic and construct its method; to make that method 
itself the basis of a general method for the application of the mathematical 
doctrine of Probabilities; and, finally, to collect from the various elements of 
truth brought to view in the course of these inquiries some probable intimations 
concerning the nature and constitution of the human mind. 

2. That this design is not altogether a novel one it is almost needless to 
remark, and it is well known that to its two main practical divisions of Logic 
and Probabilities a very considerable share of the attention of philosophers has 
been directed. In its ancient and scholastic form, indeed, the subject of Logic 
stands almost exclusively associated with the great name of Aristotle. As it 
was presented to ancient Greece in the partly technical, partly metaphysical 
disquisitions of the Organon, such, with scarcely any essential change, it has 
continued to the present day. The stream of original inquiry has rather been di- 
rected towards questions of general philosophy, which, though they have arisen 
among the disputes of the logicians, have outgrown their origin, and given to 
successive ages of speculation their peculiar bent and character. The eras of 
Porphyry and Proclus, of Anselm and Abelard, of Ramus, and of Descartes, 
together with the final protests of Bacon and Locke, rise up before the mind 
as examples of the remoter influences of the study upon the course of human 
thought, partly in suggesting topics fertile of discussion, partly in provoking 
remonstrance against its own undue pretensions. The history of the theory 
of Probabilities, on the other hand, has presented far more of that character of 
steady growth which belongs to science. In its origin the early genius of Pascal, - 
in its maturer stages of development the most recondite of all the mathematical 
speculations of Laplace, -were directed to its improvement; to omit here the 
mention of other names scarcely less distinguished than these. As the study of 
Logic has been remarkable for the kindred questions of Metaphysics to which 
it has given occasion, so that of Probabilities also has been remarkable for the 
impulse which it has bestowed upon the higher departments of mathematical 


1 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


2 


science. Each of these subjects has, moreover, been justly regarded as having 
relation to a speculative as well as to a practical end. To enable us to deduce 
correct inferences from given premises is not the only object of Logic; nor is it 
the sole claim of the theory of Probabilities that it teaches us how to establish 
the business of life assurance on a secure basis; and how to condense whatever 
is valuable in the records of innumerable observations in astronomy, in physics, 
or in that field of social inquiry which is fast assuming a character of great 
importance. Both these studies have also an interest of another kind, derived 
from the light which they shed upon the intellectual powers. They instruct us 
concerning the mode in which language and number serve as instrumental aids 
to the processes of reasoning; they reveal to us in some degree the connexion 
between different powers of our common intellect; they set before us what, in 
the two domains of demonstrative and of probable knowledge, are the essen- 
tial standards of truth and correctness, -standards not derived from without, 
but deeply founded in the constitution of the human faculties. These ends of 
speculation yield neither in interest nor in dignity, nor yet, it may be added, in 
importance, to the practical objects, with the pursuit of which they have been 
historically associated. To unfold the secret laws and relations of those high 
faculties of thought by which all beyond the merely perceptive knowledge of the 
world and of ourselves is attained or matured, is an object which does not stand 
in need of commendation to a rational mind. 

3. But although certain parts of the design of this work have been entertained 
by others, its general conception, its method, and, to a considerable extent, 
its results, are believed to be original. For this reason I shall offer, in the 
present chapter, some preparatory statements and explanations, in order that 
the real aim of this treatise may be understood, and the treatment of its subject 
facilitated. 

It is designed, in the first place, to investigate the fundamental laws of those 
operations of the mind by which reasoning is performed. It is unnecessary to 
enter here into any argument to prove that the operations of the mind are in 
a certain real sense subject to laws, and that a science of the mind is therefore 
possible. If these are questions which admit of doubt, that doubt is not to be 
met by an endeavour to settle the point of dispute a priori, but by directing 
the attention of the objector to the evidence of actual laws, by referring him 
to an actual science. And thus the solution of that doubt would belong not to 
the introduction to this treatise, but to the treatise itself. Let the assumption 
be granted, that a science of the intellectual powers is possible, and let us for a 
moment consider how the knowledge of it is to be obtained. 

4. Like all other sciences, that of the intellectual operations must primarily 
rest upon observation, -the subject of such observation being the very operations 
and processes of which we desire to determine the laws. But while the necessity 
of a foundation in experience is thus a condition common to all sciences, there 
are some special differences between the modes in which this principle becomes 
available for the determination of general truths when the subject of inquiry is 
the mind, and when the subject is external nature. To these it is necessary to 
direct attention. 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


3 


The general laws of Nature are not, for the most part, immediate objects 
of perception. They are either inductive inferences from a large body of facts, 
the common truth in which they express, or, in their origin at least, physical 
hypotheses of a causal nature serving to explain phaenomena with undeviating 
precision, and to enable us to predict new combinations of them. They are in all 
cases, and in the strictest sense of the term, probable conclusions, approaching, 
indeed, ever and ever nearer to certainty, as they receive more and more of the 
confirmation of experience. But of the character of probability, in the strict and 
proper sense of that term, they are never wholly divested. On the other hand, 
the knowledge of the laws of the mind does not require as its basis any extensive 
collection of observations. The general truth is seen in the particular instance, 
and it is not confirmed by the repetition of instances. We may illustrate this 
position by an obvious example. It may be a question whether that formula of 
reasoning, which is called the dictum of Aristotle, de omni et nullo , expresses a 
primary law of human reasoning or not; but it is no question that it expresses a 
general truth in Logic. Now that truth is made manifest in all its generality by 
reflection upon a single instance of its application. And this is both an evidence 
that the particular principle or formula in question is founded upon some general 
law or laws of the mind, and an illustration of the doctrine that the perception 
of such general truths is not derived from an induction from many instances, but 
is involved in the clear apprehension of a single instance. In connexion with this 
truth is seen the not less important one that our knowledge of the laws upon 
which the science of the intellectual powers rests, whatever may be its extent or 
its deficiency, is not probable knowledge. For we not only see in the particular 
example the general truth, but we see it also as a certain truth, -a truth, our 
confidence in which will not continue to increase with increasing experience of 
its practical verifications. 

5. But if the general truths of Logic are of such a nature that when presented 
to the mind they at once command assent, wherein consists the difficulty of 
constructing the Science of Logic? Not, it may be answered, in collecting the 
materials of knowledge, but in discriminating their nature, and determining 
their mutual place and relation. All sciences consist of general truths, but of 
those truths some only are primary and fundamental, others are secondary and 
derived. The laws of elliptic motion, discovered by Kepler, are general truths 
in astronomy, but they are not its fundamental truths. And it is so also in 
the purely mathematical sciences. An almost boundless diversity of theorems, 
which are known, and an infinite possibility of others, as yet unknown, rest 
together upon the foundation of a few simple axioms; and yet these are all 
general truths. It may be added, that they are truths which to an intelligence 
sufficiently refined would shine forth in their own unborrowed light, without 
the need of those connecting links of thought, those steps of wearisome and 
often painful deduction, by which the knowledge of them is actually acquired. 
Let us define as fundamental those laws and principles from which all other 
general truths of science may be deduced, and into which they may all be again 
resolved. Shall we then err in regarding that as the true science of Logic which, 
laying down certain elementary laws, confirmed by the very testimony of the 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


4 


mind, permits us thence to deduce, by uniform processes, the entire chain of its 
secondary consequences, and furnishes, for its practical applications, methods 
of perfect generality? Let it be considered whether in any science, viewed either 
as a system of truth or as the foundation of a practical art, there can properly 
be any other test of the completeness and the fundamental character of its laws, 
than the completeness of its system of derived truths, and the generality of 
the methods which it serves to establish. Other questions may indeed present 
themselves. Convenience, prescription, individual preference, may urge their 
claims and deserve attention. But as respects the question of what constitutes 
science in its abstract integrity, I apprehend that no other considerations than 
the above are properly of any value. 

6. It is designed, in the next place, to give expression in this treatise to the 
fundamental laws of reasoning in the symbolical language of a Calculus. Upon 
this head it will suffice to say, that those laws are such as to suggest this mode of 
expression, and to give to it a peculiar and exclusive fitness for the ends in view. 
There is not only a close analogy between the operations of the mind in general 
reasoning and its operations in the particular science of Algebra, but there is to 
a considerable extent an exact agreement in the laws by which the two classes of 
operations are conducted. Of course the laws must in both cases be determined 
independently; any formal agreement between them can only be established 
a posteriori by actual comparison. To borrow the notation of the science of 
Number, and then assume that in its new application the laws by which its use is 
governed will remain unchanged, would be mere hypothesis. There exist, indeed, 
certain general principles founded in the very nature of language, by which the 
use of symbols, which are but the elements of scientific language, is determined. 
To a certain extent these elements are arbitrary. Their interpretation is purely 
conventional: we are permitted to employ them in whatever sense we please. But 
this permission is limited by two indispensable conditions, -first, that from the 
sense once conventionally established we never, in the same process of reasoning, 
depart; secondly, that the laws by which the process is conducted be founded 
exclusively upon the above fixed sense or meaning of the symbols employed. 
In accordance with these principles, any agreement which may be established 
between the laws of the symbols of Logic and those of Algebra can but issue 
in an agreement of processes. The two provinces of interpretation remain apart 
and independent, each subject to its own laws and conditions. 

Now the actual investigations of the following pages exhibit Logic, in its 
practical aspect, as a system of processes carried on by the aid of symbols having 
a definite interpretation, and subject to laws founded upon that interpretation 
alone. But at the same time they exhibit those laws as identical in form with 
the laws of the general symbols of algebra, with this single addition, viz., that 
the symbols of Logic are further subject to a special law (Chap, II.), to which 
the symbols of quantity, as such, are not subject. Upon the nature and the 
evidence of this law it is not purposed here to dwell. These questions will be 
fully discussed in a future page. But as constituting the essential ground of 
difference between those forms of inference with which Logic is conversant, and 
those which present themselves in the particular science of Number, the law in 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


5 


question is deserving of more than a passing notice. It may be said that it lies at 
the very foundation of general reasoning, -that it governs those intellectual acts 
of conception or of imagination which are preliminary to the processes of logical 
deduction, and that it gives to the processes themselves much of their actual 
form and expression. It may hence be affirmed that this law constitutes the 
germ or seminal principle, of which every approximation to a general method 
in Logic is the more or less perfect development. 

7. The principle has already been laid down (5) that the sufficiency and truly 
fundamental character of any assumed system of laws in the science of Logic 
must partly be seen in the perfection of the methods to which they conduct 
us. It remains, then, to consider what the requirements of a general method in 
Logic are, and how far they are fulfilled in the system of the present work. 

Logic is conversant with two kinds of relations, -relations among things, and 
relations among facts. But as facts are expressed by propositions, the latter 
species of relation may, at least for the purposes of Logic, be resolved into a 
relation among propositions. The assertion that the fact or event A is an invari- 
able consequent of the fact or event B may, to this extent at least, be regarded 
as equivalent to the assertion, that the truth of the proposition affirming the oc- 
currence of the event B always implies the truth of the proposition affirming the 
occurrence of the event A. Instead, then, of saying that Logic is conversant with 
relations among things and relations among facts, we are permitted to say that 
it is concerned with relations among things and relations among propositions. 
Of the former kind of relations we have an example in the proposition- “All men 
are mortal;” of the latter kind in the proposition- “If the sun is totally eclipsed, 
the stars will become visible.” The one expresses a relation between “men” and 
“mortal beings,” the other between the elementary propositions- “The sun is to- 
tally eclipsed;” “The stars will become visible.” Among such relations I suppose 
to be included those which affirm or deny existence with respect to things, and 
those which affirm or deny truth with respect to propositions. Now let those 
things or those propositions among which relation is expressed be termed the 
elements of the propositions by which such relation is expressed. Proceeding 
from this definition, we may then say that the premises of any logical argument 
express given relations among certain elements, and that the conclusion must 
express an implied relation among those elements, or among a part of them, i.e. 
a relation implied by or inferentially involved in the premises. 

8. Now this being premised, the requirements of a general method in Logic 
seem to be the following:- 

lst. As the conclusion must express a relation among the whole or among 
a part of the elements involved in the premises, it is requisite that we should 
possess the means of eliminating those elements which we desire not to appear 
in the conclusion, and of determining the whole amount of relation implied by 
the premises among the elements which we wish to retain. Those elements 
which do not present themselves in the conclusion are, in the language of the 
common Logic, called middle terms; and the species of elimination exemplified 
in treatises on Logic consists in deducing from two propositions, containing a 
common element or middle term, a conclusion connecting the two remaining 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


6 


terms. But the problem of elimination, as contemplated in this work, possesses 
a much wider scope. It proposes not merely the elimination of one middle 
term from two propositions, but the elimination generally of middle terms from 
propositions, without regard to the number of either of them, or to the nature 
of their connexion. To this object neither the processes of Logic nor those of 
Algebra, in their actual state, present any strict parallel. In the latter science 
the problem of elimination is known to be limited in the following manner:-From 
two equations we can eliminate one symbol of quantity; from three equations 
two symbols; and, generally, from n equations n — 1 symbols. But though this 
condition, necessary in Algebra, seems to prevail in the existing Logic also, it 
has no essential place in Logic as a science. There, no relation whatever can be 
proved to prevail between the number of terms to be eliminated and the number 
of propositions from which the elimination is to be effected. From the equation 
representing a single proposition, any number of symbols representing terms 
or elements in Logic may be eliminated; and from any number of equations 
representing propositions, one or any other number of symbols of this kind may 
be eliminated in a similar manner. For such elimination there exists one general 
process applicable to all cases. This is one of the many remarkable consequences 
of that distinguishing law of the symbols of Logic, to which attention has been 
already directed. 

2ndly. It should be within the province of a general method in Logic to ex- 
press the final relation among the elements of the conclusion by any admissible 
kind of proposition, or in any selected order of terms. Among varieties of kind 
we may reckon those which logicians have designated by the terms categorical, 
hypothetical, disjunctive, &c. To a choice or selection in the order of the terms, 
we may refer whatsoever is dependent upon the appearance of particular ele- 
ments in the subject or in the predicate, in the antecedent or in the consequent, 
of that proposition which forms the “conclusion.” But waiving the language of 
the schools, let us consider what really distinct species of problems may present 
themselves to our notice. We have seen that the elements of the final or inferred 
relation may either be things or propositions. Suppose the former case; then 
it might be required to deduce from the premises a definition or description of 
some one thing, or class of things, constituting an element of the conclusion in 
terms of the other things involved in it. Or we might form the conception of 
some thing or class of things, involving more than one of the elements of the 
conclusion, and require its expression in terms of the other elements. Again, 
suppose the elements retained in the conclusion to be propositions, we might 
desire to ascertain such points as the following, viz., Whether, in virtue of the 
premises, any of those propositions, taken singly, are true or false?- Whether 
particular combinations of them are true or false?- Whether, assuming a par- 
ticular proposition to be true, any consequences will follow, and if so, what 
consequences, with respect to the other propositions?-Whether any particular 
condition being assumed with reference to certain of the propositions, any con- 
sequences, and what consequences, will follow with respect to the others? and so 
on. I say that these are general questions, which it should fall within the scope 
or province of a general method in Logic to solve. Perhaps we might include 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


7 


them all under this one statement of the final problem of practical Logic. Given 
a set of premises expressing relations among certain elements, whether things 
or propositions: required explicitly the whole relation consequent among any of 
those elements under any proposed conditions, and in any proposed form. That 
this problem, under all its aspects, is resolvable, will hereafter appear. But it is 
not for the sake of noticing this fact, that the above inquiry into the nature and 
the functions of a general method in Logic has been introduced. It is necessary 
that the reader should apprehend what are the specific ends of the investigation 
upon which we are entering, as well as the principles which are to guide us to 
the attainment of them. 

9. Possibly it may here be said that the Logic of Aristotle, in its rules 
of syllogism and conversion, sets forth the elementary processes of which all 
reasoning consists, and that beyond these there is neither scope nor occasion 
for a general method. I have no desire to point out the defects of the common 
Logic, nor do I wish to refer to it any further than is necessary, in order to 
place in its true light the nature of the present treatise. With this end alone in 
view, I would remark:-lst. That syllogism, conversion, &c., are not the ultimate 
processes of Logic. It will be shown in this treatise that they are founded upon, 
and are resolvable into, ulterior and more simple processes which constitute the 
real elements of method in Logic. Nor is it true in fact that all inference is 
reducible to the particular forms of syllogism and conversion.- Vide Chap. xv. 
2ndly. If all inference were reducible to these two processes (and it has been 
maintained that it is reducible to syllogism alone), there would still exist the 
same necessity for a general method. For it would still be requisite to determine 
in what order the processes should succeed each other, as well as their particular 
nature, in order that the desired relation should be obtained. By the desired 
relation I mean that full relation which, in virtue of the premises, connects any 
elements selected out of the premises at will, and which, moreover, expresses that 
relation in any desired form and order. If we may judge from the mathematical 
sciences, which are the most perfect examples of method known, this directive 
function of Method constitutes its chief office and distinction. The fundamental 
processes of arithmetic, for instance, are in themselves but the elements of a 
possible science. To assign their nature is the first business of its method, but 
to arrange their succession is its subsequent and higher function. In the more 
complex examples of logical deduction, and especially in those which form a 
basis for the solution of difficult questions in the theory of Probabilities, the aid 
of a directive method, such as a Calculus alone can supply, is indispensable. 

10. Whence it is that the ultimate laws of Logic are mathematical in their 
form; why they are, except in a single point, identical with the general laws of 
Number; and why in that particular point they differ;-are questions upon which 
it might not be very remote from presumption to endeavour to pronounce a 
positive judgment. Probably they lie beyond the reach of our limited faculties. 
It may, perhaps, be permitted to the mind to attain a knowledge of the laws to 
which it is itself subject, without its being also given to it to understand their 
ground and origin, or even, except in a very limited degree, to comprehend their 
fitness for their end, as compared with other and conceivable systems of law. 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


Such knowledge is, indeed, unnecessary for the ends of science, which properly 
concerns itself with what is, and seeks not for grounds of preference or reasons 
of appointment. These considerations furnish a sufficient answer to all protests 
against the exhibition of Logic in the form of a Calculus. It is not because we 
choose to assign to it such a mode of manifestation, but because the ultimate 
laws of thought render that mode possible, and prescribe its character, and 
forbid, as it would seem, the perfect manifestation of the science in any other 
form, that such a mode demands adoption. It is to be remembered that it is the 
business of science not to create laws, but to discover them. We do not originate 
the constitution of our own minds, greatly as it may be in our power to modify 
their character. And as the laws of the human intellect do not depend upon our 
will, so the forms of the science, of which they constitute the basis, are in all 
essential regards independent of individual choice. 

11. Beside the general statement of the principles of the above method, 
this treatise will exhibit its application to the analysis of a considerable va- 
riety of propositions, and of trains of propositions constituting the premises 
of demonstrative arguments. These examples have been selected from various 
writers, they differ greatly in complexity, and they embrace a wide range of 
subjects. Though in this particular respect it may appear to some that too 
great a latitude of choice has been exercised, I do not deem it necessary to offer 
any apology upon this account. That Logic, as a science, is susceptible of very 
wide applications is admitted; but it is equally certain that its ultimate forms 
and processes are mathematical. Any objection a priori which may therefore 
be supposed to lie against the adoption of such forms and processes in the dis- 
cussion of a problem of morals or of general philosophy must be founded upon 
misapprehension or false analogy. It is not of the essence of mathematics to be 
conversant with the ideas of number and quantity. Whether as a general habit 
of mind it would be desirable to apply symbolical processes to moral argument, 
is another question. Possibly, as I have elsewhere observed, 1 the perfection of 
the method of Logic may be chiefly valuable as an evidence of the speculative 
truth of its principles. To supersede the employment of common reasoning, or 
to subject it to the rigour of technical forms, would be the last desire of one 
who knows the value of that intellectual toil and warfare which imparts to the 
mind an athletic vigour, and teaches it to contend with difficulties, and to rely 
upon itself in emergencies. Nevertheless, cases may arise in which the value of 
a scientific procedure, even in those things which fall confessedly under the or- 
dinary dominion of the reason, may be felt and acknowledged. Some examples 
of this kind will be found in the present work. 

12. The general doctrine and method of Logic above explained form also 
the basis of a theory and corresponding method of Probabilities. Accordingly, 
the development of such a theory and method, upon the above principles, will 
constitute a distinct object of the present treatise. Of the nature of this appli- 
cation it may be desirable to give here some account, more especially as regards 
the character of the solutions to which it leads. In connexion with this object 

1 Mathematical Analysis of Logic. London : G. Bell. 1847. 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


9 


some further detail will be requisite concerning the forms in which the results 
of the logical analysis are presented. 

The ground of this necessity of a prior method in Logic, as the basis of a 
theory of Probabilities, may be stated in a few words. Before we can determine 
the mode in which the expected frequency of occurrence of a particular event is 
dependent upon the known frequency of occurrence of any other events, we must 
be acquainted with the mutual dependence of the events themselves. Speaking 
technically, we must be able to express the event whose probability is sought, 
as a function of the events whose probabilities are given. Now this explicit 
determination belongs in all instances to the department of Logic. Probability, 
however, in its mathematical acceptation, admits of numerical measurement. 
Hence the subject of Probabilities belongs equally to the science of Number and 
to that of Logic. In recognising the co-ordinate existence of both these elements, 
the present treatise differs from all previous ones; and as this difference not 
only affects the question of the possibility of the solution of problems in a large 
number of instances, but also introduces new and important elements into the 
solutions obtained, I deem it necessary to state here, at some length, the peculiar 
consequences of the theory developed in the following pages. 

13. The measure of the probability of an event is usually defined as a fraction, 
of which the numerator represents the number of cases favourable to the event, 
and the denominator the whole number of cases favourable and unfavourable; 
all cases being supposed equally likely to happen. That definition is adopted 
in the present work. At the same time it is shown that there is another aspect 
of the subject (shortly to be referred to) which might equally be regarded as 
fundamental, and which would actually lead to the same system of methods 
and conclusions. It may be added, that so far as the received conclusions of 
the theory of Probabilities extend, and so far as they are consequences of its 
fundamental definitions, they do not differ from the results (supposed to be 
equally correct in inference) of the method of this work. 

Again, although questions in the theory of Probabilities present themselves 
under various aspects, and may be variously modified by algebraical and other 
conditions, there seems to be one general type to which all such questions, or 
so much of each of them as truly belongs to the theory of Probabilities, may 
be referred. Considered with reference to the data and the qucesitum, that type 
may be described as follows: — 1st. The data are the probabilities of one or 
more given events, each probability being either that of the absolute fulfilment 
of the event to which it relates, or the probability of its fulfilment under given 
supposed conditions. 2ndly. The qucesitum, or object sought, is the probability 
of the fulfilment, absolutely or conditionally, of some other event differing in 
expression from those in the data, but more or less involving the same elements. 
As concerns the data, they are either causally given , — as when the probability 
of a particular throw of a die is deduced from a knowledge of the constitution 
of the piece, — or they are derived from observation of repeated instances of the 
success or failure of events. In the latter case the probability of an event may be 
defined as the limit toward which the ratio of the favourable to the whole number 
of observed cases approaches (the uniformity of nature being presupposed) as 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


10 


the observations are indefinitely continued. Lastly, as concerns the nature or 
relation of the events in question, an important distinction remains. Those 
events are either simple or compound. By a compound event is meant one of 
which the expression in language, or the conception in thought, depends upon 
the expression or the conception of other events, which, in relation to it, may be 
regarded as simple events. To say “it rains,” or to say “it thunders,” is to express 
the occurrence of a simple event; but to say “it rains and thunders,” or to say 
“it either rains or thunders,” is to express that of a compound event. For the 
expression of that event depends upon the elementary expressions, “it rains,” 
“it thunders.” The criterion of simple events is not, therefore, any supposed 
simplicity in their nature. It is founded solely on the mode of their expression 
in language or conception in thought. 

14. Now one general problem, which the existing theory of Probabilities 
enables us to solve, is the following, viz.: — Given the probabilities of any simple 
events: required the probability of a given compound event, i.e. of an event 
compounded in a given manner out of the given simple events. The problem 
can also be solved when the compound event, whose probability is required, is 
subjected to given conditions, i.e. to conditions dependent also in a given man- 
ner on the given simple events. Beside this general problem, there exist also 
particular problems of which the principle of solution is known. Various ques- 
tions relating to causes and effects can be solved by known methods under the 
particular hypothesis that the causes are mutually exclusive, but apparently not 
otherwise. Beyond this it is not clear that any advance has been made toward 
the solution of what may be regarded as the general problem of the science, 
viz.: Given the probabilities of any events, simple or compound, conditioned 
or unconditioned: required the probability of any other event equally arbitrary 
in expression and conception. In the statement of this question it is not even 
postulated that the events whose probabilities are given, and the one whose 
probability is sought, should involve some common elements, because it is the 
office of a method to determine whether the data of a problem are sufficient for 
the end in view, and to indicate, when they are not so, wherein the deficiency 
consists. 

This problem, in the most unrestricted form of its statement, is resolvable by 
the method of the present treatise; or, to speak more precisely, its theoretical 
solution is completely given, and its practical solution is brought to depend 
only upon processes purely mathematical, such as the resolution and analysis 
of equations. The order and character of the general solution may be thus 
described. 

15. In the first place it is always possible, by the preliminary method of the 
Calculus of Logic, to express the event whose probability is sought as a logical 
function of the events whose probabilities are given. The result is of the following 
character: Suppose that X represents the event whose probability is sought, A , 
B, C, &c. the events whose probabilities are given, those events being either 
simple or compound. Then the whole relation of the event X to the events A, 
B, C, &c. is deduced in the form of what mathematicians term a development , 
consisting, in the most general case, of four distinct classes of terms. By the 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


11 


first class are expressed those combinations of the events A, B, C, which both 
necessarily accompany and necessarily indicate the occurrence of the event X; 
by the second class, those combinations which necessarily accompany, but do 
not necessarily imply, the occurrence of the event X\ by the third class, those 
combinations whose occurrence in connexion with the event X is impossible, 
but not otherwise impossible; by the fourth class, those combinations whose 
occurrence is impossible under any circumstances. I shall not dwell upon this 
statement of the result of the logical analysis of the problem, further than to 
remark that the elements which it presents are precisely those by which the 
expectation of the event X , as dependent upon our knowledge of the events A, B , 
C , is, or alone can be, affected. General reasoning would verify this conclusion; 
but general reasoning would not usually avail to disentangle the complicated 
web events and circumstances from which the solution above described must be 
evolved. The attainment of this object constitutes the first step towards the 
complete solution of the question I proposed. It is to be noted that thus far the 
process of solution is logical, i. e. conducted by symbols of logical significance, 
and resulting in an equation interpretable into a proposition. Let this result be 
termed the final logical equation. 

The second step of the process deserves attentive remark. From the final 
logical equation to which the previous step has conducted us, are deduced, 
by inspection, a series of algebraic equations implicitly involving the complete 
solution of the problem proposed. Of the mode in which this transition is 
effected let it suffice to say, that there exists a definite relation between the laws 
by which the probabilities of events are expressed as algebraic functions of the 
probabilities of other events upon which they depend, and the laws by which 
the logical connexion of the events is itself expressed. This relation, like the 
other coincidences of formal law which have been referred to, is not founded 
upon hypothesis, but is made known to us by observation (1.4), and reflection. 
If, however, its reality were assumed a priori as the basis of the very definition 
of Probability, strict deduction would thence lead us to the received numerical 
definition as a necessary consequence. The Theory of Probabilities stands, as 
it has already been remarked (1.12), in equally close relation to Logic and to 
Arithmetic; and it is indifferent, so far as results are concerned, whether we 
regard it as springing out of the latter of these sciences, or as founded in the 
mutual relations which connect the two together. 

16. There are some circumstances, interesting perhaps to the mathematician, 
attending the general solutions deduced by the above method, which it may be 
desirable to notice. 

1st. As the method is independent of the number and the nature of the 
data, it continues to be applicable when the latter are insufficient to render 
determinate the value sought. When such is the case, the final expression of the 
solution will contain terms with arbitrary constant coefficients. To such terms 
there will correspond terms in the final logical equation (I. 15), the interpretation 
of which will inform us what new data are requisite in order to determine the 
values of those constants, and thus render the numerical solution complete. 
If such data are not to be obtained, we can still, by giving to the constants 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


12 


their limiting values 0 and 1, determine the limits within which the probability 
sought must lie independently of all further experience. When the event whose 
probability is sought is quite independent of those whose probabilities are given, 
the limits thus obtained for its value will be 0 and 1, as it is evident that they 
ought to be, and the interpretation of the constants will only lead to a re- 
statement of the original problem. 

2ndly. The expression of the final solution will in all cases involve a particular 
element of quantity, determinable by the solution of an algebraic equation. Now 
when that equation is of an elevated degree, a difficulty may seem to arise as 
to the selection of the proper root. There are, indeed, cases in which both the 
elements given and the element sought are so obviously restricted by necessary 
conditions that no choice remains. But in complex instances the discovery of 
such conditions, by unassisted force of reasoning, would be hopeless. A distinct 
method is requisite for this end, — a method which might not appropriately be 
termed the Calculus of Statistical Conditions, into the nature of this method 
I shall not here further enter than to say, that, like the previous method, it is 
based upon the employment of the “final logical equation,” and that it definitely 
assigns, 1st, the conditions which must be fulfilled among the numerical elements 
of the data, in order that the problem may be real, i.e. derived from a possible 
experience', 2ndly, the numerical limits, within which the probability sought 
must have been confined, if, instead of being determined by theory, it had been 
deduced directly by observation from the same system of phaenomena from 
which the data were derived. It is clear that these limits will be actual limits of 
the probability sought. Now, on supposing the data subject to the conditions 
above assigned to them, it appears in every instance which I have examined that 
there exists one root, and only one root, of the final algebraic equation which is 
subject to the required limitations. Every source of ambiguity is thus removed. 
It would even seem that new truths relating to the theory of algebraic equations 
are thus incidentally brought to light. It is remarkable that the special element 
of quantity, to which the previous discussion relates, depends only upon the 
data, and not at all upon the quassitum of the problem proposed. Hence the 
solution of each particular problem unties the knot of difficulty for a system of 
problems, viz., for that system of problems which is marked by the possession of 
common data, independently of the nature of their qucesita. This circumstance 
is important whenever from a particular system of data it is required to deduce a 
series of connected conclusions. And it further gives to the solutions of particular 
problems that character of relationship, derived from their dependence upon a 
central and fundamental unity, which not unfrequently marks the application 
of general methods. 

17. But though the above considerations, with others of a like nature, justify 
the assertion that the method of this treatise, for the solution of questions in the 
theory of Probabilities, is a general method, it does not thence follow that we are 
relieved in all cases from the necessity of recourse to hypothetical grounds. It has 
been observed that a solution may consist entirely of terms affected by arbitrary 
constant coefficients, — may, in fact, be wholly indefinite. The application of 
the method of this work to some of the most important questions within its 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


13 


range would-were the data of experience alone employed-present results of this 
character. To obtain a definite solution it is necessary, in such cases, to have 
recourse to hypotheses possessing more or less of independent probability, but 
incapable of exact verification. Generally speaking, such hypotheses will differ 
from the immediate results of experience in partaking of a logical rather than 
of a numerical character; in prescribing the conditions under which phaenomena 
occur, rather than assigning the relative frequency of their occurrence. This 
circumstance is, however, unimportant. Whatever their nature may be, the 
hypotheses assumed must thenceforth be regarded as belonging to the actual 
data, although tending, as is obvious, to give to the solution itself somewhat of a 
hypothetical character. With this understanding as to the possible sources of the 
data actually employed, the method is perfectly general, but for the correctness 
of the hypothetical elements introduced it is of course no more responsible than 
for the correctness of the numerical data derived from experience. 

In illustration of these remarks we may observe that the theory of the reduc- 
tion of astronomical observations 2 rests, in part, upon hypothetical grounds. 
It assumes certain positions as to the nature of error, the equal probabilities 
of its occurrence in the form of excess or defect, &c., without which it would 
be impossible to obtain any definite conclusions from a system of conflicting 
observations. But granting such positions as the above, the residue of the inves- 
tigation falls strictly within the province of the theory of Probabilities. Similar 
observations apply to the important problem which proposes to deduce from 
the records of the majorities of a deliberative assembly the mean probability of 
correct judgment in one of its members. If the method of this treatise be applied 
to the mere numerical data, the solution obtained is of that wholly indefinite 
kind above described. And to show in a more eminent degree the insufficiency 
of those data by themselves, the interpretation of the arbitrary constants (I. 
16) which appear in the solution, merely produces a re-statement of the origi- 
nal problem. Admitting, however, the hypothesis of the independent formation 
of opinion in the individual mind, either absolutely, as in the speculations of 
Laplace and Poisson, or under limitations imposed by the actual data, as will 
be seen in this treatise, Chap. XXI., the problem assumes a far more definite 
character. It will be manifest that the ulterior value of the theory of Prob- 
abilities must depend very much upon the correct formation of such mediate 
hypotheses, where the purely experimental data are insufficient for definite so- 
lution, and where that further experience indicated by the interpretation of the 
final logical equation is unattainable. Upon the other hand, an undue readiness 
to form hypotheses in subjects which from their very nature are placed beyond 
human ken, must re-act upon the credit of the theory of Probabilities, and tend 
to throw doubt in the general mind over its most legitimate conclusions. 

18. It would, perhaps, be premature to speculate here upon the question 
whether the methods of abstract science are likely at any future day to render 
service in the investigation of social problems at all commensurate with those 

2 The author designs to treat this subject either in a separate work or in a future Appendix. 
In the present treatise he avoids the use of the integral calculus. 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


14 


which they have rendered in various departments of physical inquiry. An at- 
tempt to resolve this question upon pure a priori grounds of reasoning would be 
very likely to mislead us. For example, the consideration of human free-agency 
would seem at first sight to preclude the idea that the movements of the social 
system should ever manifest that character of orderly evolution which we are 
prepared to expect under the reign of a physical necessity. Yet already do the 
researches of the statist reveal to us facts at variance with such an anticipa- 
tion. Thus the records of crime and pauperism present a degree of regularity 
unknown in regions in which the disturbing influence of human wants and pas- 
sions is unfelt. On the other hand, the distemperature of seasons, the eruption 
of volcanoes, the spread of blight in the vegetable, or of epidemic maladies in 
the animal kingdom, things apparently or chiefly the product of natural causes, 
refuse to be submitted to regular and apprehensible laws. “Fickle as the wind,” 
is a proverbial expression. Reflection upon these points teaches us in some de- 
gree to correct our earlier judgments. We learn that we are not to expect, under 
the dominion of necessity, an order perceptible to human observation, unless 
the play of its producing causes is sufficiently simple; nor, on the other hand, 
to deem that free agency in the individual is inconsistent with regularity in the 
motions of the system of which he forms a component unit. Human freedom 
stands out as an apparent fact of our consciousness, while it is also, I conceive, 
a highly probable deduction of analogy (Chap, XXII.) from the nature of that 
portion of the mind whose scientific constitution we are able to investigate. 
But whether accepted as a fact reposing on consciousness, or as a conclusion 
sanctioned by the reason, it must be so interpreted as not to conflict with an 
established result of observation, viz.: that phsenomena, in the production of 
which large masses of men are concerned, do actually exhibit a very remarkable 
degree of regularity, enabling us to collect in each succeeding age the elements 
upon which the estimate of its state and progress, so far as manifested in out- 
ward results, must depend. There is thus no sound objection a priori against 
the possibility of that species of data which is requisite for the experimental 
foundation of a science of social statistics. Again, whatever other object this 
treatise may accomplish, it is presumed that it will leave no doubt as to the 
existence of a system of abstract principles and of methods founded upon those 
principles, by which any collective body of social data may be made to yield, 
in an explicit form, whatever information they implicitly involve. There may, 
where the data are exceedingly complex, be very great difficulty in obtaining 
this information, — difficulty due not to any imperfection of the theory, but to 
the laborious character of the analytical processes to which it points. It is quite 
conceivable that in many instances that difficulty may be such as only united 
effort could overcome. But that we possess theoretically in all cases, and prac- 
tically, so far as the requisite labour of calculation may be supplied, the means 
of evolving from statistical records the seeds of general truths which lie buried 
amid the mass of figures, is a position which may, I conceive, with perfect safety 
be affirmed. 

19. But beyond these general positions I do not venture to speak in terms of 
assurance. Whether the results which might be expected from the application 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


15 


of scientific methods to statistical records, over and above those the discovery of 
which requires no such aid, would so far compensate for the labour involved as 
to render it worth while to institute such investigations upon a proper scale of 
magnitude, is a point which could, perhaps, only be determined by experience. 
It is to be desired, and it might without great presumption be expected, that in 
this, as in other instances, the abstract doctrines of science should minister to 
more than intellectual gratification. Nor, viewing the apparent order in which 
the sciences have been evolved, and have successively contributed their aid to 
the service of mankind, does it seem very improbable that a day may arrive in 
which similar aid may accrue from departments of the field of knowledge yet 
more intimately allied with the elements of human welfare. Let the speculations 
of this treatise, however, rest at present simply upon their claim to be regarded 
as true. 

20. I design, in the last place, to endeavour to educe from the scientific 
results of the previous inquiries some general intimations respecting the nature 
and constitution of the human mind. Into the grounds of the possibility of this 
species of inference it is not necessary to enter here. One or two general ob- 
servations may serve to indicate the track which I shall endeavour to follow. It 
cannot but be admitted that our views of the science of Logic must materially 
influence, perhaps mainly determine, our opinions upon the nature of the intel- 
lectual faculties. For example, the question whether reasoning consists merely 
in the application of certain first or necessary truths, with which the mind has 
been originally imprinted, or whether the mind is itself a seat of law, whose 
operation is as manifest and as conclusive in the particular as in the general 
formula, or whether, as some not undistinguished writers seem to maintain, all 
reasoning is of particulars; this question, I say, is one which not merely affects 
the science of Logic, but also concerns the formation of just views of the consti- 
tution of the intellectual faculties. Again, if it is concluded that the mind is by 
original constitution a seat of law, the question of the nature of its subjection 
to this law, — whether, for instance, it is an obedience founded upon necessity, 
like that which sustains the revolutions of the heavens, and preserves the order 
of Nature, — or whether it is a subjection of some quite distinct kind, is also a 
matter of deep speculative interest. Further, if the mind is truly determined 
to be a subject of law, and if its laws also are truly assigned, the question of 
their probable or necessary influence upon the course of human thought in dif- 
ferent ages is one invested with great importance, and well deserving a patient 
investigation, as matter both of philosophy and of history. These and other 
questions I propose, however imperfectly, to discuss in the concluding portion 
of the present work. They belong, perhaps, to the domain of probable or con- 
jectural, rather than to that of positive, knowledge. But it may happen that 
where there is not sufficient warrant for the certainties of science, there may 
be grounds of analogy adequate for the suggestion of highly probable opinions. 
It has seemed to me better that this discussion should be entirely reserved for 
the sequel of the main business of this treatise, — which is the investigation of 
scientific truths and laws. Experience sufficiently instructs us that the proper 
order of advancement in all inquiries after truth is to proceed from the known 



CHAPTER I. NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK 


16 


to the unknown. There are parts, even of the philosophy and constitution of the 
human mind, which have been placed fully within the reach of our investigation. 
To make a due acquaintance with those portions of our nature the basis of all 
endeavours to penetrate amid the shadows and uncertainties of that conjectural 
realm which lies beyond and above them, is the course most accordant with the 
limitations of our present condition. 



Chapter II 

OF SIGNS IN GENERAL, AND OF THE SIGNS 
APPROPRIATE TO THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC IN 
PARTICULAR; ALSO OF THE LAWS TO WHICH 
THAT CLASS OF SIGNS ARE SUBJECT. 


1. That Language is an instrument of human reason, and not merely a medium 
for the expression of thought, is a truth generally admitted. It is proposed in 
this chapter to inquire what it is that renders Language thus subservient to 
the most important of our intellectual faculties. In the various steps of this 
inquiry we shall be led to consider the constitution of Language, considered as 
a system adapted to an end or purpose; to investigate its elements; to seek to 
determine their mutual relation and dependence; and to inquire in what manner 
they contribute to the attainment of the end to which, as co-ordinate parts of 
a system, they have respect. 

In proceeding to these inquiries, it will not be necessary to enter into the 
discussion of that famous question of the schools, whether Language is to be 
regarded as an essential instrument of reasoning, or whether, on the other hand, 
it is possible for us to reason without its aid. I suppose this question to be beside 
the design of the present treatise, for the following reason, viz., that it is the 
business of Science to investigate laws; and that, whether we regard signs as 
the representatives of things and of their relations, or as the representatives 
of the conceptions and operations of the human intellect, in studying the laws 
of signs, we are in effect studying the manifested laws of reasoning. If there 
exists a difference between the two inquiries, it is one which does not affect the 
scientific expressions of formal law, which are the object of investigation in the 
present stage of this work, but relates only to the mode in which those results 
are presented to the mental regard. For though in investigating the laws of 
signs, a posteriori, the immediate subject of examination is Language, with the 
rules which govern its use; while in making the internal processes of thought 
the direct object of inquiry, we appeal in a more immediate way to our personal 
consciousness, — it will be found that in both cases the results obtained are 
formally equivalent. Nor could we easily conceive, that the unnumbered tongues 
and dialects of the earth should have preserved through a long succession of ages 
so much that is common and universal, were we not assured of the existence of 


17 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


18 


some deep foundation of their agreement in the laws of the mind itself. 

2. The elements of which all language consists are signs or symbols. Words 
are signs. Sometimes they are said to represent things; sometimes the opera- 
tions by which the mind combines together the simple notions of things into 
complex conceptions; sometimes they express the relations of action, passion, 
or mere quality, which we perceive to exist among the objects of our experi- 
ence; sometimes the emotions of the perceiving mind. But words, although in 
this and in other ways they fulfil the office of signs, or representative symbols, 
are not the only signs which we are capable of employing. Arbitrary marks, 
which speak only to the eye, and arbitrary sounds or actions, which address 
themselves to some other sense, are equally of the nature of signs, provided 
that their representative office is defined and understood. In the mathematical 
sciences, letters, and the symbols +, — , =, &c., are used as signs, although the 
term “sign” is applied to the latter class of symbols, which represent operations 
or relations, rather than to the former, which represent the elements of number 
and quantity. As the real import of a sign does not in any way depend upon its 
particular form or expression, so neither do the laws which determine its use. 
In the present treatise, however, it is with written signs that we have to do, and 
it is with reference to these exclusively that the term “sign” will be employed. 
The essential properties of signs are enumerated in the following definition. 

Definition .- A sign is an arbitrary mark, having a fixed interpretation, and 
susceptible of combination with other signs in subjection to fixed laws dependent 
upon their mutual interpretation. 

3. Let us consider the particulars involved in the above definition separately. 

(1.) In the first place, a sign is an arbitrary mark. It is clearly indifferent 

what particular word or token we associate with a given idea, provided that 
the association once made is permanent. The Romans expressed by the word 
“civitas” what we designate by the word “state.” But both they and we might 
equally well have employed any other word to represent the same conception. 
Nothing, indeed, in the nature of Language would prevent us from using a mere 
letter in the same sense. Were this done, the laws according to which that letter 
would require to be used would be essentially the same with the laws which 
govern the use of “civitas” in the Latin, and of “state” in the English language, 
so far at least as the use of those words is regulated by any general principles 
common to all languages alike. 

(2.) In the second place, it is necessary that each sign should possess, within 
the limits of the same discourse or process of reasoning, a fixed interpretation. 
The necessity of this condition is obvious, and seems to be founded in the very 
nature of the subject. There exists, however, a dispute as to the precise nature 
of the representative office of words or symbols used as names in the processes of 
reasoning. By some it is maintained, that they represent the conceptions of the 
mind alone; by others, that they represent things. The question is not of great 
importance here, as its decision cannot affect the laws according to which signs 
are employed. I apprehend, however, that the general answer to this and such 
like questions is, that in the processes of reasoning, signs stand in the place and 
fulfil the office of the conceptions and operations of the mind; but that as those 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


19 


conceptions and operations represent things, and the connexions and relations of 
things, so signs represent things with their connexions and relations; and lastly, 
that as signs stand in the place of the conceptions and operations of the mind, 
they are subject to the laws of those conceptions and operations. This view will 
be more fully elucidated in the next chapter; but it here serves to explain the 
third of those particulars involved in the definition of a sign, viz., its subjection 
to fixed laws of combination depending upon the nature of its interpretation. 

4. The analysis and classification of those signs by which the operations of 
reasoning are conducted will be considered in the following Proposition: 

Proposition I. 

All the operations of Language, as an instrument of reasoning, may he con- 
ducted by a system of signs composed of the following elements, viz.: 

1st. Literal symbols, as x, y, &c., representing things as subjects of our 
conceptions. 

2nd. Signs of operation, as +, — , x, standing for those operations of the 
mind by which the conceptions of things are combined or resolved so as to form 
new conceptions involving the same elements. 

3rd. The sign of identity, =. 

And these symbols of Logic are in their use subject to definite laws, partly 
agreeing with and partly differing from the laws of the corresponding symbols in 
the science of Algebra. 

Let it be assumed as a criterion of the true elements of rational discourse, 
that they should be susceptible of combination in the simplest forms and by 
the simplest laws, and thus combining should generate all other known and 
conceivable forms of language; and adopting this principle, let the following 
classification be considered. 


CLASS I. 

5. Appellative or descriptive signs, expressing either the name of a thing, or 
some quality or circumstance belonging to it. 

To this class we may obviously refer the substantive proper or common, and 
the adjective. These may indeed be regarded as differing only in this respect, 
that the former expresses the substantive existence of the individual thing or 
things to which it refers; the latter implies that existence. If we attach to the 
adjective the universally understood subject “being” or “thing,” it becomes 
virtually a substantive, and may for all the essential purposes of reasoning be 
replaced by the substantive. Whether or not, in every particular of the mental 
regard, it is the same thing to say, “Water is a fluid thing,” as to say, “Water is 
fluid;” it is at least equivalent in the expression of the processes of reasoning. 

It is clear also, that to the above class we must refer any sign which may 
conventionally be used to express some circumstance or relation, the detailed 
exposition of which would involve the use of many signs. The epithets of poetic 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


20 


diction are very frequently of this kind. They are usually compounded adjec- 
tives, singly fulfilling the office of a many-worded description. Homer’s “deep- 
eddying ocean” embodies a virtual description in the single word paduoivric- 
And conventionally any other description addressed either to the imagination 
or to the intellect might equally be represented by a single sign, the use of 
which would in all essential points be subject to the same laws as the use of the 
adjective “good” or “great.” Combined with the subject “thing,” such a sign 
would virtually become a substantive; and by a single substantive the combined 
meaning both of thing and quality might be expressed. 

6. Now, as it has been defined that a sign is an arbitrary mark, it is permis- 
sible to replace all signs of the species above described by letters. Let us then 
agree to represent the class of individuals to which a particular name or descrip- 
tion is applicable, by a single letter, as x. If the name is “men,” for instance, 
let x represent “all men,” or the class “men.” By a class is usually meant a 
collection of individuals, to each of which a particular name or description may 
be applied; but in this work the meaning of the term will be extended so as 
to include the case in which but a single individual exists, answering to the re- 
quired name or description, as well as the cases denoted by the terms “nothing” 
and “universe,” which as “classes” should be understood to comprise respec- 
tively “no beings,” “all beings.” Again, if an adjective, as “good,” is employed 
as a term of description, let us represent by a letter, as y, all things to which 
the description “good” is applicable, i.e. “all good things,” or the class “good 
things.” Let it further be agreed, that by the combination xy shall be repre- 
sented that class of things to which the names or descriptions represented by x 
and y are simultaneously applicable. Thus, if x alone stands for “white things,” 
and y for “sheep,” let xy stand for “white sheep;” and in like manner, if 2 stand 
for “horned things,” and x and y retain their previous interpretations, let zxy 
represent “horned white sheep,” i.e. that collection of things to which the name 
“sheep,” and the descriptions “white” and “horned” are together applicable. 

Let us now consider the laws to which the symbols x, y, &c., used in the 
above sense, are subject. 

7. First, it is evident, that according to the above combinations, the order in 
which two symbols are written is indifferent. The expressions xy and yx equally 
represent that class of things to the several members of which the names or 
descriptions x and y are together applicable. Hence we have, 

xy = yx. (1) 

In the case of x representing white things, and y sheep, either of the mem- 
bers of this equation will represent the class of “white sheep.” There may be a 
difference as to the order in which the conception is formed, but there is none 
as to the individual things which are comprehended under it. In like manner, 
if x represent “estuaries,” and y “rivers,” the expressions xy and yx will indif- 
ferently represent “rivers that are estuaries,” or “estuaries that are rivers,” the 
combination in this case being in ordinary language that of two substantives, 
instead of that of a substantive and an adjective as in the previous instance. 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


21 


Let there be a third symbol, as z, representing that class of things to which the 
term “navigable” is applicable, and any one of the following expressions, 

zxy, zyx, xyz , &c., 

will represent the class of “navigable rivers that are estuaries.” 

If one of the descriptive terms should have some implied reference to another, 
it is only necessary to include that reference expressly in its stated meaning, in 
order to render the above remarks still applicable. Thus, if x represent “wise” 
and y “counsellor,” we shall have to define whether x implies wisdom in the 
absolute sense, or only the wisdom of counsel. With such definition the law 
xy = yx continues to be valid. 

We are permitted , therefore, to employ the symbols x, y, z, &c., in the place 
of the substantives, adjectives, and descriptive phrases subject to the rule of in- 
terpretation, that any expression in which several of these symbols are written 
together shall represent all the objects or individuals to which their several mean- 
ings are together applicable, and to the law that the order in which the symbols 
succeed each other is indifferent. 

As the rule of interpretation has been sufficiently exemplified, I shall deem it 
unnecessary always to express the subject “things” in defining the interpretation 
of a symbol used for an adjective. When I say, let x represent “good,” it will 
be understood that x only represents “good” when a subject for that quality 
is supplied by another symbol, and that, used alone, its interpretation will be 
“good things.” 

8. Concerning the law above determined, the following observations, which 
will also be more or less appropriate to certain other laws to be deduced here- 
after, may be added. 

First, I would remark, that this law is a law of thought, and not, properly 
speaking, a law of things. Difference in the order of the qualities or attributes 
of an object, apart from all questions of causation, is a difference in conception 
merely. The law (1) expresses as a general truth, that the same thing may be 
conceived in different ways, and states the nature of that difference; and it does 
no more than this. 

Secondly, As a law of thought, it is actually developed in a law of Language, 
the product and the instrument of thought. Though the tendency of prose 
writing is toward uniformity, yet even there the order of sequence of adjectives 
absolute in their meaning, and applied to the same subject, is indifferent, but 
poetic diction borrows much of its rich diversity from the extension of the same 
lawful freedom to the substantive also. The language of Milton is peculiarly 
distinguished by this species of variety. Not only does the substantive often 
precede the adjectives by which it is qualified, but it is frequently placed in 
their midst. In the first few lines of the invocation to Light, we meet with such 
examples as the following: 

“ Offspring of heaven first-bom.” 

“The rising world of waters dark and deep.” 

“Bright effluence of bright essence increate.” 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


22 


Now these inverted forms are not simply the fruits of a poetic license. They 
are the natural expressions of a freedom sanctioned by the intimate laws of 
thought, but for reasons of convenience not exercised in the ordinary use of 
language. 

Thirdly, The law expressed by (1) may be characterized by saying that the 
literal symbols x, y, z, are commutative, like the symbols of Algebra. In saying 
this, it is not affirmed that the process of multiplication in Algebra, of which 
the fundamental law is expressed by the equation 

xy = yx, 

possesses in itself any analogy with that process of logical combination which 
xy has been made to represent above; but only that if the arithmetical and the 
logical process are expressed in the same manner, their symbolical expressions 
will be subject to the same formal law. The evidence of that subjection is in 
the two cases quite distinct. 

9. As the combination of two literal symbols in the form xy expresses the 
whole of that class of objects to which the names or qualities represented by x 
and y are together applicable, it follows that if the two symbols have exactly 
the same signification, their combination expresses no more than either of the 
symbols taken alone would do. In such case we should therefore have 


xy = x. 

As y is, however, supposed to have the same meaning as x, we may replace it 
in the above equation by x, and we thus get 


xx = x. 

Now in common Algebra the combination xx is more briefly represented by x 2 . 
Let us adopt the same principle of notation here; for the mode of expressing a 
particular succession of mental operations is a thing in itself quite as arbitrary 
as the mode of expressing a single idea or operation (II. 3) . In accordance with 
this notation, then, the above equation assumes the form 

x 2 = x , (2) 

and is, in fact, the expression of a second general law of those symbols by which 
names, qualities, or descriptions, are symbolically represented. 

The reader must bear in mind that although the symbols x and y in the ex- 
amples previously formed received significations distinct from each other, noth- 
ing prevents us from attributing to them precisely the same signification. It is 
evident that the more nearly their actual significations approach to each other, 
the more nearly does the class of things denoted by the combination xy ap- 
proach to identity with the class denoted by x, as well as with that denoted 
by y. The case supposed in the demonstration of the equation (2) is that of 
absolute identity of meaning. The law which it expresses is practically exem- 
plified in language. To say “good, good,” in relation to any subject, though 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


23 


a cumbrous and useless pleonasm, is the same as to say “good.” Thus “good, 
good” men, is equivalent to “good” men. Such repetitions of words are indeed 
sometimes employed to heighten a quality or strengthen an affirmation. But this 
effect is merely secondary and conventional; it is not founded in the intrinsic 
relations of language and thought. Most of the operations which we observe in 
nature, or perform ourselves, are of such a kind that their effect is augmented 
by repetition, and this circumstance prepares us to expect the same thing in 
language, and even to use repetition when we design to speak with emphasis. 
But neither in strict reasoning nor in exact discourse is there any just ground 
for such a practice. 

10. We pass now to the consideration of another class of the signs of speech, 
and of the laws connected with their use. 

CLASS II. 

11. Signs of those mental operations whereby we collect parts into a whole, 
or separate a whole into its parts. 

We are not only capable of entertaining the conceptions of objects, as char- 
acterized by names, qualities, or circumstances, applicable to each individual of 
the group under consideration, but also of forming the aggregate conception of a 
group of objects consisting of partial groups, each of which is separately named 
or described. For this purpose we use the conjunctions “and,” “or,” &c. “Trees 
and minerals,” “barren mountains, or fertile vales,” are examples of this kind. 
In strictness, the words “and,” “or,” interposed between the terms descriptive 
of two or more classes of objects, imply that those classes are quite distinct, so 
that no member of one is found in another. In this and in all other respects 
the words “and” “or” are analogous with the sign + in algebra, and their laws 
are identical. Thus the expression “men and women” is, conventional meanings 
set aside, equivalent with the expression “women and men.” Let x represent 
“men,” y, “women;” and let + stand for “ and ” and “or,” then we have 

x + y = y + x, (3) 

an equation which would equally hold true if x and y represented numbers , and 
+ were the sign of arithmetical addition. 

Let the symbol z stand for the adjective “European,” then since it is, in 
effect, the same thing to say “European men and women,” as to say “European 
men and European women,” we have 

z (x + y) = zx + zy. (4) 

And this equation also would be equally true were x, y , and z symbols of number, 
and were the juxtaposition of two literal symbols to represent their algebraic 
product, just as in the logical signification previously given, it represents the 
class of objects to which both the epithets conjoined belong. 

The above are the laws which govern the use of the sign +, here used to 
denote the positive operation of aggregating parts into a whole. But the very 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


24 


idea of an operation effecting some positive change seems to suggest to us the 
idea of an opposite or negative operation, having the effect of undoing what 
the former one has done. Thus we cannot conceive it possible to collect parts 
into a whole, and not conceive it also possible to separate a part from a whole. 
This operation we express in common language by the sign except, as, “All men 
except Asiatics,” “All states except those which are monarchical.” Here it is 
implied that the things excepted form a part of the things from which they are 
excepted. As we have expressed the operation of aggregation by the sign +, so 
we may express the negative operation above described by — minus. Thus if x be 
taken to represent men, and y, Asiatics, i. e. Asiatic men, then the conception 
of “All men except Asiatics” will be expressed by x — y. And if we represent 
by x, “states,” and by y the descriptive property “having a monarchical form,” 
then the conception of “All states except those which are monarchical” will be 
expressed by x — xy. 

As it is indifferent for all the essential purposes of reasoning whether we 
express excepted cases first or last in the order of speech, it is also indifferent in 
what order we write any series of terms, some of which are affected by the sign 
— . Thus we have, as in the common algebra, 

x-y = -y + x. (5) 

Still representing by x the class “men,” and by y “Asiatics,” let z represent the 
adjective “white.” Now to apply the adjective “white” to the collection of men 
expressed by the phrase “Men except Asiatics,” is the same as to say, “White 
men, except white Asiatics.” Hence we have 

z (x — y) = zx — zy. (6) 

This is also in accordance with the laws of ordinary algebra. 

The equations (4) and (6) may be considered as exemplification of a single 
general law, which may be stated by saying, that the literal symbols, x, y, z, &c. 
are distributive in their operation. The general fact which that law expresses is 
this, viz.: — If any quality or circumstance is ascribed to all the members of a 
group, formed either by aggregation or exclusion of partial groups, the resulting 
conception is the same as if the quality or circumstance were first ascribed to 
each member of the partial groups, and the aggregation or exclusion effected 
afterwards. That which is ascribed to the members of the whole is ascribed to 
the members of all its parts, howsoever those parts are connected together. 

CLASS III. 

12. Signs by which relation is expressed, and by which we form propositions. 

Though all verbs may with propriety be referred to this class, it is sufficient 
for the purposes of Logic to consider it as including only the substantive verb 
is or are, since every other verb may be resolved into this element, and one of 
the signs included under Class I. For as those signs are used to express quality 
or circumstance of every kind, they may be employed to express the active or 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


25 


passive relation of the subject of the verb, considered with reference either to 
past, to present, or to future time. Thus the Proposition, “Caesar conquered 
the Gauls,” may be resolved into “Caesar is he who conquered the Gauls.” The 
ground of this analysis I conceive to be the following: — Unless we understand 
what is meant by having conquered the Gauls, i.e. by the expression “One 
who conquered the Gauls,” we cannot understand the sentence in question. It 
is, therefore, truly an element of that sentence; another element is “Caesar,” 
and there is yet another required, the copula is to show the connexion of these 
two. I do not, however, affirm that there is no other mode than the above of 
contemplating the relation expressed by the proposition, “Caesar conquered the 
Gauls;” but only that the analysis here given is a correct one for the particular 
point of view which has been taken, and that it suffices for the purposes of 
logical deduction. It may be remarked that the passive and future participles of 
the Greek language imply the existence of the principle which has been asserted, 
viz.: that the sign is or are may be regarded as an element of every personal 
verb. 

13. The above sign, is or are may be expressed by the symbol =. The laws, 
or as would usually be said, the axioms which the symbol introduces, are next 
to be considered. 

Let us take the Proposition, “The stars are the suns and the planets,” and 
let us represent stars by x, suns by y, and planets by z\ we have then 

x = y + z. (7) 

Now if it be true that the stars are the suns and the planets, it will follow that 
the stars, except the planets, are suns. This would give the equation 

x — z = y, (8) 

which must therefore be a deduction from (7). Thus a term z has been removed 
from one side of an equation to the other by changing its sign. This is in 
accordance with the algebraic rule of transposition. 

But instead of dwelling upon particular cases, we may at once affirm the 
general axioms: — 

1st. If equal things are added to equal things, the wholes are equal. 

2nd. If equal things are taken from equal things, the remainders are equal. 

And it hence appears that we may add or subtract equations, and employ 
the rule of transposition above given just as in common algebra. 

Again: If two classes of things, x and y, be identical, that is, if all the 
members of the one are members of the other, then those members of the one 
class which possess a given property z will be identical with those members of 
the other which possess the same property z. Hence if we have the equation 

x = y, 

then whatever class or property 2 may represent, we have also 


zx = zy. 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


26 


This is formally the same as the algebraic law: — If both members of an equation 
are multiplied by the same quantity, the products are equal. 

In like manner it may be shown that if the corresponding members of two 
equations are multiplied together, the resulting equation is true. 

14. Here, however, the analogy of the present system with that of algebra, 
as commonly stated, appears to stop. Suppose it true that those members of a 
class x which possess a certain property z are identical with those members of a 
class y which possess the same property z, it does not follow that the members 
of the class x universally are identical with the members of the class y. Hence 
it cannot be inferred from the equation 

zx = zy, 


that the equation 

x = y 

is also true. In other words, the axiom of algebraists, that both sides of an 
equation may be divided by the same quantity, has no formal equivalent here. 
I say no formal equivalent, because, in accordance with the general spirit of 
these inquiries, it is not even sought to determine whether the mental operation 
which is represented by removing a logical symbol, z, from a combination zx, 
is in itself analogous with the operation of division in Arithmetic. That mental 
operation is indeed identical with what is commonly termed Abstraction, and it 
will hereafter appear that its laws are dependent upon the laws already deduced 
in this chapter. What has now been shown is, that there does not exist among 
those laws anything analogous in form with a commonly received axiom of 
Algebra. 

But a little consideration will show that even in common algebra that axiom 
does not possess the generality of those other axioms which have been consid- 
ered. The deduction of the equation x = y from the equation zx = zy is only 
valid when it is known that z is not equal to 0. If then the value z = 0 is sup- 
posed to be admissible in the algebraic system, the axiom above stated ceases 
to be applicable, and the analogy before exemplified remains at least unbroken. 

15. However, it is not with the symbols of quantity generally that it is of 
any importance, except as a matter of speculation, to trace such affinities. We 
have seen (II. 9) that the symbols of Logic are subject to the special law, 

x 2 = x. 

Now of the symbols of Number there are but two, viz. 0 and 1, which are 
subject to the same formal law. We know that 0 2 = 0, and that l 2 = 1; and 
the equation x 2 = x, considered as algebraic, has no other roots than 0 and 1. 
Hence, instead of determining the measure of formal agreement of the symbols 
of Logic with those of Number generally, it is more immediately suggested to 
us to compare them with symbols of quantity admitting only of the values 0 
and 1. Let us conceive, then, of an Algebra in which the symbols x, y, z, etc. 
admit indifferently of the values 0 and 1, and of these values alone. The laws, 



CHAPTER II. SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS 


27 


the axioms, and the processes, of such an Algebra will be identical in their 
whole extent with the laws, the axioms, and the processes of an Algebra of 
Logic. Difference of interpretation will alone divide them. Upon this principle 
the method of the following work is established. 

16. It now remains to show that those constituent parts of ordinary language 
which have not been considered in the previous sections of this chapter are either 
resolvable into the same elements as those which have been considered, or are 
subsidiary to those elements by contributing to their more precise definition. 

The substantive, the adjective, and the verb, together with the particles 
and , except, we have already considered. The pronoun may be regarded as a 
particular form of the substantive or the adjective. The adverb modifies the 
meaning of the verb, but does not affect its nature. Prepositions contribute 
to the expression of circumstance or relation, and thus tend to give precision 
and detail to the meaning of the literal symbols. The conjunctions if, either, 
or, are used chiefly in the expression of relation among propositions, and it 
will hereafter be shown that the same relations can be completely expressed by 
elementary symbols analogous in interpretation, and identical in form and law 
with the symbols whose use and meaning have been explained in this Chapter. 
As to any remaining elements of speech, it will, upon examination, be found that 
they are used either to give a more definite significance to the terms of discourse, 
and thus enter into the interpretation of the literal symbols already considered, 
or to express some emotion or state of feeling accompanying the utterance of a 
proposition, and thus do not belong to the province of the understanding, with 
which alone our present concern lies. Experience of its use will testify to the 
sufficiency of the classification which has been adopted. 



Chapter III 

DERIVATION OF THE LAWS OF THE SYMBOLS OF 
LOGIC FROM THE LAWS OF THE OPERATIONS OF 
THE HUMAN MIND. 


1. The object of science, properly so called, is the knowledge of laws and re- 
lations. To be able to distinguish what is essential to this end, from what is 
only accidentally associated with it, is one of the most important conditions 
of scientific progress. I say, to distinguish between these elements, because a 
consistent devotion to science does not require that the attention should be 
altogether withdrawn from other speculations, often of a metaphysical nature, 
with which it is not unfrequently connected. Such questions, for instance, as 
the existence of a sustaining ground of phaenomena, the reality of cause, the 
propriety of forms of speech implying that the successive states of things are 
connected by operations, and others of a like nature, may possess a deep interest 
and significance in relation to science, without being essentially scientific. It is 
indeed scarcely possible to express the conclusions of natural science without 
borrowing the language of these conceptions. Nor is there necessarily any prac- 
tical inconvenience arising from this source. They who believe, and they who 
refuse to believe, that there is more in the relation of cause and effect than an 
invariable order of succession, agree in their interpretation of the conclusions 
of physical astronomy. But they only agree because they recognise a common 
element of scientific truth, which is independent of their particular views of the 
nature of causation. 

2. If this distinction is important in physical science, much more does it 
deserve attention in connexion with the science of the intellectual powers. For 
the questions which this science presents become, in expression at least, almost 
necessarily mixed up with modes of thought and language, which betray a meta- 
physical origin. The idealist would give to the laws of reasoning one form of 
expression; the sceptic, if true to his principles, another. They who regard the 
phaenomena with which we are concerned in this inquiry as the mere succes- 
sive states of the thinking subject devoid of any causal connexion, and they 
who refer them to the operations of an active intelligence, would, if consistent, 
equally differ in their modes of statement. Like difference would also result 
from a difference of classification of the mental faculties. Now the principle 


28 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


29 


which I would here assert, as affording us the only ground of confidence and 
stability amid so much of seeming and of real diversity, is the following, viz., 
that if the laws in question are really deduced from observation, they have a 
real existence as laws of the human mind, independently of any metaphysical 
theory which may seem to be involved in the mode of their statement. They 
contain an element of truth which no ulterior criticism upon the nature, or even 
upon the reality, of the mind’s operations, can essentially affect. Let it even 
be granted that the mind is but a succession of states of consciousness, a series 
of fleeting impressions uncaused from without or from within, emerging out of 
nothing, and returning into nothing again, — the last refinement of the sceptic 
intellect, — still, as laws of succession, or at least of a past succession, the results 
to which observation had led would remain true. They would require to be 
interpreted into a language from whose vocabulary all such terms as cause and 
effect, operation and subject, substance and attribute, had been banished; but 
they would still be valid as scientific truths. 

Moreover, as any statement of the laws of thought, founded upon actual 
observation, must thus contain scientific elements which are independent of 
metaphysical theories of the nature of the mind, the practical application of 
such elements to the construction of a system or method of reasoning must 
also be independent of metaphysical distinctions. For it is upon the scientific 
elements involved in the statement of the laws, that any practical application 
will rest, just as the practical conclusions of physical astronomy are independent 
of any theory of the cause of gravitation, but rest only on the knowledge of 
its phaenomenal effects. And, therefore, as respects both the determination of 
the laws of thought, and the practical use of them when discovered, we are, 
for all really scientific ends, unconcerned with the truth or falsehood of any 
metaphysical speculations whatever. 

3. The course which it appears to me to be expedient, under these circum- 
stances, to adopt, is to avail myself as far as possible of the language of common 
discourse, without regard to any theory of the nature and powers of the mind 
which it may be thought to embody. For instance, it is agreeable to common 
usage to say that we converse with each other by the communication of ideas, 
or conceptions, such communication being the office of words; and that with 
reference to any particular ideas or conceptions presented to it, the mind pos- 
sesses certain powers or faculties by which the mental regard maybe fixed upon 
some ideas, to the exclusion of others, or by which the given conceptions or 
ideas may, in various ways, be combined together. To those faculties or powers 
different names, as Attention, Simple Apprehension, Conception or Imagina- 
tion, Abstraction, &c., have been given, — names which have not only furnished 
the titles of distinct divisions of the philosophy of the human mind, but passed 
into the common language of men. Whenever, then, occasion shall occur to use 
these terms, I shall do so without implying thereby that I accept the theory 
that the mind possesses such and such powers and faculties as distinct elements 
of its activity. Nor is it indeed necessary to inquire whether such powers of the 
understanding have a distinct existence or not. We may merge these different 
titles under the one generic name of Operations of the human mind, define these 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


30 


operations so far as is necessary for the purposes of this work, and then seek to 
express their ultimate laws. Such will be the general order of the course which 
I shall pursue, though reference will occasionally be made to the names which 
common agreement has assigned to the particular states or operations of the 
mind which may fall under our notice. 

It will be most convenient to distribute the more definite results of the 
following investigation into distinct Propositions. 

Proposition I. 

4. To deduce the laws of the symbols of Logic from a consideration of those 
operations of the mind which are implied in the strict use of language as an 
instrument of reasoning. 

In every discourse, whether of the mind conversing with its own thoughts, 
or of the individual in his intercourse with others, there is an assumed or ex- 
pressed limit within which the subjects of its operation are confined. The most 
unfettered discourse is that in which the words we use are understood in the 
widest possible application, and for them the limits of discourse are co-extensive 
with those of the universe itself. But more usually we confine ourselves to a less 
spacious held. Sometimes, in discoursing of men we imply (without expressing 
the limitation) that it is of men only under certain circumstances and conditions 
that we speak, as of civilized men, or of men in the vigour of life, or of men 
under some other condition or relation. Now, whatever may be the extent of 
the held within which all the objects of our discourse are found, that held may 
properly be termed the universe of discourse. 

5. Furthermore, this universe of discourse is in the strictest sense the ul- 
timate subject of the discourse. The office of any name or descriptive term 
employed under the limitations supposed is not to raise in the mind the concep- 
tion of all the beings or objects to which that name or description is applicable, 
but only of those which exist within the supposed universe of discourse. If that 
universe of discourse is the actual universe of things, which it always is when 
our words are taken in their real and literal sense, then by men we mean all 
men that exist ; but if the universe of discourse is limited by any antecedent 
implied understanding, then it is of men under the limitation thus introduced 
that we speak. It is in both cases the business of the word men to direct a 
certain operation of the mind, by which, from the proper universe of discourse, 
we select or fix upon the individuals signified. 

6. Exactly of the same kind is the mental operation implied by the use of 
an adjective. Let, for instance, the universe of discourse be the actual Universe. 
Then, as the word men directs us to select mentally from that Universe all the 
beings to which the term “men” is applicable; so the adjective “good,” in the 
combination “good men,” directs us still further to select mentally from the 
class of men all those who possess the further quality “good;” and if another 
adjective were prefixed to the combination “good men,” it would direct a further 
operation of the same nature, having reference to that further quality which it 
might be chosen to express. 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


31 


It is important to notice carefully the real nature of the operation here 
described, for it is conceivable, that it might have been different from what it is. 
Were the adjective simply attributive in its character, it would seem, that when a 
particular set of beings is designated by men, the prefixing of the adjective good 
would direct us to attach mentally to all those beings the quality of goodness. 
But this is not the real office of the adjective. The operation which we really 
perform is one of selection according to a prescribed principle or idea. To what 
faculties of the mind such an operation would be referred, according to the 
received classification of its powers, it is not important to inquire, but I suppose 
that it would be considered as dependent upon the two faculties of Conception 
or Imagination, and Attention. To the one of these faculties might be referred 
the formation of the general conception; to the other the fixing of the mental 
regard upon those individuals within the prescribed universe of discourse which 
answer to the conception. If, however, as seems not improbable, the power 
of Attention is nothing more than the power of continuing the exercise of any 
other faculty of the mind, we might properly regard the whole of the mental 
process above described as referrible to the mental faculty of Imagination or 
Conception, the first step of the process being the conception of the Universe 
itself, and each succeeding step limiting in a definite manner the conception 
thus formed. Adopting this view, I shall describe each such step, or any definite 
combination of such steps, as a definite act of conception. And the use of this 
term I shall extend so as to include in its meaning not only the conception of 
classes of objects represented by particular names or simple attributes of quality, 
but also the combination of such conceptions in any manner consistent with the 
powers and limitations of the human mind; indeed, any intellectual operation 
short of that which is involved in the structure of a sentence or proposition. 
The general laws to which such operations of the mind are subject are now to 
be considered. 

7. Now it will be shown that the laws which in the preceding chapter have 
been determined a posteriori from the constitution of language, for the use 
of the literal symbols of Logic, are in reality the laws of that definite mental 
operation which has just been described. We commence our discourse with a 
certain understanding as to the limits of its subject, i.e. as to the limits of its 
Universe. Every name, every term of description that we employ, directs him 
whom we address to the performance of a certain mental operation upon that 
subject. And thus is thought communicated. But as each name or descriptive 
term is in this view but the representative of an intellectual operation, that 
operation being also prior in the order of nature, it is clear that the laws of the 
name or symbol must be of a derivative character, — must, in fact, originate in 
those of the operation which they represent. That the laws of the symbol and 
of the mental process are identical in expression will now be shown. 

8. Let us then suppose that the universe of our discourse is the actual 
universe, so that words are to be used in the full extent of their meaning, and 
let us consider the two mental operations implied by the words “white” and 
“men.” The word “men” implies the operation of selecting in thought from its 
subject, the universe, all men; and the resulting conception, men , becomes the 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


32 


subject of the next operation. The operation implied by the word “white” is that 
of selecting from its subject, “men,” all of that class which are white. The final 
resulting conception is that of “white men.” Now it is perfectly apparent that 
if the operations above described had been performed in a converse order, the 
result would have been the same. Whether we begin by forming the conception 
of “men,” and then by a second intellectual act limit that conception to “white 
men,” or whether we begin by forming the conception of “white objects,” and 
then limit it to such of that class as are “men,” is perfectly indifferent so far 
as the result is concerned. It is obvious that the order of the mental processes 
would be equally indifferent if for the words “white” and “men” we substituted 
any other descriptive or appellative terms whatever, provided only that their 
meaning was fixed and absolute. And thus the indifference of the order of two 
successive acts of the faculty of Conception, the one of which furnishes the 
subject upon which the other is supposed to operate, is a general condition of 
the exercise of that faculty. It is a law of the mind, and it is the real origin of 
that law of the literal symbols of Logic which constitutes its formal expression 
(1) Chap. II. 

9. It is equally clear that the mental operation above described is of such 
a nature that its effect is not altered by repetition. Suppose that by a definite 
act of conception the attention has been fixed upon men, and that by another 
exercise of the same faculty we limit it to those of the race who are white. Then 
any further repetition of the latter mental act, by which the attention is limited 
to white objects, does not in any way modify the conception arrived at, viz., 
that of white men. This is also an example of a general law of the mind, and it 
has its formal expression in the law ((2) Chap, II.) of the literal symbols. 

10. Again, it is manifest that from the conceptions of two distinct classes 
of things we can form the conception of that collection of things which the two 
classes taken together compose; and it is obviously indifferent in what order of 
position or of priority those classes are presented to the mental view. This is 
another general law of the mind, and its expression is found in (3) Chap. II. 

11. It is not necessary to pursue this course of inquiry and comparison. Suf- 
ficient illustration has been given to render manifest the two following positions, 
viz.: 

First, That the operations of the mind, by which, in the exercise of its 
power of imagination or conception, it combines and modifies the simple ideas 
of things or qualities, not less than those operations of the reason which are 
exercised upon truths and propositions, are subject to general laws. 

Secondly, That those laws are mathematical in their form, and that they are 
actually developed in the essential laws of human language. Wherefore the laws 
of the symbols of Logic are deducible from a consideration of the operations of 
the mind in reasoning. 

12. The remainder of this chapter will be occupied with questions relating 
to that law of thought whose expression is x 2 = x (II. 9), a law which, as has 
been implied (II. 15), forms the characteristic distinction of the operations of the 
mind in its ordinary discourse and reasoning, as compared with its operations 
when occupied with the general algebra of quantity. An important part of the 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


33 


following inquiry will consist in proving that the symbols 0 and 1 occupy a place, 
and are susceptible of an interpretation, among the symbols of Logic; and it may 
first be necessary to show how particular symbols, such as the above, may with 
propriety and advantage be employed in the representation of distinct systems 
of thought. 

The ground of this propriety cannot consist in any community of interpreta- 
tion. For in systems of thought so truly distinct as those of Logic and Arithmetic 
(I use the latter term in its widest sense as the science of Number), there is, 
properly speaking, no community of subject. The one of them is conversant with 
the very conceptions of things, the other takes account solely of their numerical 
relations. But inasmuch as the forms and methods of any system of reasoning 
depend immediately upon the laws to which the symbols are subject, and only 
mediately, through the above link of connexion, upon their interpretation, there 
may be both propriety and advantage in employing the same symbols in differ- 
ent systems of thought, provided that such interpretations can be assigned to 
them as shall render their formal laws identical, and their use consistent. The 
ground of that employment will not then be community of interpretation, but 
the community of the formal laws, to which in their respective systems they 
are subject. Nor must that community of formal laws be established upon any 
other ground than that of a careful observation and comparison of those results 
which are seen to flow independently from the interpretations of the systems 
under consideration. 

These observations will explain the process of inquiry adopted in the follow- 
ing Proposition. The literal symbols of Logic are universally subject to the law 
whose expression is x 2 = x. Of the symbols of Number there are two only, 0 
and 1, which satisfy this law. But each of these symbols is also subject to a 
law peculiar to itself in the system of numerical magnitude, and this suggests 
the inquiry, what interpretations must be given to the literal symbols of Logic, 
in order that the same peculiar and formal laws may be realized in the logical 
system also. 


Proposition II 

13. To determine the logical value and significance of the symbols 0 and 1. 

The symbol 0, as used in Algebra, satisfies the following formal law, 

0 x y = 0, or Oy = 0, (1) 

whatever number y may represent. That this formal law may be obeyed in 
the system of Logic, we must assign to the symbol 0 such an interpretation 
that the class represented by Oy may be identical with the class represented 
by 0, whatever the class y may be. A little consideration will show that this 
condition is satisfied if the symbol 0 represent Nothing. In accordance with a 
previous definition, we may term Nothing a class. In fact, Nothing and Universe 
are the two limits of class extension, for they are the limits of the possible 
interpretations of general names, none of which can relate to fewer individuals 
than are comprised in Nothing, or to more than are comprised in the Universe. 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


34 


Now whatever the class y may be, the individuals which are common to it and to 
the class “Nothing” are identical with those comprised in the class “Nothing,” 
for they are none. And thus by assigning to 0 the interpretation Nothing, the law 
(1) is satisfied; and it is not otherwise satisfied consistently with the perfectly 
general character of the class y. 

Secondly, The symbol 1 satisfies in the system of Number the following law, 
viz., 

1 xy = y, or 1 y = y, 

whatever number y may represent. And this formal equation being assumed as 
equally valid in the system of this work, in which 1 and y represent classes, it 
appears that the symbol 1 must represent such a class that all the individuals 
which are found in any proposed class y are also all the individuals 1 y that are 
common to that class y and the class represented by 1. A little consideration 
will here show that the class represented by 1 must be “the Universe,” since this 
is the only class in which are found all the individuals that exist in any class. 
Hence the respective interpretations of the symbols 0 and 1 in the system of 
Logic are Nothing and Universe. 

14. As with the idea of any class of objects as “men,” there is suggested 
to the mind the idea of the contrary class of beings which are not men; and 
as the whole Universe is made up of these two classes together, since of every 
individual which it comprehends we may affirm either that it is a man, or that 
it is not a man, it becomes important to inquire how such contrary names are 
to be expressed. Such is the object of the following Proposition. 

Proposition III. 

If x represent any class of objects, then will 1 — x represent the contrary or 
supplementary class of objects., i.e. the class including all objects which are not 
comprehended in the class x. 

For greater distinctness of conception let x represent the class men, and let 
us express, according to the last Proposition, the Universe by 1; now if from the 
conception of the Universe, as consisting of “men” and “not-men,” we exclude 
the conception of “men,” the resulting conception is that of the contrary class, 
“not-men.” Hence the class “not-men” will be represented by 1 — x. And, in 
general, whatever class of objects is represented by the symbol x, the contrary 
class will be expressed by 1 — x. 

15. Although the following Proposition belongs in strictness to a future 
chapter of this work, devoted to the subject of maxims or necessary truths, yet, 
on account of the great importance of that law of thought to which it relates, 
it has been thought proper to introduce it here. 

Proposition IV. 

That axiom of metaphysicians which is termed the principle of contradiction, 
and which affirms that it is impossible for any being to possess a quality, and 
at the same time not to possess it, is a consequence of the fundamental law of 
thought, whose expression is x 2 = x. 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


35 


Let us write this equation in the form 

x — x 2 = 0, 

whence we have 

x (1 — x) = 0; (1) 

both these transformations being justified by the axiomatic laws of combination 
and transposition (II. 13). Let us, for simplicity of conception, give to the 
symbol x the particular interpretation of men, then 1 — x will represent the 
class: of “not-men” (Prop. III.) Now the formal product of the expressions of 
two classes represents that class of individuals which is common to them both 
(II. 6). Hence x{l — x) will represent the class whose members are at once 
“men,” and “not men,” and the equation (1) thus express the principle, that 
a class whose members are at the same time men and not men does not exist. 
In other words, that it is impossible for the same individual to be at the same 
time a man and not a man. Now let the meaning of the symbol x be extended 
from the representing of “men,” to that of any class of beings characterized by 
the possession of any quality whatever; and the equation (1) will then express 
that it is impossible for a being to possess a quality and not to possess that 
quality at the same time. But this is identically that “principle of contradiction” 
which Aristotle has described as the fundamental axiom of all philosophy. “It 
is impossible that the same quality should both belong and not belong to the 
same thing.. . . This is the most certain of all principles.. . . Wherefore they who 
demonstrate refer to this as an ultimate opinion. For it is by nature the source 
of all the other axioms.” 1 

The above interpretation has been introduced not on account of its imme- 
diate value in the present system, but as an illustration of a significant fact in 
the philosophy of the intellectual powers, viz., that what has been commonly 
regarded as the fundamental axiom of metaphysics is but the consequence of a 
law of thought, mathematical in its form. I desire to direct attention also to the 
circumstance that the equation (1) in which that fundamental law of thought 
is expressed is an equation of the second degree. 2 Without speculating at all 

1 To yap a uto ap.a UTiap/Eiv xe xai pit] Ojiap/eiv douvaxov xij) aOxtjj xai xaxa to auxo. . . Auxr] or] 
xaacov taxi pepaioxaxr] xuv dpxov- • • Aio TiavxEC oi cxttooeixvuvtec; sic xauxriv dvayouaiv taxaxriv 
oo^av' rpuaei yap dpi;r| xai xov oaaov d^eopiaxov aGxr] xavxov. — Metaphysica, III, 3. 

2 Should it here be said that the existence of the equation x 2 = x necessitates also the 
existence of the equation x 3 = x, which is of the third degree, and then inquired whether that 
equation does not indicate a process of trichotomy; the answer is, that the equation x 3 = x 
is not interpretable in the system of logic. For writing it in either of the forms 

x (1 — x) (1 + x) = 0 , ( 2 ) 

x (1 — x) (— 1 — x) = 0, (3) 

we see that its interpretation, if possible at all, must involve that of the factor 1 + x, or of the 
factor —1 — x. The former is not interpretable, because we cannot conceive of the addition 
of any class x to the universe 1; the latter is not interpretable, because the symbol —1 is not 
subject to the law x( 1 — x) = 0, to which all class symbols are subject. Hence the equation 
x 3 = x admits of no interpretation analogous to that of the equation x 2 = x. Were the former 
equation, however, true independently of the latter, i.e. were that act of the mind which is 



CHAPTER III. DERIVATION OF THE LAWS 


36 


in this chapter upon the question, whether that circumstance is necessary in 
its own nature, we may venture to assert that if it had not existed, the whole 
procedure of the understanding would have been different from what it is. Thus 
it is a consequence of the fact that the fundamental equation of thought is of 
the second degree, that we perform the operation of analysis and classification, 
by division into pairs of opposites, or, as it is technically said, by dichotomy. 
Now if the equation in question had been of the third degree, still admitting 
of interpretation as such, the mental division must have been threefold in char- 
acter, and we must have proceeded by a species of trichotomy, the real nature 
of which it is impossible for us, with our existing faculties, adequately to con- 
ceive, but the laws of which we might still investigate as an object of intellectual 
speculation. 

16. The law of thought expressed by the equation (1) will, for reasons which 
are made apparent by the above discussion, be occasionally referred to as the 
“law of duality.” 


denoted by the symbol x, such that its second repetition should reproduce the result of a 
single operation, but not its first or mere repetition, it is presumable that we should be able 
to interpret one of the forms (1), (2), which under the actual conditions of thought we cannot 
do. There exist operations, known to the mathematician, the law of which may be adequately 
expressed by the equation x 3 = x. But they are of a nature altogether foreign to the province 
of general reasoning. 

In saying that it is conceivable that the law of thought might have been different from what 
it is, I mean only that we can frame such an hypothesis, and study its consequences. The 
possibility of doing this involves no such doctrine as that the actual law of human reason is 
the product either of chance or of arbitrary will. 



Chapter IV 

OF THE DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS INTO THE 
TWO CLASSES OF “PRIMARY” AND 
“SECONDARY;” OF THE CHARACTERISTIC 
PROPERTIES OF THOSE CLASSES, AND OF THE 
LAWS OF THE EXPRESSION OF PRIMARY 
PROPOSITIONS. 


1. The laws of those mental operations which are concerned in the processes of 
Conception or Imagination having been investigated, and the corresponding laws 
of the symbols by which they are represented explained, we are led to consider 
the practical application of the results obtained: first, in the expression of the 
complex terms of propositions; secondly, in the expression of propositions; and 
lastly, in the construction of a general method of deductive analysis. In the 
present chapter we shall be chiefly concerned with the first of these objects, as 
an introduction to which it is necessary to establish the following Proposition: 

Proposition I. 

All logical propositions may be considered as belonging to one or the other 
of two great classes, to which the respective names of “ Primary ” or “Concrete 
Propositions,” and “Secondary” or “Abstract Propositions,” may be given. 

Every assertion that we make may be referred to one or the other of the two 
following kinds. Either it expresses a relation among things, or it expresses, or 
is equivalent to the expression of, a relation among propositions. An assertion 
respecting the properties of things, or the phaenomena which they manifest, or 
the circumstances in which they are placed, is, properly speaking, the assertion 
of a relation among things. To say that “snow is white,” is for the ends of 
logic equivalent to saying, that “snow is a white thing.” An assertion respecting 
facts or events, their mutual connexion and dependence, is, for the same ends, 
generally equivalent to the assertion, that such and such propositions concern- 
ing those events have a certain relation to each other as respects their mutual 
truth or falsehood. The former class of propositions, relating to things, I call 
“Primary;” the latter class, relating to propositions, I call “Secondary.” The 


37 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


38 


distinction is in practice nearly but not quite co-extensive with the common 
logical distinction of propositions as categorical or hypothetical. 

For instance, the propositions, “The sun shines,” “The earth is warmed,” are 
primary; the proposition, “If the sun shines the earth is warmed,” is secondary. 
To say, “The sun shines,” is to say, “The sun is that which shines,” and it 
expresses a relation between two classes of things, viz., “the sun” and “things 
which shine.” The secondary proposition, however, given above, expresses a 
relation of dependence between the two primary propositions, “The sun shines,” 
and “The earth is warmed.” I do not hereby affirm that the relation between 
these propositions is, like that which exists between the facts which they express, 
a relation of causality, but only that the relation among the propositions so 
implies, and is so implied by, the relation among the facts, that it may for the 
ends of logic be used as a fit representative of that relation. 

2. If instead of the proposition, “The sun shines,” we say, “It is true that 
the sun shines,” we then speak not directly of things, but of a proposition 
concerning things, viz., of the proposition, “The sun shines.” And, therefore, 
the proposition in which we thus speak is a secondary one. Every primary 
proposition may thus give rise to a secondary proposition, viz., to that secondary 
proposition which asserts its truth, or declares its falsehood. 

It will usually happen, that the particles if, either, or, will indicate that 
a proposition is secondary; but they do not necessarily imply that such is the 
case. The proposition, “Animals are either rational or irrational,” is primary. It 
cannot be resolved into “Either animals are rational or animals are irrational,” 
and it does not therefore express a relation of dependence between the two 
propositions connected together in the latter disjunctive sentence. The particles, 
either, or, are in fact no criterion of the nature of propositions, although it 
happens that they are more frequently found in secondary propositions. Even 
the conjunction if may be found in primary propositions. “Men are, if wise, 
then temperate,” is an example of the kind. It cannot be resolved into “If all 
men are wise, then all men are temperate.” 

3. As it is not my design to discuss the merits or defects of the ordinary 
division of propositions, I shall simply remark here, that the principle upon 
which the present classification is founded is clear and definite in its application, 
that it involves a real and fundamental distinction in propositions, and that it 
is of essential importance to the development of a general method of reasoning. 
Nor does the fact that a primary proposition may be put into a form in which 
it becomes secondary at all conflict with the views here maintained. For in the 
case thus supposed, it is not of the things connected together in the primary 
proposition that any direct account is taken, but only of the proposition itself 
considered as true or as false. 

4. In the expression both of primary and of secondary propositions, the 
same symbols, subject, as it will appear, to the same laws, will be employed 
in this work. The difference between the two cases is a difference not of form 
but of interpretation. In both cases the actual relation which it is the object 
of the proposition to express will be denoted by the sign =. In the expression 
of primary propositions, the members thus connected will usually represent the 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


39 


“terms” of a proposition, or, as they are more particularly designated, its subject 
and predicate. 


Proposition II. 

5. To deduce a general method, founded upon the enumeration of possible 
varieties, for the expression of any class or collection of things, which may 
constitute a “term v of a Primary Proposition. 

First, If the class or collection of things to be expressed is defined only 
by names or qualities common to all the individuals of which it consists, its 
expression will consist of a single term, in which the symbols expressive of those 
names or qualities will be combined without any connecting sign, as if by the 
algebraic process of multiplication. Thus, if x represent opaque substances, y 
polished substances, 2 stones, we shall have, 

xyz = opaque polished stones; 

xy( 1 — z) = opaque polished substances which are not stones; 

x(l — y)(l — z) = opaque substances which are not polished, and are not 

stones; 

and so on for any other combination. Let it be observed, that each of these 
expressions satisfies the same law of duality, as the individual symbols which it 
contains. Thus, 


xyz x xyz = xyz\ 

xy( 1 — z) x xy(l — z) = xy( 1 — 2 ); 

and so on. Any such term as the above we shall designate as a “class term,” 
because it expresses a class of things by means of the common properties or 
names of the individual members of such class. 

Secondly, If we speak of a collection of things, different portions of which are 
defined by different properties, names, or attributes, the expressions for those 
different portions must be separately formed, and then connected by the sign +. 
But if the collection of which we desire to speak has been formed by excluding 
from some wider collection a defined portion of its members, the sign — must 
be prefixed to the symbolical expression of the excluded portion. Respecting 
the use of these symbols some further observations may be added. 

6. Speaking generally, the symbol + is the equivalent of the conjunctions 
“and,” “or,” and the symbol — , the equivalent of the preposition “except.” Of 
the conjunctions “and” and “or,” the former is usually employed when the col- 
lection to be described forms the subject, the latter when it forms the predicate, 
of a proposition. “The scholar and the man of the world desire happiness,” may 
be taken as an illustration of one of these cases. “Things possessing utility are 
either productive of pleasure or preventive of pain,” may exemplify the other. 
Now whenever an expression involving these particles presents itself in a pri- 
mary proposition, it becomes very important to know whether the groups or 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


40 


classes separated in thought by them are intended to be quite distinct from 
each other and mutually exclusive, or not. Does the expression, “Scholars and 
men of the world,” include or exclude those who are both? Does the ex-pression, 
“Either productive of pleasure or preventive of pain,” include or exclude things 
which possess both these qualities? I apprehend that in strictness of meaning 
the conjunctions “and,” “or,” do possess the power of separation or exclusion 
here referred to; that the formula, “All x’s are either y’ s or z’s,” rigorously 
interpreted, means, “All x’s are either y’ s, but not z’s,” or, “z’s but not y’ s.” 
But it must at the same time be admitted, that the “jus et norma loquendi” 
seems rather to favour an opposite interpretation. The expression, “Either y’s 
or z’s,” would generally be understood to include things that are y’s and z’s 
at the same time, together with things which come under the one, but not the 
other. Remembering, however, that the symbol + does possess the separating 
power which has been the subject of discussion, we must resolve any disjunctive 
expression which may come before us into elements really separated in thought, 
and then connect their respective expressions by the symbol +. 

And thus, according to the meaning implied, the expression, “Things which 
are either x’s or y’s,” will have two different symbolical equivalents. If we mean, 
“Things which are x’s, but not y’s, or y’s, but not x’s,” the expression will be 

x{l - y) + y{l - x) $ 

the symbol x standing for x’s, y for y’s. If, however, we mean, “Things which 
are either x’s, or, if not x’s, then y’s,” the expression will be 

x + y(l — x). 

This expression supposes the admissibility of things which are both x’s and y’s 
at the same time. It might more fully be expressed in the form 

xy + x(l-y) + y(l-x); 

but this expression, on addition of the two first terms, only reproduces the 
former one. 

Let it be observed that the expressions above given satisfy the fundamental 
law of duality (III. 16). Thus we have 

{x(l-y) + y(l-x)} 2 = x(l-y) + y(l-x), 

{x + (1 — x)} 2 = x + y(l — x). 


It will be seen hereafter, that this is but a particular manifestation of a general 
law of expressions representing “classes or collections of things.” 

7. The results of these investigations may be embodied in the following rule 
of expression. 

Rule. — Express simple names or qualities by the symbols x, y, z, &c., their 
contraries by 1 — x, 1 — y, 1 — z, &c.; classes of things defined by common 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


41 


names or qualities, by connecting the corresponding symbols as in multiplica- 
tion; collections of things, consisting of portions different from each other, by 
connecting the expressions of those portions by the sign +. In particular, let 
the expression, “Either x’s or y’s,” be expressed by x{l — y) + y( 1 — x), when 
the classes denoted by x and y are exclusive, by x + y( 1 — x) when they are not 
exclusive. Similarly let the expression, “Either x ’s, or y ’s, or z ’s, ” be expressed 
by x{l — y){l — z)-\-y{l—x){l — z)-\- z{l—x){l — y), when the classes denoted by x, 
y, and z, are designed to be mutually exclusive, by x + y(l — a:) + 2(1 — x)(l — y), 
when they are not meant to be exclusive, and so on. 

8. On this rule of expression is founded the converse rule of interpretation. 
Both these will be exemplified with, perhaps, sufficient fulness in the following 
instances. Omitting for brevity the universal subject “things,” or “beings,” let 
us assume 

x = hard, y = elastic, 2 = metals; 
and we shall have the following results: 

“Non-elastic metals,” will be expressed by z( 1 — y); 

“Elastic substances with non-elastic metals,” by y + z( 1 — y); 

“Hard substances, except metals,” by x — z; 

“Metallic substances, except those which are neither hard nor elastic,” by 
2 — 2(1 — x)(l — y), or by 2{1 — (1 — x)(l — y)}, vide (6), Chap. II. 

In the last example, what we had really to express was “Metals, except not 
hard, not elastic, metals.” Conjunctions used between adjectives are usually 
superfluous, and, therefore, must not be expressed symbolically. 

Thus, “Metals hard and elastic,” is equivalent to “Hard elastic metals,” and 
expressed by xyz. 

Take next the expression, “Hard substances, except those which are metal- 
lic and non-elastic, and those which are elastic and non-metallic.” Here the 
word those means hard substances, so that the expression really means, Hard 
substances except hard substances, metallic, non-elastic, and hard substances 
non-metallic, elastic ; the word except extending to both the classes which fol- 
low it. The complete expression is 

x - {a: 2 (l -y) + xy( 1 - 2 )}; 

or, x — xz( 1 — y) — xy(l — 2 ). 


9. The preceding Proposition, with the different illustrations which have 
been given of it, is a necessary preliminary to the following one, which will 
complete the design of the present chapter. 


Proposition III. 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


42 


To deduce from an examination of their possible varieties a general method 
for the expression of Primary or Concrete Propositions. 

A primary proposition, in the most general sense, consists of two terms, 
between which a relation is asserted to exist. These terms are not necessarily 
single-worded names, but may represent any collection of objects, such as we 
have been engaged in considering in the previous sections. The mode of ex- 
pressing those terms is, therefore, comprehended in the general precepts above 
given, and it only remains to discover how the relations between the terms are 
to be expressed. This will evidently depend upon the nature of the relation, 
and more particularly upon the question whether, in that relation, the terms 
are understood to be universal or particular, i.e. whether we speak of the whole 
of that collection of objects to which a term refers, or indefinitely of the whole 
or of a part of it, the usual signification of the prefix, “some.” 

Suppose that we wish to express a relation of identity between the two 
classes, “Fixed Stars” and “Suns,” i.e. to express that “All fixed stars are 
suns,” and “All suns are fixed stars.” Here, if x stand for fixed stars, and y for 
suns, we shall have 

x = y 

for the equation required. 

In the proposition, “All fixed stars are suns,” the term “all fixed stars” would 
be called the subject , and “ suns” the predicate. Suppose that we extend the 
meaning of the terms subject and predicate in the following manner. By subject 
let us mean the first term of any affirmative proposition, i. e. the term which 
precedes the copula is or are ; and by predicate let us agree to mean the second 
term, i.e. the one which follows the copula; and let us admit the assumption 
that either of these may be universal or particular, so that, in either case, the 
whole class may be implied, or only a part of it. Then we shall have the following 
Rule for cases such as the one in the last example :- 

10. Rule. — When both Subject and Predicate of a Proposition are universal, 
form the separate expressions for them, and connect them by the sign =. 

This case will usually present itself in the expression of the definitions of 
science, or of subjects treated after the manner of pure science. Mr. Senior’s 
definition of wealth affords a good example of this kind, viz.: 

“Wealth consists of things transferable, limited in supply, and either pro- 
ductive of pleasure or preventive of pain.” 

Before proceeding to express this definition symbolically, it must be remarked 
that the conjunction and is superfluous. Wealth is really defined by its posses- 
sion of three properties or qualities, not by its composition out of three classes 
or collections of objects. Omitting then the conjunction and, let us make 

w = wealth. 
t = things transferable. 
s = limited in supply. 
p = productive of pleasure, 
r = preventive of pain. 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


43 


Now it is plain from the nature of the subject, that the expression, “Either 
productive of pleasure or preventive of pain,” in the above definition, is meant 
to be equivalent to “Either productive of pleasure; or, if not productive of plea- 
sure, preventive of pain.” Thus the class of things which the above expression, 
taken alone, would define, would consist of all things productive of pleasure, 
together with all things not productive of pleasure, but preventive of pain, and 
its symbolical expression would be 

p + (1 — p)r. 

If then we attach to this expression placed in brackets to denote that both 
its terms are referred to, the symbols s and t limiting its application to things 
“transferable” and “limited in supply,” we obtain the following symbolical equiv- 
alent for the original definition, viz.: 

w = st{p + r(l — p)}. (1) 

If the expression, “Either productive of pleasure or preventive of pain,” were 
intended to point out merely those things which are productive of pleasure 
without being preventive of pain, p(l — r), or preventive of pain, without being 
productive of pleasure, r(l —p) (exclusion being made of those things which are 
both productive of pleasure and preventive of pain), the expression in symbols 
of the definition would be 

w = st{p(l — r) + r(l — p)}. (2) 

All this agrees with what has before been more generally stated. The reader 
may be curious to inquire what effect would be produced if we literally translated 
the expression, “Things productive of pleasure or preventive of pain,” by p + r, 
making the symbolical equation of the definition to be 

w = st(p + r). (3) 

The answer is, that this expression would be equivalent to (2), with the 
additional implication that the classes of things denoted by stp and str are 
quite distinct, so that of things transferable and limited in supply there exist 
none in the universe which are at the same time both productive of pleasure and 
preventive of pain. How the full import of any equation may be determined will 
be explained hereafter. What has been said may show that before attempting to 
translate our data into the rigorous language of symbols, it is above all things 
necessary to ascertain the intended import of the words we are using. But 
this necessity cannot be regarded as an evil by those who value correctness of 
thought, and regard the right employment of language as both its instrument 
and its safeguard. 

11. Let us consider next the case in which the predicate of the proposition 
is particular, e.g. “All men are mortal.” 

In this case it is clear that our meaning is, “All men are some mortal be- 
ings,” and we must seek the expression of the predicate, “some mortal beings.” 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


44 


Represent then by v, a class indefinite in every respect but this, viz., that some 
of its members are mortal beings, and let x stand for “mortal beings,” then 
will vx represent “some mortal beings.” Hence if y represent men, the equation 
sought will be 

y = vx. 

From such considerations we derive the following Rule, for expressing an 
affirmative universal proposition whose predicate is particular: 

Rule. — Express as before the subject and the predicate, attach to the latter 
the indefinite symbol v, and equate the expressions. 

It is obvious that v is a symbol of the same kind as x, y, &c., and that it is 
subject to the general law, 


v 2 = v, orv( 1 — v) = 0. 

Thus, to express the proposition, “The planets are either primary or sec- 
ondary,” we should, according to the rule, proceed thus: 

Let x represent planets (the subject); 

y = primary bodies; 

2 = secondary bodies; 

then, assuming the conjunction “or” to separate absolutely the class of “pri- 
mary” from that of “secondary” bodies, so far as they enter into our consider- 
ation in the proposition given, we find for the equation of the proposition 

x = v{y(l-z) + z(l-y)}. (4) 

It may be worth while to notice, that in this case the literal translation of the 
premises into the form 

x = v(y + z) (5) 

would be exactly equivalent, v being an indefinite class symbol. The form 
(4) is, however, the better, as the expression 

y (1 - z) + ^ (1 - y) 

consists of terms representing classes quite distinct from each other, and 
satisfies the fundamental law of duality. 

If we take the proposition, “The heavenly bodies are either suns, or planets, 
or comets,” representing these classes of things by w, x, y, z, respectively, its 
expression, on the supposition that none of the heavenly bodies belong at once 
to two of the divisions above mentioned, will be 

w = v {x (1 — y) (1 — z) + y (1 — x) (1 — z) + z (1 — x ) (1 — y)} 

If, however, it were meant to be implied that the heavenly bodies were 
either suns, or, if not suns, planets, or, if neither, suns nor planets, fixed stars, 
a meaning which does not exclude the supposition of some of them belonging at 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


45 


once to two or to all three of the divisions of suns, planets, and fixed stars, — the 
expression required would be 

w = v {x + y (1 — x) + z (1 — x) (1 — y)} . (6) 

The above examples belong to the class of descriptions, not definitions. In- 
deed the predicates of propositions are usually particular. When this is not the 
case, either the predicate is a singular term, or we employ, instead of the copula 
“is” or “are,” some form of connexion, which implies that the predicate is to be 
taken universally. 

12. Consider next the case of universal negative propositions, e.g. “No men 
are perfect beings.” 

Now it is manifest that in this case we do not speak of a class termed “no 
men,” and assert of this class that all its members are “perfect beings.” But 
we virtually make an assertion about “ all men" to the effect that they are “not 
perfect beings .” Thus the true meaning of the proposition is this: 

“All men (subject) are (copula) not perfect (predicate);” whence, if y repre- 
sent “men,” and x “perfect beings,” we shall have 

y = v (1 - x ) , 

and similarly in any other case. Thus we have the following Rule: 

Rule. — To express any proposition of the form “No x’s are y’s,” convert, it 
into the form “All x ’s are not y ’s, ” and then proceed as in the previous case. 

13. Consider, lastly, the case in which the subject of the proposition is 
particular, e.g. “Some men are not wise.” Here, as has been remarked, the 
negative not may properly be referred, certainly, at least, for the ends of Logic, 
to the predicate wise ; for we do not mean to say that it is not true that “Some 
men are wise,” but we intend to predicate of “some men” a want of wisdom. The 
requisite form of the given proposition is, therefore, “Some men are not-wise.” 
Putting, then, y for “men,” x for “wise,” i. e. “wise beings,” and introducing v 
as the symbol of a class indefinite in all respects but this, that it contains some 
individuals of the class to whose expression it is prefixed, we have 

vy = v (1 — x) . 

14. We may comprise all that we have determined in the following general 
Rule: 


GENERAL RULE FOR THE SYMBOLICAL EXPRESSION OF PRIMARY 

PROPOSITIONS. 

1st. If the proposition is affirmative, form the expression of the subject 
and that of the predicate. Should either of them be particular, attach to it the 
indefinite symbol v, and then equate the resulting expressions. 

2ndly. If the proposition is negative, express first its true meaning by attach- 
ing the negative particle to the predicate, then proceed as above. 

One or two additional examples may suffice for illustration. 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


46 


Ex. — “No men are placed in exalted stations, and free from envious regards.” 
Let y represent “men,” x, “placed in exalted stations,” z, “free from envious 
regards.” 

Now the expression of the class described as “placed in exalted station,” and 
“free from envious regards,” is xz. Hence the contrary class, i.e. they to whom 
this description does not apply, will be represented by 1 — xz, and to this class 
all men are referred. Hence we have 

y = v (1 — xz) . 

If the proposition thus expressed had been placed in the equiva- lent form, “Men 
in exalted stations are not free from envious regards,” its expression would have 
been 

yx = v (1 — z) . 

It will hereafter appear that this expression is really equivalent to the previous 
one, on the particular hypothesis involved, viz., that v is an indefinite class 
symbol. 

Ex. — “No men are heroes but those who unite self-denial to courage.” 

Let x = “men,” y = “heroes,” 2 = “those who practise self-denial,” w, “those 
who possess courage.” 

The assertion really is, that “men who do not possess courage and practise 
self-denial are not heroes.” 

Hence we have 

x (1 — zw) = v (1 — y) 

for the equation required. 

15. In closing this Chapter it may be interesting to compare together the 
great leading types of propositions symbolically expressed. If we agree to rep- 
resent by X and Y the symbolical expressions of the “terms,” or things related, 
those types will be 


X = vY, 
X = Y, 
vX = vY. 


In the first, the predicate only is particular; in the second, both terms are 
universal; in the third, both are particular. Some minor forms are really included 
under these. Thus, if Y = 0, the second form becomes 

X = 0; 


and if Y = 1 it becomes 

X = 1; 

both which forms admit of interpretation. It is further to be noticed, that 
the expressions X and Y, if founded upon a sufficiently careful analysis of the 



CHAPTER IV. DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS 


47 


meaning of the “terms” of the proposition, will satisfy the fundamental law of 
duality which requires that we have 

X 2 = X or X (1 - X) = 0, 

Y 2 = Y or Y (1 - Y) = 0. 



Chapter V 


OF THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF 
SYMBOLICAL REASONING, AND OF THE 
EXPANSION OR DEVELOPMENT OF EXPRESSIONS 
INVOLVING LOGICAL SYMBOLS. 


1. The previous chapters of this work have been devoted to the investigation of 
the fundamental laws of the operations of the mind in reasoning; of their devel- 
opment in the laws of the symbols of Logic; and of the principles of expression, 
by which that species of propositions called primary may be represented in the 
language of symbols. These inquiries have been in the strictest sense prelim- 
inary. They form an indispensable introduction to one of the chief objects of 
this treatise — the construction of a system or method of Logic upon the basis 
of an exact summary of the fundamental laws of thought. There are certain 
considerations touching the nature of this end, and the means of its attainment, 
to which I deem it necessary here to direct attention. 

2. I would remark in the first place that the generality of a method in Logic 
must very much depend upon the generality of its elementary processes and 
laws. We have, for instance, in the previous sections of this work investigated, 
among other things, the laws of that logical process of addition which is sym- 
bolized by the sign +. Now those laws have been determined from the study of 
instances, in all of which it has been a necessary condition, that the classes or 
things added together in thought should be mutually exclusive. The expression 
x + y seems indeed uninterpretable, unless it be assumed that the things rep- 
resented by x and the things represented by y are entirely separate; that they 
embrace no individuals in common. And conditions analogous to this have been 
involved in those acts of conception from the study of which the laws of the 
other symbolical operations have been ascertained. The question then arises, 
whether it is necessary to restrict the application of these symbolical laws and 
processes by the same conditions of interpretability under which the knowledge 
of them was obtained. If such restriction is necessary, it is manifest that no 
such thing as a general method in Logic is possible. On the other hand, if such 
restriction is unnecessary, in what light are we to contemplate processes which 
appear to be uninterpretable in that sphere of thought which they are designed 
to aid? These questions do not belong to the science of Logic alone. They are 


48 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


49 


equally pertinent to every developed form of human reasoning which is based 
upon the employment of a symbolical language. 

3. I would observe in the second place, that this apparent failure of corre- 
spondency between process and interpretation does not manifest itself in the 
ordinary applications of human reason. For no operations are there performed 
of which the meaning and the application are not seen; and to most minds 
it does not suffice that merely formal reasoning should connect their premises 
and their conclusions; but every step of the connecting train, every mediate 
result which is established in the course of demonstration, must be intelligible 
also. And without doubt, this is both an actual condition and an important 
safeguard, in the reasonings and discourses of common life. 

There are perhaps many who would be disposed to extend the same princi- 
ple to the general use of symbolical language as an instrument of reasoning. It 
might be argued, that as the laws or axioms which govern the use of symbols are 
established upon an investigation of those cases only in which interpretation is 
possible, we have no right to extend their application to other cases in which in- 
terpretation is impossible or doubtful, even though (as should be admitted) such 
application is employed in the intermediate steps of demonstration only. Were 
this objection conclusive, it must be acknowledged that slight advantage would 
accrue from the use of a symbolical method in Logic. Perhaps that advantage 
would be confined to the mechanical gain of employing short and convenient 
symbols in the place of more cumbrous ones. But the objection itself is falla- 
cious. Whatever our a priori anticipations might be, it is an unquestionable fact 
that the validity of a conclusion arrived at by any symbolical process of reason- 
ing, does not depend upon our ability to interpret the formal results which have 
presented themselves in the different stages of the investigation. There exist, in 
fact, certain general principles relating to the use of symbolical methods, which, 
as pertaining to the particular subject of Logic, I shall first state, and I shall 
then offer some remarks upon the nature and upon the grounds of their claim 
to acceptance. 

4. The conditions of valid reasoning, by the aid of symbols, are — 

1st, That a fixed interpretation be assigned to the symbols employed in the 
expression of the data; and that the laws of the combination of those symbols 
be correctly determined from that interpretation. 

2nd, That the formal processes of solution or demonstration be conducted 
throughout in obedience to all the laws determined as above, without regard to 
the question of the interpretability of the particular results obtained. 

3rd, That the final result be interpretable in form, and that it be actually 
interpreted in accordance with that system of interpretation which has been em- 
ployed in the expression of the data. Concerning these principles, the following 
observations may be made. 

5. The necessity of a fixed interpretation of the symbols has already been 
sufficiently dwelt upon (II. 3). The necessity that the fixed result should be in 
such a form as to admit of that interpretation being applied, is founded on the 
obvious principle, that the use of symbols is a means towards an end, that end 
being the knowledge of some intelligible fact or truth. And that this end may 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


50 


be attained, the final result which expresses the symbolical conclusion must be 
in an interpretable form. It is, however, in connexion with the second of the 
above general principles or conditions (V. 4), that the greatest difficulty is likely 
to be felt, and upon this point a few additional words are necessary. 

I would then remark, that the principle in question may be considered as 
resting upon a general law of the mind, the knowledge of which is not given 
to us a priori, i.e. antecedently to experience, but is derived, like the knowl- 
edge of the other laws of the mind, from the clear manifestation of the general 
principle in the particular instance. A single example of reasoning, in which 
symbols are employed in obedience to laws founded upon their interpretation, 
but without any sustained reference to that interpretation, the chain of demon- 
stration conducting us through intermediate steps which are not interpretable, 
to a final result which is interpretable, seems not only to establish the validity 
of the particular application, but to make known to us the general law mani- 
fested therein. No accumulation of instances can properly add weight to such 
evidence. It may furnish us with clearer conceptions of that common element 
of truth upon which the application of the principle depends, and so prepare 
the way for its reception. It may, where the immediate force of the evidence is 
not felt, serve as a verification, a posteriori, of the practical validity of the prin- 
ciple in question. But this does not affect the position affirmed, viz., that the 
general principle must be seen in the particular instance, — seen to be general 
in application as well as true in the special example. The employment of the 
uninterpretable symbol \J — 1, in the intermediate processes of trigonometry, fur- 
nishes an illustration of what has been said. I apprehend that there is no mode 
of explaining that application which does not covertly assume the very principle 
in question. But that principle, though not, as I conceive, warranted by formal 
reasoning based upon other grounds, seems to deserve a place among those ax- 
iomatic truths which constitute, in some sense, the foundation of the possibility 
of general knowledge, and which may properly be regarded as expressions of the 
mind’s own laws and constitution. 

6. The following is the mode in which the principle above stated will be ap- 
plied in the present work. It has been seen, that any system of propositions may 
be expressed by equations involving symbols x, y, z, which, whenever interpre- 
tation is possible, are subject to laws identical in form with the laws of a system 
of quantitative symbols, susceptible only of the values 0 and 1 (II. 15). But as 
the formal processes of reasoning depend only upon the laws of the symbols, 
and not upon the nature of their interpretation, we are permitted to treat the 
above symbols, x, y, z, as if they were quantitative symbols of the kind above 
described. We may in fact lay aside the logical interpretation of the symbols 
in the given equation; convert, them into quantitative symbols, susceptible only 
of the values 0 and 1; perform upon them as such all the requisite processes of 
solution; and finally restore to them their logical interpretation. And this is the 
mode of procedure which will actually be adopted, though it will be deemed 
unnecessary to restate in every instance the nature of the transformation em- 
ployed. The processes to which the symbols x, y, z, regarded as quantitative 
and of the species above described, are subject, are not limited by those condi- 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


51 


tions of thought to which they would, if performed upon purely logical symbols, 
be subject, and a freedom of operation is given to us in the use of them, without 
which, the inquiry after a general method in Logic would be a hopeless quest. 

Now the above system of processes would conduct us to no intelligible result, 
unless the final equations resulting therefrom were in a form which should ren- 
der their interpretation, after restoring to the symbols their logical significance, 
possible. There exists, however, a general method of reducing equations to such 
a form, and the remainder of this chapter will be devoted to its consideration. 
I shall say little concerning the way in which the method renders interpretation 
possible, — this point being reserved for the next chapter,- but shall chiefly con- 
fine myself here to the mere process employed, which may be characterized as a 
process of “development.” As introductory to the nature of this process, it may 
be proper first to make a few observations. 

7. Suppose that we are considering any class of things with reference to this 
question, viz., the relation in which its members stand as to the possession or 
the want of a certain property x. As every individual in the proposed class either 
possesses or does not possess the property in question, we may divide the class 
into two portions, the former consisting of those individuals which possess, the 
latter of those which do not possess, the property. This possibility of dividing 
in thought the whole class into two constituent portions, is antecedent to all 
knowledge of the constitution of the class derived from any other source; of 
which knowledge the effect can only be to inform us, more or less precisely, to 
what further conditions the portions of the class which possess and which do 
not possess the given property are subject. Suppose, then, such knowledge is 
to the following effect, viz., that the members of that portion which possess the 
property x, possess also a certain property it, and that these conditions united 
are a sufficient definition of them. We may then represent that portion of the 
original class by the expression ux (II. 6). If, further, we obtain information 
that the members of the original class which do not possess the property x , are 
subject to a condition v, and are thus defined, it is clear, that those members 
will be represented by the expression v (1 — x). Hence the class in its totality 
will be represented by 

ux + v (1 — x ) ; 

which may be considered as a general developed form for the expression of any 
class of objects considered with reference to the possession or the want of a 
given property x. 

The general form thus established upon purely logical grounds may also be 
deduced from distinct considerations of formal law, applicable to the symbols 
x, y, z , equally in their logical and in their quantitative interpretation already 
referred to (V. 6). 

8. Definition. — Any algebraic expression involving a symbol x is termed a 
function of x, and may be represented under the abbreviated general form / ( x ). 
Any expression involving two symbols, x and y, is similarly termed a function 
of x and y, and may be represented under the general form / (x, y), and so on 
for any other case. 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


52 


Thus the form / (x) would indifferently represent any of the following func- 
tions, viz., x, 1 — x, &c.; and f (x,y) would equally represent any of the 
forms x + y, x — 2 y, , &c. 

On the same principles of notation, if in any function / (x) we change x into 
1, the result will be expressed by the form /( 1); if in the same function we 
change x into 0, the result will be expressed by the form / (0) . Thus, if / (x) 
represent the function ff+g ? / (1) will represent ^35, and / (0) will represent 

a 
a ' 

9. Definition.- Any function / (x), in which x is a logical symbol, or a 
symbol of quantity susceptible only of the values 0 and 1, is said to be developed, 
when it is reduced to the form ax + b{ 1 — x), a and b being so determined as 
to make the result equivalent to the function from which it was derived. 

This definition assumes, that it is possible to represent any function / (x) in 
the form supposed. The assumption is vindicated in the following Proposition. 

Proposition I. 

10. To develop any function f (x) in which x is a logical symbol. 

By the principle which has been asserted in this chapter, it is lawful to treat 
x as a quantitative symbol, susceptible only of the values 0 and 1. 

Assume then, 

/ (x) = ax + b (1 — x) , 

and making x = 1, we have 

/(l) = a - 

Again, in the same equation making x = 0, we have 

/ ( 0 ) = 6 - 

Hence the values of a and b are determined, and substituting them in the first 
equation, we have 

f (x) = f (l)x + f ( 0)(1 - x); (1) 

as the development sought. 1 The second member of the equation adequately 
represents the function /(#), whatever the form of that function may be. For 

lr To some it may be interesting to remark, that the development of / ( x ) obtained in this 
chapter, strictly holds, in the logical system, the place of the expansion of / (#) in ascending 
powers of x in the system of ordinary algebra. Thus it may be obtained by introducing into 
the expression of Taylor’s well-known theorem, viz.: 

/(*) = / (0) + /' (0) oi + /" (0) ^ + /'" (0) r -^ , &c. (1) 

the condition x(l — x) =0, whence we find x 2 = x, x 3 = x, &c., and 

f(x) = f (0) + | /' (0) + + &c.j x. (2) 

But making in (1), x = 1, we get 

f"(0) f'"( 0) 

/(l) = /(o) + /'( 0) + LAJ. + + &c. 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


53 


x regarded as a quantitative symbol admits only of the values 0 and 1, and for 
each of these values the development 

f(l)x + f(0) (l-x), 

assumes the same value as the function / (x). 

As an illustration, let it be required to develop the function Here, 

when x = 1, we find / (1) = |, and when x = 0, we find / (0) = 4, or 1. Hence 
the expression required is 

1 A x 2 

YT2i = r +1 - x ’ 

and this equation is satisfied for each of the values of which the symbol x is 
susceptible. 


Proposition II. 

To expand, or develop a function involving any number of logical symbols. 
Let us begin with the case in which there are two symbols, x and y, and let 
us represent the function to be developed by / (x,y). 

First, considering / (x,y) as a function of x alone, and expanding it by the 
general theorem (1), we have 

f{x,y) = f (l,y)x + f (0,y)(l-x)-, (2) 

wherein f(l,y) represents what the proposed function becomes, when in it 
for x; we write 1, and / (0 ,y) what the said function becomes, when in it for x 
we write 0. 

Now, taking the coefficient f (l,y), and regarding it as a function of y , and 
expanding it accordingly, we have 

/(l, 2/) = /(M)y + /(l,0)(l-y), (3) 

wherein / (1, 1) represents what / (1, y) becomes when y is made equal to 1, and 
/ (1, 0) what / (1, y) becomes when y is made equal to 0. 

In like manner, the coefficient / (0, y) gives by expansion, 

/ (0, y) = / (0, 1) J/ + / (0, 0) (1 — 2/) - (4) 

whence 

f"( 0) 

/' (0) + ^+ fee. = /(l) - /(0), 
and (2) becomes, on substitution, 

/(*) = /(O) + {/(l) - /(0)}X, 

= /(l)ai + /(0)(l - x), 


the form in question. This demonstration in supposing / (x) to be developable in a series of 
ascending powers of x is less general than the one in the text. 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


54 


Substitute in (2) for f(l,y), f(0,y), their values given in (3) and (4), and we 
have 


f (x, y) = f (1, 1) xy + f (1, 0) x (1 - y) + / (0, 1) (1 -x)y (5) 

+/(0,0)(l-*)(l-y)» (6) 

for the expansion required. Here / (1, 1) represents what f (x, y) becomes when 
we make therein x = 1, y = 1; /(1,0) represents what / (x,y) becomes when 
we make therein x = 1, y = 0, and so on for the rest. 

Thus, if / (x,y) represent the function we find 

/(M) = °, /( 1,0) = °, /(0,1) = *, /( 0,0) = 1 

whence the expansion of the given function is 

^xy + Ox (1 - y) + ^ (1 - x) y + (1 - x) (1 - y) ¦ 

It will in the next chapter be seen that the forms and jj, the former of which 
is known to mathematicians as the symbol of indeterminate quantity, admit, in 
such expressions as the above, of a very important logical interpretation. 

Suppose, in the next place, that we have three symbols in the function 
to be expanded, which we may represent under the general form f(x,y,z). 
Proceeding as before, we get 


f(x,y,z ) = / (1, 1, 1) xyz + f (1, 1, 0) xy(l — z) + f (1, 0, l)x{l — y) z 

+ / (1, 0, 0) x (1 — y) (1 — z) + / (0, 1, 1) (1 - x) yz 

+ f (0, 1, 0) (1 — x) y (1 — z) + / (0, 0, 1) (1 - x) (1 -y)z 

+ / (0, 0, 0) (1 — ar) (1 — y) (1 — z) 

in which / (1,1,1) represents what the function f(x,y,z) becomes when we 
make therein x = 1, y = 1, z = 1, and so on for the rest. 

11. It is now easy to see the general law which determines the expansion 
of any proposed function, and to reduce the method of effecting the expansion 
to a rule. But before proceeding to the expression of such a rule, it will be 
convenient to premise the following observations: — 

Each form of expansion that we have obtained consists of certain terms, 
into which the symbols x, y, &c. enter, multiplied by coefficients, into which 
those symbols do not enter. Thus the expansion of / (x) consists of two terms, 
x and 1 — x, multiplied by the coefficients / (1) and / (0) respectively. And 
the expansion of / (x, y) consists of the four terms xy , x (1 — y), (1 — x) y, and 
(1 — x ), (1 — y), multiplied by the coefficients / (1, 1), / (1, 0), / (0, 1), / (0, 0), 
respectively. The terms x, 1 — x, in the former case, and the terms xy, x (1 — y), 
&c., in the latter, we shall call the constituents of the expansion. It is evident 
that they are in form independent of the form of the function to be expanded. 
Of the constituent xy, x and y are termed the factors. 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


55 


The general rule of development will therefore consist of two parts, the first 
of which will relate to the formation of the constituents of the expansion, the 
second to the determination of their respective coefficients. It is as follows: 

1st. To expand any function of the symbols x, y, z. — Form a series of con- 
stituents in the following manner: Let the first constituent be the product of 
the symbols; change in this product any symbol z into 1 — z, for the second 
constituent. Then in both these change any other symbol y into 1 — y, for 
two more constituents. Then in the four constituents thus obtained change any 
other symbol x into 1 — x, for four new constituents, and so on until the number 
of possible changes is exhausted. 

2ndly. To find the coefficient of any constituent. — If that constituent involves 
a: as a factor, change in the original function x into 1; but if it involves 1 — x 
as a factor, change in the original function x into 0. Apply the same rule with 
reference to the symbols y , z, &c.: the final calculated value of the function 
thus transformed will be the coefficient sought. 

The sum of the constituents, multiplied each by its respective coefficient, 
will be the expansion required. 

12. It is worthy of observation, that a function may be developed with 
reference to symbols which it does not explicitly contain. Thus if, proceeding 
according to the rule, we seek to develop the function \ — x, with reference to 
the symbols x and y, we have, 


When x = 1 

and 

y = 

l 

the given function 

= 0 

x = 1 

55 

y = 

0 

55 55 

= 0 

X = 0 

55 

y = 

l 

55 55 

= 1 

x = 0 

55 

y = 

0 

55 55 

= 1 


Whence the development is 

1 — x = 0 xy + Ox (1 — y) + (1 — x) y + (1 — x) (1 — y) ; 

and this is a true development. The addition of the terms (1 — x) y and (1 — x) (1 — y) 
produces the function 1 — x. 

The symbol 1 thus developed according to the rule, with respect to the 
symbol x, gives 

x + 1 — x. 

Developed with respect to x and y, it gives 

xy + x (1 - y) + (1 - x) y + (1 - x) (1 - y) . 

Similarly developed with respect to any set of symbols, it produces a series 
consisting of all possible constituents of those symbols. 

13. A few additional remarks concerning the nature of the general expansions 
may with propriety be added. Let us take, for illustration, the general theorem 
(5), which presents the type of development for functions of two logical symbols. 

In the first place, that theorem is perfectly true and intelligible when x and 
y are quantitative symbols of the species considered in this chapter, whatever 
algebraic form may be assigned to the function / (x, y), and it may therefore be 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


56 


intelligibly employed in any stage of the process of analysis intermediate between 
the change of interpretation of the symbols from the logical to the quantitative 
system above referred to, and the final restoration of the logical interpretation. 

Secondly. The theorem is perfectly true and intelligible when x and y are 
logical symbols, provided that the form of the function / (a;, y) is such as to 
represent a class or collection of things, in which case the second member is 
always logically interpretable. For instance, if f (x, y) represent the function 
1 — x + xy , we obtain on applying the theorem 

1 — x + xy = xy + Oa; (1 — y) + (1 — x) y + (1 — x) (1 — y) , 

= xy+(l-x)y+(l-x)(l-y), 

and this result is intelligible and true. 

Thus we may regard the theorem as true and intelligible for quantitative 
symbols of the species above described, always ; for logical symbols, always when 
interpretable. Whensoever therefore it is employed in this work it must be 
understood that the symbols x, y are quantitative and of the particular species 
referred to, if the expansion obtained is not interpret able. 

But though the expansion is not always immediately interpretable, it always 
conducts us at once to results which are interpretable. Thus the expression x — y 
gives on development the form 

x{l-y) 

which is not generally interpretable. We cannot take, in thought, from the class 
of things which are x’s and not j/’s, the class of things which are y’ s and not a;’s, 
because the latter class is not contained in the former. But if the form x — y 
presented itself as the first member of an equation, of which the second member 
was 0, we should have on development 

x (l - y) - y (l - x) = 0. 

Now it will be shown in the next chapter that the above equation, x and y being 
regarded as quantitative and of the species described, is resolvable at once into 
the two equations 

a(i-y)=o, y (i — *) = o, 

and these equations are directly interpretable in Logic when logical interpre- 
tations are assigned to the symbols x and y. And it may be remarked, that 
though functions do not necessarily become interpretable upon development, 
yet equations are always reducible by this process to interpretable forms. 

14. The following Proposition establishes some important properties of con- 
stituents. In its enunciation the symbol t is employed to represent indifferently 
any constituent of an expansion. Thus if the expansion is that of a function of 
two symbols x and y, t represents any of the four forms xy, x (1 — y), (1 — x) y, 
and (1 — x) (1 — y). Where it is necessary to represent the constituents of an 
expansion by single symbols, and yet to distinguish them from each other, the 
distinction will be marked by suffixes. Thus t\ might be employed to represent 
xy, t '2 to represent x (1 — y), and so on. 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


57 


Proposition III. 

Any single constituent t of an expansion satisfies the law of duality whose 
expression is 

t(l-t) = 0. 

The product of any two distinct constituents of an expansion is equal to 0, and 
the sum of all the constituents is equal to 1. 

1st. Consider the particular constituent xy. We have 

xy x xy = x 2 y 2 . 

But x 2 = x, y 2 = y, by the fundamental law of class symbols; hence 

xy xiy= xy. 


Or representing xy by t, 


t x t = t, 


or 

t(l-t) =0. 

Similarly the constituent x (1 — y) satisfies the same law. For we have 

x 2 = x, (1 - y) 2 = 1 - y, 

• {x (1 - y)} 2 =x(l-y), or t (1 - t) = 0. 

Now every factor of every constituent is either of the form x or of the form 1 — x. 
Hence the square of each factor is equal to that factor, and therefore the square 
of the product of the factors, i.e. of the constituent, is equal to the constituent; 
wherefore t representing any constituent, we have 

t 2 = t, or t (1 — t) = 0. 

2ndly. The product of any two constituents is 0. This is evident from the 
general law of the symbols expressed by the equation x (1 — x) = 0; for whatever 
constituents in the same expansion we take, there will be at least one factor x 
in the one, to which will correspond a factor 1 — x in the other. 

3rdly. The sum of all the constituents of an expansion is unity. This is 
evident from addition of the two constituents x and 1 — x, or of the four con- 
stituents, xy, x(l — y), (1 — x)y, (1 — x)(l — y). But it is also, and more generally, 
proved by expanding 1 in terms of any set of symbols (V. 12). The constituents 
in this case are formed as usual, and all the coefficients are unity. 

15. With the above Proposition we may connect the following. 


Proposition IV. 



CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLIC REASONING 


58 


If V represent the sum of any series of constituents, the separate coefficients 
of which are 1, then is the condition satisfied, 

V(1 - V) = 0 

Let fi, t -2 . . . t n be the constituents in question, then 

V = ti + t2 • • ¦ + t n . 

Squaring both sides, and observing that t\ = t\, tit- 2 ,= 0, &c., we have 

V 2 = t\ + t2 ¦ ¦ ¦ + t n ; 

whence 

V = y 2 . 

Therefore 

V (1 - V) = 0. 



Chapter VI 

OF THE GENERAL INTERPRETATION OF LOGICAL 
EQUATIONS, AND THE RESULTING ANALYSIS OF 
PROPOSITIONS. ALSO, OF THE CONDITION OF 
INTERPRETABILITY OF LOGICAL FUNCTIONS. 


1. It has been observed that the complete expansion of any function by the 
general rule demonstrated in the last chapter, involves two distinct sets of ele- 
ments, viz., the constituents of the expansion, and their coefficients. I propose 
in the present chapter to inquire, first, into the interpretation of constituents, 
and afterwards into the mode in which that interpretation is modified by the 
coefficients with which they are connected. 

The terms “logical equation,” “logical function,” &c., will be employed gen- 
erally to denote any equation or function involving the symbols x , y, &c., which 
may present itself either in the expression of a system of premises, or in the train 
of symbolical results which intervenes between the premises and the conclusion. 
If that function or equation is in a form not immediately interpretable in Logic, 
the symbols x, y, &c., must be regarded as quantitative symbols of the species 
described in previous chapters (II. 15), (V. 6), as satisfying the law, 

x (1 — x) = 0. 

By the problem, then, of the interpretation of any such logical function or 
equation, is meant the reduction of it to a form in which, when logical values are 
assigned to the symbols x, y, &c., it shall become interpretable, together with 
the resulting interpretation. These conventional definitions are in accordance 
with the general principles for the conducting of the method of this treatise, 
laid down in the previous chapter. 

Proposition I. 

2. The constituents of the expansion of any function of the logical symbols 
x, y, &c., are interpretable, and represent the several exclusive divisions of the 
universe of discourse, formed by the predication and denial in every possible way 
of the qualities denoted by the symbols x, y, &c. 


59 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


60 


For greater distinctness of conception, let it be supposed that the function 
expanded involves two symbols x and y, with reference to which the expansion 
has been effected. We have then the following constituents, viz.: 

xy, x(l-y), (1 - x) y, (1 - x) (1 - y) . 

Of these it is evident, that the first xy represents that class of objects which 
at the same time possess both the elementary qualities expressed by x and y, 
and that the second x (1 — y) represents the class possessing the property x, but 
not the property y. In like manner the third constituent represents the class of 
objects which possess the property represented by y, but not that represented 
by x; and the fourth constituent (1 — x) (1 — y), represents that class of objects, 
the members of which possess neither of the qualities in question. 

Thus the constituents in the case just considered represent all the four classes 
of objects which can be described by affirmation and denial of the properties 
expressed by x and y. Those classes are distinct from each other. No member 
of one is a member of another, for each class possesses some property or quality 
contrary to a property or quality possessed by any other class. Again, these 
classes together make up the universe, for there is no object which may not be 
described by the presence or the absence of a proposed quality, and thus each 
individual thing in the universe may be referred to some one or other of the four 
classes made by the possible combination of the two given classes x and y, and 
their contraries. 

The remarks which have here been made with reference to the constituents 
of f (x,y) are perfectly general in character. The constituents of any expansion 
represent classes — those classes are mutually distinct, through the possession of 
contrary qualities, and they together make up the universe of discourse. 

3. These properties of constituents have their expression in the theorems 
demonstrated in the conclusion of the last chapter, and might thence have been 
deduced. From the fact that every constituent satisfies the fundamental law of 
the individual symbols, it might have been conjectured that each constituent 
would represent a class. From the fact that the product of any two constituents 
of an expansion vanishes, it might have been concluded that the classes they 
represent are mutually exclusive. Lastly, from the fact that the sum of the 
constituents of an expansion is unity, it might have been inferred, that the 
classes which they represent, together make up the universe. 

4. Upon the laws of constituents and the mode of their interpretation above 
determined, are founded the analysis and the interpretation of logical equations. 
That all such equations admit of interpretation by the theorem of development 
has already been stated. I propose here to investigate the forms of possible 
solution which thus present themselves in the conclusion of a train of reasoning, 
and to show how those forms arise. Although, properly speaking, they are but 
manifestations of a single fundamental type or principle of expression, it will 
conduce to clearness of apprehension if the minor varieties which they exhibit 
are presented separately to the mind. 

The forms, which are three in number, are as follows: 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


61 


FORM I. 

5. The form we shall first consider arises when any logical equation V = 0 
is developed, and the result, after resolution into its component equations, is 
to be interpreted. The function is supposed to involve the logical symbols x, y, 
&c., in combinations which are not fractional. Fractional combinations indeed 
only arise in the class of problems which will be considered when we come to 
speak of the third of the forms of solution above referred to. 

Proposition II. 

To interpret the logical equation V = 0. 

For simplicity let us suppose that V involves but two symbols, x and y , and 
let us represent the development of the given equation by 

axy + bx (1 — y) + c (1 — x) y + d (1 — x) (1 — y) = 0; (1) 

a, 6, c, and d being definite numerical constants. 

Now, suppose that any coefficient, as a, does not vanish. Then multiplying 
each side of the equation by the constituent xy, to which that coefficient is 
attached, we have 

axy = 0, 

whence, as a does not vanish, 

xy = 0, 

and this result is quite independent of the nature of the other coefficients of the 
expansion. Its interpretation, on assigning to x and y their logical significance, 
is “No individuals belonging at once to the class represented by x, and the class 
represented by y, exist.” 

But if the coefficient a does vanish, the term axy does not appear in the 
development (1), and, therefore, the equation xy = 0 cannot thence be deduced. 

In like manner, if the coefficient b does not vanish, we have 

x (l - y) = o, 

which admits of the interpretation, “There are no individuals which at the same 
time belong to the class x, and do not belong to the class y." 

Either of the above interpretations may, however, as will subsequently be 
shown, be exhibited in a different form. 

The sum of the distinct interpretations thus obtained from the several terms 
of the expansion whose coefficients do not vanish, will constitute the complete 
interpretation of the equation V = 0. The analysis is essentially independent of 
the number of logical symbols involved in the function V, and the object of the 
proposition will, therefore, in all instances, be attained by the following Rule: - 

Rule. — Develop the function V, and equate to 0 every constituent whose 
coefficient does not vanish. The interpretation of these results collectively will 
constitute the interpretation of the given equation. 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


62 


6. Let us take as an example the definition of “clean beasts,” laid down in 
the Jewish law, viz., “Clean beasts are those which both divide the hoof and 
chew the cud,” and let us assume 
x = clean beasts; 

y = beasts dividing the hoof; Then the given proposition will be repre- 
z = beasts chewing the cud; 
sented by the equation 

x = yz 

which we shall reduce to the form 


x — yz = 0, 

and seek that form of interpretation to which the present method leads. Fully 
developing the first member, we have 

Oxyz + xy (1 — z) + x (1 — y) z + x (1 — y) (1 — z) 
— (1 — a;) yz + 0 (1 — x) y (1 — z) + 0 (1 — x) (1 — y) z + 0 (1 — x) (1 — y) (1 — z) . 

Whence the terms, whose coefficients do not vanish, give 

xy (1 — z) = 0, xz (1 — y) = 0, x (1 — y) (1 — z) = 0, (1 — x)yz = 0. 

These equations express a denial of the existence of certain classes of objects, 
viz.: 

1st. Of beasts which are clean, and divide the hoof, but do not chew the 
cud. 

2nd. Of beasts which are clean, and chew the cud, but do not divide the 
hoof. 

3rd. Of beasts which are clean, and neither divide the hoof nor chew the 
cud. 

4th. Of beasts which divide the hoof, and chew the cud, and are not clean. 

Now all these several denials are really involved in the original proposition. 
And conversely, if these denials be granted, the original proposition will follow as 
a necessary consequence. They are, in fact, the separate elements of that propo- 
sition. Every primary proposition can thus be resolved into a series of denials 
of the existence of certain defined classes of things, and may, from that system 
of denials, be itself reconstructed. It might here be asked, how it is possible 
to make an assertive proposition out of a series of denials or negations? From 
what source is the positive element derived? I answer, that the mind assumes 
the existence of a universe not a priori as a fact independent of experience, 
but either a posteriori as a deduction from experience, or hypothetically as a 
foundation of the possibility of assertive reasoning. Thus from the Proposition, 
“There are no men who are not fallible,” which is a negation or denial of the 
existence of “infallible men,” it may be inferred either hypothetically, “All men 
(if men exist) are fallible,” or absolutely, (experience having assured us of the 
existence of the race), “All men are fallible.” 

The form in which conclusions are exhibited by the method of this Proposi- 
tion may be termed the form of “Single or Conjoint Denial.” 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


63 


FORM II. 

7. As the previous form was derived from the development and interpre- 
tation of an equation whose second member is 0, the present form, which is 
supplementary to it, will be derived from the development and interpretation 
of an equation whose second member is 1. It is, however, readily suggested by 
the analysis of the previous Proposition. 

Thus in the example last discussed we deduced from the equation 

x — yz = 0 

the conjoint denial of the existence of the classes represented by the constituents 

xy(l-z), xz (1 — y) , x(l-y)(l-z), (1 -x)yz, 

whose coefficients were not equal to 0. It follows hence that the remaining 
constituents represent classes which make up the universe. Hence we shall have 

xyz + (1 - x) y (1 - z) + (1 - x) (1 - y) z + (1 - a:) (1 - y) (1 - z) = 1. 

This is equivalent to the affirmation that all existing things belong to some one 
or other of the following classes, viz.: 

1st. Clean beasts both dividing the hoof and chewing the cud. 

2nd. Unclean beasts dividing the hoof, but not chewing the cud. 

3rd. Unclean beasts chewing the cud, but not dividing the hoof. 

4th. Things which are neither clean beasts, nor chewers of the cud, nor 
dividers of the hoof. 

This form of conclusion may be termed the form of “Single or Disjunctive 
Affirmation,” — single when but one constituent appears in the final equation; 
disjunctive when, as above, more constituents than one are there found. 

Any equation, V = 0, wherein V satisfies the law of duality, may also be 
made to yield this form of interpretation by reducing it to the form 1 — V = 1, 
and developing the first member. The case, however, is really included in the 
next general form. Both the previous forms are of slight importance compared 
with the following one. 


FORM ill. 

8. In the two preceding cases the functions to be developed were equated to 
0 and to 1 respectively. In the present case I shall suppose the corresponding 
function equated to any logical symbol w. We are then to endeavour to interpret 
the equation V = w, V being a function of the logical symbols x, y, z, & c. In 
the first place, however, I deem it necessary to show how the equation V = w, 
or, as it will usually present itself, w = V, arises. 

Let us resume the definition of “clean beasts,” employed in the previous 
examples, viz., “Clean beasts are those which both divide the hoof and chew 
the cud,” and suppose it required to determine the relation in which “beasts 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


64 


chewing the cud” stand to “clean beasts” and “beasts dividing the hoof.” The 
equation expressing the given proposition is 


x = yz, 

and our object will be accomplished if we can determine 2 as an interpretable 
function of x and y. 

Now treating x, y, z as symbols of quantity subject to a peculiar law, we 
may deduce from the above equation, by solution, 

x 

z = — . 

V 

But this equation is not at present in an interpretable form. If we can reduce 
it to such a form it will furnish the relation required. 

On developing the second member of the above equation, we have 

^ = xy + (1 - y) + 0 (1 - x) y + ^ (1 - x) (1 - y ) , 

and it will be shown hereafter (Prop. 3) that this admits of the following 
interpretation: 

“Beasts which chew the cud consist of all clean beasts (which also divide 
the hoof), together with an indefinite remainder (some, none, or all) of unclean 
beasts which do not divide the hoof.” 

9. Now the above is a particular example of a problem of the utmost gen- 
erality in Logic, and which may thus be stated: -“Given any logical equation 
connecting the symbols x, y, z, w, required an interpretable expression for the 
relation of the class represented by w to the classes represented by the other 
symbols x, y, z, &c.” 

The solution of this problem consists in all cases in determining, from the 
equation given, the expression of the above symbol w, in terms of the other 
symbols, and rendering that expression interpretable by development. Now the 
equation given is always of the first degree with respect to each of the symbols 
involved. The required expression for w can therefore always be found. In fact, 
if we develop the given equation, whatever its form may be with respect to w, 
we obtain an equation of the form 

Ew + E'(l-w)= 0, (1) 

E and E' being functions of the remaining symbols. From the above we have 

E' = ( E " - E) w. 


Therefore 


w = 


E' 

E' -E 


(2) 


and expanding the second member by the rule of development, it will only 
remain to interpret the result in logic by the next proposition. 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


65 


If the fraction E ^_ E has common factors in its numerator and denominator, 
we are not permitted to reject them, unless they are mere numerical constants. 
For the symbols x, y, &c., regarded as quantitative, may admit of such values 0 
and 1 as to cause the common factors to become equal to 0, in which case the 
algebraic rule of reduction fails. This is the case contemplated in our remarks on 
the failure of the algebraic axiom of division (II. 14) . To express the solution in 
the form (2), and without attempting to perform any unauthorized reductions, 
to interpret the result by the theorem of development, is a course strictly in 
accordance with the general principles of this treatise. 

If the relation of the class expressed by 1 — w to the other classes, x, y, &c. 
is required, we deduce from (1), in like manner as above, 


to the interpretation of which also the method of the following Proposition is 
applicable: 


Proposition III. 

10. To determine the interpretation of any logical equation of the form w = 
V, in which w is a class symbol, and V a function of other class symbols quite 
unlimited in its form. 

Let the second member of the above equation be fully expanded. Each 
coefficient of the result will belong to some one of the four classes, which, with 
their respective interpretations, we proceed to discuss. 

1st. Let the coefficient be 1. As this is the symbol of the universe, and 
as the product of any two class symbols represents those individuals which are 
found in both classes, any constituent which has unity for its coefficient must 
be interpreted without limitation, i.e. the whole of the class which it represents 
is implied. 

2nd. Let the coefficient be 0. As in Logic, equally with Arithmetic, this is 
the symbol of Nothing, no part of the class represented by the constituent to 
which it is prefixed must be taken. 

3rd. Let the coefficient be of the form ^ . Now, as in Arithmetic, the symbol 
K represents an indefinite number, except when otherwise determined by some 
special circumstance, analogy would suggest that in the system of this work the 
same symbol should represent an indefinite class. That this is its true meaning 
will be made clear from the following example: 

Let us take the Proposition, “Men not mortal do not exist;” represent this 
Proposition by symbols; and seek, in obedience to the laws to which those 
symbols have been proved to be subject, a reverse definition of “mortal beings,” 
in terms of “men.” 

Now if we represent “men” by y, and “mortal beings” by x, the Proposition, 
“Men who are not mortals do not exist,” will be expressed by the equation 


2/(1 - x ) = 0 , 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


66 


from which we are to seek the value of x. Now the above equation gives 

y — yx = 0, or yx = y. 

Were this an ordinary algebraic equation, we should, in the next place, divide 
both sides of it by y. But it has been remarked in Chap. 11. that the opera- 
tion of division cannot be performed with the symbols with which we are now 
engaged. Our resource, then, is to express the operation, and develop the result 
by the method of the preceding chapter. We have, then, first, 



and, expanding the second member as directed, 

0 ,, 

X = V + 0 I 1 ~ y ) ‘ 

This implies that mortals (x) consist of all men ( y ), together with such a re- 
mainder of beings which are not men (1 — y), as be indicated by the coefficient 
ij . Now let us inquire what remainder of “not men” is implied by the premiss. It 
might happen that the remainder included all the beings who are not men, or it 
might include only some of them, and not others, or it might include none, and 
any one of these assumptions would be in perfect accordance with our premiss. 
In other words, whether those beings which are not men are all , or some, or 
none, of them mortal , the truth of the premiss which virtually asserts that all 
men are mortal, will be equally unaffected, and therefore the expression ^ here 
indicates that all, some, or none of the class to whose expression it is affixed 
must be taken. 

Although the above determination of the significance of the symbol 2 is 
founded only upon the examination of a particular case, yet the principle in- 
volved in the demonstration is general, and there are no circumstances under 
which the symbol can present itself to which the same mode of analysis is in- 
applicable. We may properly term 2 an indefinite class symbol, and may, if 
convenience should require, replace it by an uncompounded symbol v, subject 
to the fundamental law, u(l — v) = 0. 

4th. It may happen that the coefficient of a constituent in an expansion does 
not belong to any of the previous cases. To ascertain its true interpretation when 
this happens, it will be necessary to premise the following theorem: 

11. Theorem. — If a function V, intended to represent any class or col- 
lection of objects, w, be expanded, and if the numerical coefficient, a, of any 
constituent in its development, do not satisfy the law. 

a (1 — a) = 0, 

then the constituent in question must be made equal to 0. 

To prove the theorem generally, let us represent the expansion given, under 
the form 

w = afii + a 2 t 2 + a 3 t 3 + &c., (1) 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


67 


in which t\, t2, t 3 , &c. represent the constituents, and a\, 02, 03, &c. the 
coefficients; let us also suppose that ai and a 2 do not satisfy the law 


ai (1 - ai) = 0, a 2 (1 - a 2 ) = 0; 


but that the other coefficients are subject to the law in question, so that we 
have 

a 2 = a 3 , &c. 

Now multiply each side of the equation (1) by itself. The result will be 

w — ci^ti T a 2 2 t 2 T & c. (2) 

This is evident from the fact that it must represent the development of the 
equation 

w=V 2 , 

but it may also be proved by actually squaring (1), and observing that we have 
t \ 2 = ti, t 2 2 = t 2 , ht 2 = 0, &c. 


by the properties of constituents. Now subtracting (2) from (1), we have 
(ai - ai 2 ) ti + (a 2 - a 2 2 ) t 2 = 0. 


Or, 


ai (1 — ai) t\ + a 2 (1 — a 2 ) t 2 — 0. 
Multiply the last equation by t\\ then since t\t 2 = 0, we have 

ai (1 — ai) t\ = 0, whence t 2 = 0. 

In like manner multiplying the same equation by t 2 , we have 
a 2 (1 — a 2 ) t 2 = 0, whence t 2 = 0. 


Thus it may be shown generally that any constituent whose coefficient is 
not subject to the same fundamental law as the symbols themselves must be 
separately equated to 0. The usual form under which such coefficients occur 
is This is the algebraic symbol of infinity. Now the nearer any number 
approaches to infinity (allowing such an expression), the more does it depart 
from the condition of satisfying the fundamental law above referred to. 

The symbol )j, whose interpretation was previously discussed, does not nec- 
essarily disobey the law we are here considering, for it admits of the numerical 
values 0 and 1 indifferently. Its actual interpretation, however, as an indefinite 
class symbol, cannot, I conceive, except upon the ground of analogy, be deduced 
from its arithmetical properties, but must be established experimentally. 

12. We may now collect the results to which we have been led, into the 
following summary: 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


68 


1st. The symbol 1, as the coefficient of a term in a development, indicates 
that the whole of the class which that constituent represents, is to be taken. 

2nd. The coefficient 0 indicates that none of the class are to be taken. 

3rd. The symbol ^ indicates that a perfectly indefinite portion of the class, 
i.e. some, none, or all of its members are to be taken. 

4th. Any other symbol as a coefficient indicates that the constituent to 
which it is prefixed must be equated to 0. 

It follows hence that if the solution of a problem, obtained by development, 
be of the form 

w = A + OB + — C + — D, 

that solution may be resolved into the two following equations, viz., 

w = A + vC, (3) 

D = 0, (4) 

v being an indefinite class symbol. The interpretation of (3) shows what ele- 
ments enter, or may enter, into the composition of w, the class of things whose 
definition is required; and the interpretation of (4) shows what relations exist 
among the elements of the original problem, in perfect independence of w. 

Such are the canons of interpretation. It may be added, that they are univer- 
sal in their application, and that their use is always unembarrassed by exception 
or failure. 

13. Corollary- If V be an independently interpretable logical function, it 
will satisfy the symbolical law, V(\ — V) = 0. 

By an independently interpretable logical function, I mean one which is 
interpretable, without presupposing any relation among the things represented 
by the symbols which it involves. Thus x(l — y) is independently interpretable, 
but x — y is not so. The latter function presupposes, as a condition of its 
interpretation, that the class represented by y is wholly contained in the class 
represented by x; the former function does not imply any such requirement. 

Now if V be independently interpretable, and if w represent the collection 
of individuals which it contains, the equation w = V will hold true without 
entailing as a consequence the vanishing of any of the constituents in the devel- 
opment of V ; since such vanishing of constituents would imply relations among 
the classes of things denoted by the symbols in V. Hence the development of V 
will be of the form 

aiti + a 2 <2 + &c. 

the coefficients a\, a 2 , &c. all satisfying the condition 

ai(l — aq) = 0, a 2 (l — a 2 ) = 0, &c. 

Hence by the reasoning of Prop. 4, Chap. v. the function V will be subject 
to the law 

V(1 -V)=0. 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


69 


This result, though evident a priori from the fact that V is supposed to 
represent a class or collection of things, is thus seen to follow also from the 
properties of the constituents of which it is composed. The condition V(l — V) = 
0 may be termed “the condition of interpret ability of logical functions.” 

14. The general form of solutions, or logical conclusions developed in the 
last Proposition, may be designated as a “Relation between terms.” I use, as 
before, the word “terms” to denote the parts of a proposition, whether simple 
or complex, which are connected by the copula “is” or “are.” The classes of 
things represented by the individual symbols may be called the elements of the 
proposition. 

15. Ex. 1. -Resuming the definition of “clean beasts,” (VI. 6), required a 
description of “unclean beasts.” 

Here, as before, x standing for “ clean beasts,” y for “beasts dividing the 
hoof,” z for “beasts chewing the cud,” we have 


x = yz ; 


( 5 ) 


whence 

1 — x = 1 — yz\ 

and developing the second member, 

1 - x = y(l - z) + z(l - y) + (1 - y)(l - z); 

which is interpretable into the following Proposition: Unclean beasts are all 
which divide the hoof without chewing the cud , all which chew the cud without 
dividing the hoof , and all which neither divide the hoof nor chew the cud. 

Ex. 2. -The same definition being given, required a description of beasts 
which do not divide the hoof. 

From the equation x = yz we have 

x 

V= - Z 5 

therefore, 


and developing the second member, 

1 — y = 0 xz H — — a;(l — z ) + (1 — x ) z + q( 1 — 20(1 — z )¦ 

s Here, according to the Rule, the term whose coefficients is must be sepa- 
rately equated to 0, whence we have 

1 — y = (1 — x)z + v(l — ®)(1 — z), 
x{l — z) = 0; 

whereof the first equation gives by interpretation the Proposition: Beasts which 
do not divide the hoof consist of all unclean beasts which chew the cud , and an 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


70 


indefinite remainder (some, none, or all) of unclean beasts which do not chew 
the cud. 

The second equation gives the Proposition: There are no clean beasts which 
do not chew the cud. This is one of the independent relations above referred to. 
We sought the direct relation of “Beasts not dividing the hoof,” to “Clean beasts 
and beasts which chew the cud.” It happens, however, that independently of 
any relation to beasts not dividing the hoof, there exists, in virtue of the premiss, 
a separate relation between clean beasts and beasts which chew the cud. This 
relation is also necessarily given by the process. 

Ex. 3. -Let us take the following definition, viz.: “Responsible beings are all 
rational beings who are either free to act, or have voluntarily sacrificed their 
freedom,” and apply to it the preceding analysis. 

Let x stand for responsible beings. 
y ” rational beings. 

z ” those who are free to act, 

w ” those who have voluntarily sacrificed their 

freedom of action. 

In the expression of this definition I shall assume, that the two alternatives 
which it presents, viz.: “Rational beings free to act,” and “Rational beings 
whose freedom of action has been voluntarily sacrificed,” are mutually exclusive, 
so that no individuals are found at once in both these divisions. This will permit 
us to interpret the proposition literally into the language of symbols, as follows: 

x = yz + yw. (6) 

Let us first determine hence the relation of “rational beings” to responsible 
beings, beings free to act, and beings whose freedom of action has been voluntar- 
ily abjured. Perhaps this object will be better stated by saying, that we desire 
to express the relation among the elements of the premiss in such a form as will 
enable us to determine how far rationality may be inferred from responsibility, 
freedom of action, a voluntary sacrifice of freedom, and their contraries. 

From (6) we have 

x 

y = na — V 

(z + w) 

and developing the second member, but rejecting terms whose coefficients 
are 0, 


y = - xzw + xz( 1 — w ) + x(l — z)w + -*(1 — z)( 1 — w) 


whence, equating to 0 the terms whose coefficients are I and I, we have 

y = xz( 1 — w) + xw( 1 — z) + v(l — a;)(l — z)( 1 — w); (7) 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


71 


xzw = 0; 

(8) 

z)(l - w) = 0; 

(9) 


whence by interpretation — 

Direct Conclusion. — Rational beings are all responsible beings who are 
either free to act, not having voluntarily sacrificed their freedom, or not free 
to act, having voluntarily sacrificed their freedom, together with an indefinite 
remainder (some, none, or all) of beings not responsible, not free, and not having 
voluntarily sacrificed their freedom. 

First Independent Relation. — No responsible beings are at the same 
time free to act, and in the condition of having voluntarily sacrificed their free- 
dom. 

Second.- No responsible beings are not free to act, and at the same time in 
the condition of not having sacrificed their freedom. 

The independent relations above determined may, however, be put in another 
and more convenient form. Thus (8) gives 

xw = - = Oz + -(1 — z), on development; 

2 0 

or, 

xw = i>(l — z); (10) 

and in like manner (9) gives 

x(l -w) = — = J.Z + 0(1 - z); 

1 — z 0 

or, 

x(l — w) = vz\ (11) 

and (10) and (11) interpreted give the following Propositions: 

1st. Responsible beings who have voluntarily sacrificed their freedom are not 
free. 

2nd. Responsible beings who have not voluntarily sacrificed their freedom are 
free. 

These, however, are merely different forms of the relations before determined. 

16. In examining, these results, the reader must bear in mind, that the sole 
province of a method of inference or analysis, is to determine those relations 
which are necessitated by the connexion of the terms in the original propo- 
sition. Accordingly, in estimating the completeness with which this object is 
effected, we have nothing whatever to do with those other relations which may 
be suggested to our minds by the meaning of the terms employed, as distinct 
from their expressed connexion. Thus it seems obvious to remark, that “They 
who have voluntarily sacrificed their freedom are not free,” this being a relation 
implied in the very meaning of the terms. And hence it might appear, that 
the first of the two independent relations assigned by the method is on the one 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


72 


hand needlessly limited, and on the other hand superfluous. However, if regard 
be had merely to the connexion of the terms in the original premiss, it will be 
seen that the relation in question is not liable to either of these charges. The 
solution, as expressed in the direct conclusion and the independent relations, 
conjointly, is perfectly complete, without being in any way superfluous. 

If we wish to take into account the implicit relation above referred to, viz., 
“They who have voluntarily sacrificed their freedom are not free,” we can do so 
by making this a distinct proposition, the proper expression of which would be 

w = v{l — z). 

This equation we should have to employ together with that expressive of the 
original premiss. The mode in which such an examination must be conducted 
will appear when we enter upon the theory of systems of propositions in a future 
chapter. The sole difference of result to which the analysis leads is, that the 
first of the independent relations deduced above is superseded. 

17. Ex. 4. - Assuming the same definition as in Example 2, let it be required 
to obtain a description of irrational persons. 

We have 


z + w — x 
z + w 

= -xzw + Oxz(l — w) + Ox(l — z)w — -x(l — z)( 1 — w) 

+ (1 — x)zw + (1 — x)z( 1 — iv) + (1 — x)(l — z)w + -(1 — x)(l — z) (1 — w) 

= (1 — x)zw + (1 — x)z( 1 — iv) + (1 — x)(l — z)w + u(l — x)(l — z)( 1 — w) 

= (1 — x)z + (1 — x)(l — z)w + v(l — x)(l — z)( 1 — w), 

with xzw = 0, x(l — z){l — w) = 0. 

The independent relations here given are the same as we before arrived at, 
as they evidently ought to be, since whatever relations prevail independently 
of the existence of a given class of objects y, prevail independently also of the 
existence of the contrary class 1 — y. 

The direct solution afforded by the first equation is '.-Irrational persons con- 
sist of all irresponsible beings who are either free to act, or have voluntarily 
sacrificed their liberty, and are not free to act; together with an indefinite re- 
mainder of irresponsible beings who have not sacrificed their liberty, and are not 
free to act. 

18. The propositions analyzed in this chapter have been of that species 
called definitions. I have discussed none of which the second or predicate term 
is particular, and of which the general type is Y = vX, Y and X being functions 
of the logical symbols x, y, z, & c., and v an indefinite class symbol. The analysis 



CHAPTER VI. OF INTERPRETATION 


73 


of such propositions is greatly facilitated (though the step is not an essential one) 
by the elimination of the symbol v, and this process depends upon the method 
of the next chapter. I postpone also the consideration of another important 
problem necessary to complete the theory of single propositions, but of which 
the analysis really depends upon the method of the reduction of systems of 
propositions to be developed in a future page of this work. 



Chapter VII 


ON ELIMINATION. 


1. In the examples discussed in the last chapter, all the elements of the original 
premiss re-appeared in the conclusion, only in a different order, and with a 
different connexion. But it more usually happens in common reasoning, and 
especially when we have more than one premiss, that some of the elements 
are required not to appear in the conclusion. Such elements, or, as they are 
commonly called, “middle terms,” may be considered as introduced into the 
original propositions only for the sake of that connexion which they assist to 
establish among the other elements, which are alone designed to enter into the 
expression of the conclusion. 

2. Respecting such intermediate elements, or middle terms, some erroneous 
notions prevail. It is a general opinion, to which, however, the examples con- 
tained in the last chapter furnish a contradiction, that inference consists pe- 
culiarly in the elimination of such terms, and that the elementary type of this 
process is exhibited in the elimination of one middle term from two premises, so 
as to produce a single resulting conclusion into which that term does not enter. 
Hence it is commonly held, that syllogism is the basis, or else the common type, 
of all inference, which may thus, however complex its form and structure, be 
resolved into a series of syllogisms. The propriety of this view will be considered 
in a subsequent chapter. At present I wish to direct attention to an important, 
but hitherto unnoticed, point of difference between the system of Logic, as ex- 
pressed by symbols, and that of common algebra, with reference to the subject 
of elimination. In the algebraic system we are able to eliminate one symbol from 
two equations, two symbols from three equations, and generally n — 1 symbols 
from n equations. There thus exists a definite connexion between the number of 
independent equations given, and the number of symbols of quantity which it is 
possible to eliminate from them. But it is otherwise with the system of Logic. 
No fixed connexion there prevails between the number of equations given rep- 
resenting propositions or premises, and the number of typical symbols of which 
the elimination can be effected. From a single equation an indefinite number of 
such symbols may be eliminated. On the other hand, from an indefinite number 
of equations, a single class symbol only may be eliminated. We may affirm, 
that in this peculiar system, the problem of elimination is resolvable under all 


74 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


75 


circumstances alike. This is a consequence of that remarkable law of duality 
to which the symbols of Logic are subject. To the equations furnished by the 
premises given, there is added another equation or system of equations drawn 
from the fundamental laws of thought itself, and supplying the necessary means 
for the solution of the problem in question. Of the many consequences which 
flow from the law of duality, this is perhaps the most deserving of attention. 

3. As in Algebra it often happens, that the elimination of symbols from a 
given system of equations conducts to a mere identity in the form 0 = 0, no 
independent relations connecting the symbols which remain; so in the system 
of Logic, a like result, admitting of a similar interpretation, may present itself. 
Such a circumstance does not detract from the generality of the principle before 
stated. The object of the method upon which we are about to enter is to 
eliminate any number of symbols from any number of logical equations, and to 
exhibit in the result the actual relations which remain. Now it may be, that no 
such residual relations exist. In such a case the truth of the method is shown 
by its leading us to a merely identical proposition. 

4. The notation adopted in the following Propositions is similar to that of 
the last chapter. By f(x) is meant any expression involving the logical symbol 
x, with or without other logical symbols. By /( 1) is meant what f(x) becomes 
when x is therein changed into 1; by /( 0) what the same function becomes when 
x is changed into 0. 


Proposition I. 

5. If f(x ) = 0 be any logical equation involving the class symbol x, with or 
without other class symbols, then will the equation 

/(!)/(«) = 0 

be true, independently of the interpretation of x: and it will be the complete 
result of the elimination of x from the above equation. 

In other words, the elimination of x from any given equation, f(x) = 0, will 
be effected by successively changing in that equation x into 1, and x into 0, and 
multiplying the two resulting equations together. 

Similarly the complete result of the elimination of any class symbols, x, 
y , etc., from any equation of the form V = 0, will be obtained by completely 
expanding the first member of that equation in constituents of the given symbols, 
and multiplying together all the coefficients of those constituents, and equating 
the product to 0. 

Developing the first member of the equation f(x) = 0, we have (V. 10), 


/( 1 )® + /( 0)(1 ~ x ) = 0 ; 
or, [/( 1) - /(0)]ar + /( 0) = 0. .'. x = i 

/(l) 

m -/a)' 


and 1 — x = — 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


76 


Substitute these expressions for x and 1 — x in the fundamental equation 

x(l — x) = 0, 

and there results 

/(Q)/(i) n 
[/( 0 )-/( l )] 2 ’ 

or, /(l)/(0) = 0, (1) 


the form required. 

6. It is seen in this process, that the elimination is really effected between 
the given equation fix) = 0 and the universally true equation x{l — x) = 0, 
expressing the fundamental law of logical symbols, qua logical. There exists, 
therefore, no need of more than one premiss or equation, in order to render pos- 
sible the elimination of a term, the necessary law of thought virtually supplying 
the other premiss or equation. And though the demonstration of this conclusion 
may be exhibited in other forms, yet the same element furnished by the mind 
itself will still be virtually present. Thus we might proceed as follows: 

Multiply (1) by x, and we have 

/(!)* = 0 , ( 2 ) 

and let us seek by the forms of ordinary algebra to eliminate x from this equation 
and (1). 

Now if we have two algebraic equations of the form 

ax + b = 0, 
a'x + b' = 0; 

it is well known that the result of the elimination of x is 

ah' — a'b = 0 (3) 

But comparing the above pair of equations with (1) and (3) respectively, we 
find 

a = /(l) — /(0), b = /(()): 
a' = f( 1) b'= 0; 

which, substituted in (4), give 

/(l)/(0) = 0, 

as before. In this form of the demonstration, the fundamental equation x(l — 
x) = 0, makes its appearance in the derivation of (3) from (1). 

7. I shall add yet another form of the demonstration, partaking of a half log- 
ical character, and which may set the demonstration of this important theorem 
in a clearer light. 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


77 


We have as before 

/(l)* + /(0)(l-*) = 0. 

Multiply this equation first by x, and secondly by 1 — x, we get 

/(!)* = 0 /(0)(1 — x) = 0. 

From these we have by solution and development, 


/( 1 ) = 


0 

x 


0 

0 


(!-*). 


on development, 


/( 0 ) 


0 

1 — X 


o a - 


The direct interpretation of these equations is— 

1st. Whatever individuals are included in the class represented by /( 1) , are 
not ads. 

2nd. Whatever individuals are included in the class represented by /( 0), are 

ads. 

Whence by common logic, there are no individuals at once in the class /( 1) 
and in the class /( 0), i.e. there are no individuals in the class /(l)/(0). Hence, 


/(l)/(0) = 0. 


( 4 ) 


Or it would suffice to multiply together the developed equations, whence the 
result would immediately follow. 

8. The theorem (5) furnishes us with the following Rule : 

TO ELIMINATE ANY SYMBOL FROM A PROPOSED EQUATION. 

RULE.-T/ie terms of the equation having been brought, by transposition if 
necessary, to the first side, give to the symbol successively the values 1 and 0, 
and multiply the resulting equations together. 

The first part of the Proposition is now proved. 

9. Consider in the next place the general equation 

f(x,y) = 0; 


the first member of which represents any function of x, y, and other symbols. 

By what has been shown, the result of the elimination of y from this equation 
will be 

f(x,l)f(x,0) = 0; 

for such is the form to which we are conducted by successively changing in the 
given equation y into 1, and y into 0, and multiplying the results together. 

Again, if in the result obtained we change successively x into 1, and x into 
0, and multiply the results together, we have 


/(l, !)/(!> 0)/(0, l)/(0, 0) = 0; 


( 5 ) 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


78 


as the final result of elimination. But the four factors of the first member of this 
equation are the four coefficients of the complete expansion of f(x,y), the first 
member of the original equation; whence the second part of the Proposition is 
manifest. 


EXAMPLES. 

10. Ex. 1. - Having given the Proposition, “All men are mortal,” and its 
symbolical expression, in the equation, 


V = vx, 

in which y represents “men,” and x “mortals,” it is required to eliminate the 
indefinite class symbol v, and to interpret the result. 

Here bringing the terms to the first side, we have 


When v = 1 this becomes 

and when v = 0 it becomes 


¦y — vx = 0. 
y-x = 0; 


y = 0 ; 

and these two equations multiplied together, give 

y ~ yx = 0 , 


or y(l — x) = 0, 

it being observed that y 2 = y. 

The above equation is the required result of elimination, and its interpreta- 
tion is, Men who are not mortal do not exist, - an obvious conclusion. 

If from the equation last obtained we seek a description of beings who are 
not mortal, we have 


. . x du — 

V 

Whence, by expansion, 1 — x = ^(1 — y), which interpreted gives, They who 
are not mortal are not men. This is an example of what in the common logic is 
called conversion by contraposition, or negative conversion. 1 

Ex. 2.-Taking the Proposition, “No men are perfect,” as represented by the 
equation 

V = v{ 1 - x), 

^^Whately’s Logic, Book II. chap. II. sec. 4. 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


79 


wherein y represents “men,” and x “perfect beings,” it is required to eliminate 
v, and find from the result a description both of perfect beings and of imperfect 
beings. We have 

y — i>(l — a;) = 0. 

Whence, by the rule of elimination, 

{y-(l-x)}xy = 0, 


or 

y-y( l-x) = o, 

or 

yx = 0; 

which is interpreted by the Proposition, Perfect men do not exist. From the 
above equation we have 

x = - = -(1 — y) by development; 

y 0 

whence, by interpretation, No perfect beings are men. Similarly, 

, , 0 y 0„ . 

l-x=l - - = - = y + -(1 - y), 

y y 0 

which, on interpretation, gives, Imperfect beings are all men with an indefinite 
remainder of beings, which are not men. 

11. It will generally be the most convenient course, in the treatment of 
propositions, to eliminate first the indefinite class symbol v, wherever it occurs 
in the corresponding equations. This will only modify their form, without im- 
pairing their significance. Let us apply this process to one of the examples of 
Chap. IV. For the Proposition, “No men are placed in exalted stations and free 
from envious regards,” we found the expression 

y = u(i - xz), 

and for the equivalent Proposition, “Men in exalted stations are not free from 
envious regards,” the expression 

yx = v(l - z); 

and it was observed that these equations, v being an indefinite class symbol, 
were themselves equivalent. To prove this, it is only necessary to eliminate from 
each the symbol v. The first equation is 

y — v(l — xz) = 0, 

whence, first making v = 1, and then v = 0, and multiplying the results, we 
have 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


80 


(y-l + xz)y = 0, 
or yxz = 0. 

Now the second of the given equations becomes on transposition 

¦yx — v{l — z) — 0; 
whence {x — 1 + z)yx = 0, 
or yxz = 0, 

as before. The reader will easily interpret the result. 

12. Ex. 3.-As a subject for the general method of this chapter, we will 
resume Mr. Senior’s definition of wealth, viz.: “Wealth consists of things trans- 
ferable, limited in supply, and either productive of pleasure or preventive of 
pain.” We shall consider this definition, agreeably to a former remark, as in- 
cluding all things which possess at once both the qualities expressed in the last 
part of the definition, upon which assumption we have, as our representative 
equation, 

w = st{pr + p(l — r) + r(l — p)}, 
or w = st{p + r(l — p)}, 

wherein 

w stands for wealth. 

s ” things limited in supply. 

t ” things transferable. 

p ” things productive of pleasure, 

r ” things preventive of pain. 

From the above equation we can eliminate any symbols that we do not 
desire to take into account, and express the result by solution and development, 
according to any proposed arrangement of subject and predicate. 

Let us first consider what the expression for w, wealth, would be if the 
element r, referring to prevention of pain, were eliminated. Now bringing the 
terms of the equation to the first side, we get 

w — st(p + r — rp) = 0. 

Making r = 1, the first member becomes w—st , and making r = 0 it becomes 
w — stp; whence we have by the Rule, 

(w — st)(w — stp) = 0 (6) 

or 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


81 


whence 


w — wstp — wst + stp = 0; 


( 7 ) 


stp 

w = 

st + stp — 1 

the development of the second member of which equation gives 


w = 


stp+ -st(l-p). 


(8) 


Whence we have the conclusion,- Wealth consists of all things limited in sup- 
ply, transferable, and productive of pleasure, and an indefinite remainder of 
things limited in supply, transferable, and not productive of pleasure. This is 
sufficiently obvious. 

Let it be remarked that it is not necessary to perform the multiplication 
indicated in (7), and reduce that equation to the form (8), in order to determine 
the expression of w in terms of the other symbols. The process of development 
may in all cases be made to supersede that of multiplication. Thus if we develop 
(7) in terms of w, we find 


(1 — sf)( 1 — stp)w + stp( 1 — w) = 0, 

whence 


stp 

VJ — ; 

stp — (1 — st)(l — stp) ’ 

and this equation developed will give, as before, 

0 

w = stp + -st(l — p). 

13. Suppose next that we seek a description of things limited in supply, 
as dependent upon their relation to wealth, transferableness, and tendency to 
produce pleasure, omitting all reference to the prevention of pain. 

From equation (8), which is the result of the elimination of r from the original 
equation, we have 

w — s (¦ wt + wtp — tp) = 0; 


w 


s = 


wt + wtp — tp 
= wtp + wt (1 — p) + (1 — t) p + (1 — t) (1 — p) 

+0 (1 - w) tp + jj (1 - w) t (1 - p) + jj (1 - w) (1 - t) p 

+ (l-t)(l-p). 


whence 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


82 


We will first give the direct interpretation of the above solution, term by term; 
afterwards we shall offer some general remarks which it suggests; and, finally, 
show how the expression of the conclusion may be somewhat abbreviated. 

First, then, the direct interpretation is, Things limited in supply consist of 
All wealth transferable and productive of pleasure-all wealth transferable, and not 
productive of pleasure, -an indefinite amount of what is not wealth, but is either 
transferable, and not productive of pleasure, or intransferable and productive of 
pleasure, or neither transferable nor productive of pleasure. 

To which the terms whose coefficients are g permit us to add the following 
independent relations, viz.: 

1st. Wealth that is intransferable, and productive of pleasure, does not exist. 

2ndly. Wealth that is intransferable, and not productive of pleasure, does not 
exist. 

14. Respecting this solution I suppose the following remarks are likely to be 
made. 

First, it may be said, that in the expression above obtained for “things 
limited in supply,” the term “All wealth transferable,” &c., is in part redundant; 
since all wealth is (as implied in the original proposition, and directly asserted 
in the independent relations) necessarily transferable. 

I answer, that although in ordinary speech we should not deem it necessary to 
add to “wealth” the epithet “transferable,” if another part of our reasoning had 
led us to express the conclusion, that there is no wealth which is not transferable, 
yet it pertains to the perfection of this method that it in all cases fully defines the 
objects represented by each term of the conclusion, by stating the relation they 
bear to each quality or element of distinction that we have chosen to employ. 
This is necessary in order to keep the different parts of the solution really distinct 
and independent, and actually prevents redundancy. Suppose that the pair of 
terms we have been considering had not contained the word “transferable,” 
and had unitedly been “All wealth,” we could then logically resolve the single 
term “All wealth” into the two terms “All wealth transferable,” and “All wealth 
intransferable.” But the latter term is shown to disappear by the “independent 
relations.” Hence it forms no part of the description required, and is therefore 
redundant. The remaining term agrees with the conclusion actually obtained. 

Solutions in which there cannot, by logical divisions, be produced any super- 
fluous or redundant terms, may be termed pure solutions. Such are all the solu- 
tions obtained by the method of development and elimination above explained. 
It is proper to notice, that if the common algebraic method of elimination were 
adopted in the cases in which that method is possible in the present system, 
we should not be able to depend upon the purity of the solutions obtained. Its 
want of generality would not be its only defect. 

15. In the second place, it will be remarked, that the conclusion contains 
two terms, the aggregate significance of which would be more conveniently ex- 
pressed by a single term. Instead of “All wealth productive of pleasure, and 
transferable,” and “All wealth not productive of pleasure, and transferable,” we 
might simply say, “All wealth transferable.” This remark is quite just. But it 
must be noticed that whenever any such simplifications are possible, they are 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


83 


immediately suggested by the form of the equation we have to interpret; and if 
that equation be reduced to its simplest form, then the interpretation to which 
it conducts will be in its simplest form also. Thus in the original solution the 
terms wtp and wt(l — p), which have unity for their coefficient, give, on addition, 
wt\ the terms w (1 — t) p and w (1 — t) (1 — p), which have f for their coefficient 
give w (1 — t); and the terms (1 — w) (1 — t) p and (1 — w) (1 — t) (1 — p), which 
have ^ for their coefficient, give (1 — w) (1 — t). Whence the complete solution 
is 

s = wt + jj (1 - w) (1 - t) + jj (i - w) t (1 - p ) , 
with the independent relation, 

. , 0 

w (1 — t) = 0, or w = -t. 

The interpretation would now stand thus:- 

lst. Things limited in supply consist of all wealth transferable, with an indef- 
inite remainder of what is not wealth and not transferable, and of transferable 
articles which are not wealth, and are not productive of pleasure. 

2nd. All wealth is transferable. 

This is the simplest form under which the general conclusion, with its atten- 
dant condition, can be put. 

16. When it is required to eliminate two or more symbols from a proposed 
equation we can either employ (6) Prop. I., or eliminate them in succession, the 
order of the process being indifferent. From the equation 

w = st (p + r — pr ) , 

we have eliminated r, and found the result, 

w — wst — wstp + stp = 0. 

Suppose that it had been required to eliminate both r and t, then taking the 
above as the first step of the process, it remains to eliminate from the last 
equation t. Now when t = 1 the first member of that equation becomes 

w — ws — wsp + sp, 

and when t = 0 the same member becomes w. Whence we have 

w (w — ws — wsp + sp) = 0, 


or 

w — ws = 0, 

for the required result of elimination. 

If from the last result we determine w, we have 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


84 


0 0 

w = i = n s ’ 

1 — s 0 

whence “ All wealth is limited in supply .” As p does not enter into the equa- 
tion, it is evident that the above is true, irrespectively of any relation which the 
elements of the conclusion bear to the quality “productive of pleasure.” 

Resuming the original equation, let it be required to eliminate s and t. We 
have 


w = st(p + r — pr). 

Instead, however, of separately eliminating s and t according to the Rule, it 
will suffice to treat st as a single symbol, seeing that it satisfies the fundamental 
law of the symbols by the equation 

sf(l — st) = 0. 

Placing, therefore, the given equation under the form 
w — st(p + r — pr) = 0; 

and making st successively equal to 1 and to 0, and taking the product of 
the results, we have 


(w — p — r + pr)w = 0, 
or w — wp — wr + wpr = 0, 

for the result sought. 

As a particular illustration, let it be required to deduce an expression for 
“things productive of pleasure” ( p ), in terms of “wealth” (w), and “things pre- 
ventive of pain” (r). 

We have, on solving the equation, 


w( 1 — r) 

v = a — \ 

¦u;(l — r) 

= —wr + w(l — r) -h — (1 — w)r + -(1 — u>)(l — r) 

„ , 0 (K 

= u>(l — r) + -wr + -(1 — w). 

Whence the following conclusion:- Things productive of pleasure are, all wealth 
not preventive of pain, an indefinite amount of wealth that is preventive of pain, 
and an indefinite amount of what is not wealth. 

From the same equation we get 


w{l — r) 0 

u>(l — r) w{l — r ) ’ 


1 — p = 1 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


85 


which developed, gives 


u>(l — p) = —wr + -(1 — w)-r + -(1 — to) • (1 — r) 

0 

= ^wr+ -(1-te). 

Whence, Things not productive of pleasure are either wealth, preventive of 
pain, or what is not wealth. 

Equally easy would be the discussion of any similar case. 

17. In the last example of elimination, we have eliminated the compound 
symbol st from the given equation, by treating it as a single symbol. The 
same method is applicable to any combination of symbols which satisfies the 
fundamental law of individual symbols. Thus the expression p + r — pr will, on 
being multiplied by itself, reproduce itself, so that if we represent p + r — pr by 
a single symbol as y, we shall have the fundamental law obeyed, the equation 

y = y 2 , or 2/(1 - y) = 0, 

being satisfied. For the rule of elimination for symbols is founded upon the 
supposition that each individual symbol is subject to that law; and hence the 
elimination of any function or combination of such symbols from an equation, 
may be effected by a single operation, whenever that law is satisfied by the 
function. 

Though the forms of interpretation adopted in this and the previous chapter 
show, perhaps better than any others, the direct significance of the symbols 1 
and g, modes of expression more agreeable to those of common discourse may, 
with equal truth and propriety, be employed. Thus the equation (9) may be 
interpreted in the following manner: Wealth is either limited in supply, trans- 
ferable, and productive of pleasure, or limited in supply, transferable, and not 
productive of pleasure. And reversely, Whatever is limited in supply, transfer- 
able, and productive of pleasure, is wealth. Reverse interpretations, similar to 
the above, are always furnished when the final development introduces terms 
having unity as a coefficient. 

18. NOTE.-The fundamental equation /(l)/(0) = 0, expressing the result 
of the elimination of the symbol x from any equation f(x) = 0, admits of a 
remarkable interpretation. 

It is to be remembered, that by the equation f(x) = 0 is implied some 
proposition in which the individuals represented by the class x, suppose “men,” 
are referred to, together, it may be, with other individuals; and it is our object 
to ascertain whether there is implied in the proposition any relation among 
the other individuals, independently of those found in the class men. Now 
the equation /( 1) = 0 expresses what the original proposition would become 
if men made up the universe, and the equation /( 0) = 0 expresses what that 
original proposition would become if men ceased to exist, wherefore the equation 
/(l)/(0) = 0 expresses what in virtue of the original proposition would be 



CHAPTER VII. OF ELIMINATION 


86 


equally true on either assumption, i. e. equally true whether “men” were “all 
things” or “nothing.” Wherefore the theorem expresses that what is equally 
true, whether a given class of objects embraces the whole universe or disappears 
from existence, is independent of that class altogether, and vice versa. Herein we 
see another example of the interpretation of formal results, immediately deduced 
from the mathematical laws of thought, into general axioms of philosophy. 



Chapter VIII 

ON THE REDUCTION OF SYSTEMS OF 
PROPOSITIONS. 


1. In the preceding chapters we have determined sufficiently for the most es- 
sential purposes the theory of single primary propositions, or, to speak more 
accurately, of primary propositions expressed by a single equation. And we 
have established upon that theory an adequate method. We have shown how 
any element involved in the given system of equations may be eliminated, and 
the relation which connects the remaining elements deduced in any proposed 
form, whether of denial, of affirmation, or of the more usual relation of subject 
and predicate. It remains that we proceed to the consideration of systems of 
propositions, and institute with respect to them a similar series of investiga- 
tions. We are to inquire whether it is possible from the equations by which 
a system of propositions is expressed to eliminate, ad libitum, any number of 
the symbols involved; to deduce by interpretation of the result the whole of the 
relations implied among the remaining symbols; and to determine in particu- 
lar the expression of any single element, or of any interpretable combination 
of elements, in terms of the other elements, so as to present the conclusion in 
any admissible form that may be required. These questions will be answered 
by showing that it is possible to reduce any system of equations, or any of the 
equations involved in a system, to an equivalent single equation, to which the 
methods of the previous chapters may be immediately applied. It will be seen 
also, that in this reduction is involved an important extension of the theory 
of single propositions, which in the previous discussion of the subject we were 
compelled to forego. This circumstance is not peculiar in its nature. There are 
many special departments of science which cannot be completely surveyed from 
within, but require to be studied also from an external point of view, and to be 
regarded in connexion with other and kindred subjects, in order that their full 
proportions be understood. 

This chapter will exhibit two distinct modes of reducing systems of equations 
to equivalent single equations. The first of these rests upon the employment of 
arbitrary constant multipliers. It is a method sufficiently simple in theory, but it 
has the inconvenience of rendering the subsequent processes of elimination and 
development, when they occur, somewhat tedious. It was, however, the method 


87 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


of reduction first discovered, and partly on this account, and partly on account 
of its simplicity, it has been thought proper to retain it. The second method 
does not require the introduction of arbitrary constants, and is in nearly all 
respects preferable to the preceding one. It will, therefore, generally be adopted 
in the subsequent investigations of this work. 

2. We proceed to the consideration of the first method. 

Proposition I. 

Any system of logical equations may be reduced to a single equivalent equa- 
tion, by multiplying each equation after the first by a distinct arbitrary constant 
quantity, and adding all the results, including the first equation, together. 

By Prop. 2, Chap, VI., the interpretation of any single equation, f(x, y..) = 0 
is obtained by equating to 0 those constituents of the development of the first 
member, whose coefficients do not vanish. And hence, if there be given two 
equations, f(x , y..) = 0, and F(x, y..) = 0, their united import will be contained 
in the system of results formed by equating to 0 all those constituents which 
thus present themselves in both, or in either, of the given equations developed 
according to the Rule of Chap. VI. Thus let it be supposed, that we have the 
two equations 


xy — 2x = 0, 

(1) 

x-y = 0; 

(2) 


The development of the first gives 


- xy - 2x(l - y) = 0; 

whence, xy = 0, x{l — y) = 0. (3) 

The development of the second equation gives 

x{l ~y)~ 2/(1 - x) = 0; 

whence, x{\ — y) = 0, y( 1 — x) = 0. (4) 

The constituents whose coefficients do not vanish in both developments are xy, 
x{l — y), and (1 — x)y, and these would together give the system 

xy = 0,;r(l - y) = 0, (l - x)y = 0; (5) 

which is equivalent to the two systems given by the developments separately, 
seeing that in those systems the equation x{\ — y) = 0 is repeated. Confining 
ourselves to the case of binary systems of equations, it remains then to determine 
a single equation, which on development shall yield the same constituents with 
coefficients which do not vanish, as the given equations produce. Now if we 
represent by 


Vi = 0,V 2 = 0, 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


89 


the given equations, V\ and V 2 being functions of the logical symbols x,y,z, 
&c.; then the single equation 


V\ + cH 2 = 0 , (6) 

c being an arbitrary constant quantity, will accomplish the required object. For 
let At represent any term in the full development V, wherein t is a constituent 
and A its numerical coefficient, and let Bt. represent the corresponding term in 
the full development of V 2 , then will the corresponding term in the development 
of (6) be 

(A + cB)t. 

The coefficient of t vanishes if A and B both vanish, but not otherwise. For if 
we assume that A and B do not both vanish, and at the same time make 

A + cB = 0, (7) 

the following cases alone can present themselves. 

1st. That A vanishes and B does not vanish. In this case the above equation 
becomes 

cB = 0, 

and requires that c = 0. But this contradicts the hypothesis that c is an 
arbitrary constant. 

2nd. That B vanishes and A does not vanish. This assumption reduces (7) 
to 

A = 0, 

by which the assumption is itself violated. 

3rd. That neither A nor B vanishes. The equation (7) then gives 

-A 



which is a definite value, and, therefore, conflicts with the hypothesis that c is 
arbitrary. 

Hence the coefficient A + cB vanishes when A and B both vanish, but not 
otherwise. Therefore, the same constituents will appear in the development of 
(6), with coefficients which do not vanish, as in the equations Vj = 0, V 2 = 0, 
singly or together. And the equation Vi + cV 2 = 0, will be equivalent to the 
system V\ = 0, V 2 = 0. 

By similar reasoning it appears, that the general system of equations 
Hi = 0, H 2 = 0, V 3 = 0, &c. ; 
may be replaced by the single equation 

Hi+cH2 + c , H 3 + &c. = 0, 

c, d , &c., being arbitrary constants. The equation thus formed may be treated 
in all respects as the ordinary logical equations of the previous chapters. The 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


90 


arbitrary constants Ci,C 2 , &c., are not logical symbols. They do not satisfy the 
law, 

ci(l - ci) = 0, c 2 (l - c 2 ) = 0 . 

But their introduction is justified by that general principle which has been stated 
in (II. 15) and (V. 6), and exemplified in nearly all our subsequent investigations, 
viz., that equations involving the symbols of Logic may be treated in all respects 
as if those symbols were symbols of quantity, subject to the special law x(l— x) = 
0, until in the final stage of solution they assume a form interpretable in that 
system of thought with which Logic is conversant. 

3. The following example will serve to illustrate the above method. 

Ex. 1. -Suppose that an analysis of the properties of a particular class of 
substances has led to the following general conclusions, viz.: 

1st. That wherever the properties A and B are combined, either the property 
C, or the property D, is present also; but they are not jointly present. 

2nd. That wherever the properties B and C are combined, the properties A 
and D are either both present with them, or both absent. 

3rd. That wherever the properties A and B are both absent, the properties 
C and D are both absent also; and vice versa, where the properties C and D 
are both absent, A and B are both absent also. 

Let it then be required from the above to determine what may be concluded 
in any particular instance from the presence of the property A with respect to 
the presence or absence of the properties B and C, paying no regard to the 
property D. 

Represent the property A by x; 

the property B by y, 
the property C by Z\ 
the property D by w. 

Then the symbolical expression of the premises will be 


xy— v(w(l— z)+z(l— w))', yz = x(xu;+(l— x)(l— re)); (1— x)(l— y) = (1— z)(l— w). 

From the first two of these equations, separately eliminating the indefinite 
class symbol v, we have 

xy( 1 — w(l — z) — z( 1 — w )) = 0; 

¦yz{ 1 — xw — (1 — x)(l — w)) = 0. 

Now if we observe that by development 

1 — w( 1 — z) — z{ 1 — w) = wz + (1 — u>)(l — z), 

and 

1 — xw — (1 — x)(l — w) = x(l — w) + w{l — x), 
and in these expressions replace, for simplicity, 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


91 


1 - xbyx, 1 - ybyy, &c., 

we shall have from the three last equations, 


xy(wz + wz) = 0; 

(1) 

yz(xw + xw) = 0; 

(2) 

x y = wz ; 

and from this system we must eliminate w. 

( 3 ) 


Multiplying the second of the above equations by c, and the third by d , and 
adding the results to the first, we have 

xy(wz + wz) + cyz(xw + xw) + c'(xy — wz) = 0. 

When w is made equal to 1, and therefore w to 0, the first member of the 
above equation becomes 


xyz + cxyz + c'xy. 

And when in the same member w is made 0 and w = 1, it becomes 


xyz + cxyz + c'xy — d z. 

Hence the result of the elimination of w may be expressed in the form 


( xyz + cxyz + c'xy) (xyz + cxyz + c'xy — d z) = 0; (4) 

and from this equation x is to be determined. 

Were we now to proceed as in former instances, we should multiply together 
the factors in the first member of the above equation ; but it may be well to 
show that such a course is not at all necessary. Let us develop the first member 
of (4) with reference to x, the symbol whose expression is sought, we find 


yz(yz + cyz — c’z)x + (cyz + dy)(dy — c' z)( 1 — x) = 0; 
or, cyzx + (cyz + dy)(dy — dz)( 1 — x) = 0; 

whence we find, 


(cyz + dy) (dy - d z) 

X == * 

(cyz + dy) (dy — dz) — cyz ’ 

and developing the second member with respect to y and z, 

n 0 c' 2 0 

x = Oyz + -yz + yz + -yz\ 

or, 

x = (1 - y) z + (1 - z) + (1 - y) (1 - z) ; 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


92 


or, 

X = (1 - y) z + jj (1 - z ) ; 

the interpretation of which is, Wherever the property A is present, there either 
C is present and B absent, or C is absent. And inversely, Wherever the property 
C is present, and the property B absent, there the property A is present. 

These results may be much more readily obtained by the method next to 
be explained. It is, however, satisfactory to possess different modes, serving for 
mutual verification, of arriving at the same conclusion. 

4. We proceed to the second method. 

Proposition II. 

If any equations, V\ = 0, V 2 = 0, &c., are such that the developments of 
their first members consist only of constituents with positive coefficients, those 
equations may be combined together into a single equivalent equation by addition. 

For, as before, let At represent any term in the development of the function 
Vi, Bt the corresponding term in the development of V 2 and so on. Then will 
the corresponding term in the development of the equation 


Vl + V 2 + &c. = 0, (1) 

formed by the addition of the several given equations, be 

(A + B + &c.) t. 

But as by hypothesis the coefficients A, B , &c. are none of them negative, 
the aggregate coefficient A + B, &c. in the derived equation will only vanish 
when the separate coefficients A, B , &c. vanish together. Hence the same 
constituents will appear in the development of the equation (1) as in the several 
equations V\ = 0, V 2 = 0, &c. of the original system taken collectively, and 
therefore the interpretation of the equation (1) will be equivalent to the collective 
interpretations of the several equations from which it is derived. 

Proposition III. 

5. If Vi = 0, V 2 = 0, &c. represent any system of equations, the terms of 
which have by transposition been brought to like first side, then the combined 
interpretation of the system will be involved in the single equation, 

Vi + V 2 2 + &c. = 0, 

formed by adding together the squares of the given equations. 

For let any equation of the system, as Vi = 0, produce on development an 
equation 


a\t\ + a 2 t 2 + &c. = 0 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


93 


in which ti,t- 2 ,&zc. are constituents, and ai,a 2 ,&c. their corresponding co- 
efficients. Then the equation Vj 2 = 0 will produce on development an equation 


cqti T a 2 t 2 A Vc. — 0, 

as may be proved either from the law of the development or by squaring the 
function aHi + a 2 t 2 , &c. in subjection to the conditions 

t\ = t\, t 2 = t 2 , , t\t 2 = 0 

assigned in Prop. 3, Chap. v. Hence the constituents which appear in 
the expansion of the equation Vj 2 = 0, are the same with those which appear 
in the expansion of the equation Vj = 0, and they have positive coefficients. 
And the same remark applies to the equations V 2 = 0, &c. Whence, by the last 
Proposition, the equation 


Vj 2 + V 2 2 + &c. = 0 

will be equivalent in interpretation to the system of equations 

Vj = 0, V 2 = 0, &c. 

Corollary . -Any equation, V = 0, of which the first member already satisfies 
the condition 


V 2 = V, or V(1 - V) = 0, 

does not need (as it would remain unaffected by) the process of squar- 
ing. Such equations are, indeed, immediately developable into a series of con- 
stituents, with coefficients equal to 1, Chap. v. Prop. 4. 

Proposition IV. 

6. Whenever the equations of a system have by the above process of squaring, 
or by any other process, been reduced to a form such that all the constituents 
exhibited in their development have positive coefficients, any derived equations 
obtained by elimination will possess the same character, and may be combined 
with the other equations by addition. 

Suppose that we have to eliminate a symbol x from any equation V = 0, 
which is such that none of the constituents, in the full development of its first 
member, have negative coefficients. That expansion may be written in the form 

Via + V 0 (l - a) = 0 

Vj and Vj being each of the form 


a\ti + a 2 t 2 ... + a n t n , 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


94 


in which t\t 2 -..t n are constituents of the other symbols, and aia 2 ...a n in each 
case positive or vanishing quantities. The result of elimination is 

4hF 2 = 0; 

and as the coefficients in V\ and V 2 , are none of them negative, there can be no 
negative coefficients in the product V 1 V 2 . Hence the equation V 1 V 2 = 0 may be 
added to any other equation, the coefficients of whose constituents are positive, 
and the resulting equation will combine the full significance of those from which 
it was obtained. 


Proposition V. 

7. To deduce from the previous Propositions a practical rule or method for 
the reduction of systems of equations expressing propositions in Logic. 

We have by the previous investigations established the following points, viz.: 

1st. That any equations which are of the form V = 0, V satisfying the 
fundamental law of duality V(l — V) =0, may be combined together by simple 
addition. 

2ndly. That any other equations of the form V = 0 may be reduced, by the 
process of squaring, to a form in which the same principle of combination by 
mere addition is applicable. 

It remains then only to determine what equations in the actual expression 
of propositions belong to the former, and what to the latter, class. 

Now the general types of propositions have been set forth in the conclusion 
of Chap. IV. The division of propositions which they represent is as follows: 

1st. Propositions, of which the subject is universal, and the predicate par- 
ticular. 

The symbolical type (IV. 15) is 


X = vY, 

X and Y satisfying the law of duality. Eliminating v, we have 

X(1-V)=0, (1) 

and this will be found also to satisfy the same law. No further reduction by 
the process of squaring is needed. 

2nd. Propositions of which both terms are universal, and of which the sym- 
bolical type is 


X = Y, 


X and Y separately satisfying the law of duality. Writing the equation in 
the form X — Y = 0, and squaring, we have 


X - 2XV + Y = 0, 
or, X(1 - Y) + Y(1 -X) = 0. 


(2) 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


95 


The first member of this equation satisfies the law of duality, as is evident 
from its very form. 

We may arrive at the same equation in a different manner. The equation 


X = Y 

is equivalent to the two equations 

X = vY, Y = vX, 

(for to affirm that X’s are identical with Y' s is to affirm both that All X’s 
are Y’ s, and that All F’s are X’s). Now these equations give, on elimination of 

v, 

X(1 - Y) = 0, Y( 1 - X) = 0, 
which added, produce (2). 

3rd. Propositions of which both terms are particular. The form of such 
propositions is 

vX = vY, 

but v is not quite arbitrary, and therefore must not be eliminated. For v is the 
representative of some , which, though it may include in its meaning all , does 
not include none. We must therefore transpose the second member to the first 
side, and square the resulting equation according to the rule. The result will 
obviously be 

vX(l -Y)+vY{l- X) =0. 

The above conclusions it may be convenient to embody in a Rule, which will 
serve for constant future direction. 

8. Rule. — The equations being so expressed as that the terms X and Y in 
the following typical forms obey the law of duality, change the equations 

X = vY into X(1 - Y) = 0, 

X = Y into X(1 -Y)+ Y( 1 — X) = 0. 
vX = vY into vX(l - Y) + vY( 1 - X) = 0. 

Any equation which is given in the form X = 0 will not need transformation, 
and any equation which presents itself in the form X = 1 may be replaced by 
1 — X = 0, as appears from the second of the above transformations. 

When the equations of the system have thus been reduced, any of them, as 
well as any equations derived from them by the process of elimination, may be 
combined by addition. 

9. Note.— It has been seen in Chapter IV. that in literally translating the 
terms of a proposition, without attending to its real meaning, into the language 
of symbols, we may produce equations in which the terms X and Y do not 
obey the law of duality. The equation w = st(p + r), given in (3) Prop. 3 of the 
chapter referred to, is of this kind. Such equations, however, as it has been seen, 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


96 


have a meaning. Should it, for curiosity, or for any other motive, be determined 
to employ them, it will be best to reduce them by the Rule (VI. 5). 

10. Ex. 2.-Let us take the following Propositions of Elementary Geometry: 
1st. Similar figures consist of all whose corresponding angles are equal, and 
whose corresponding sides are proportional. 

2nd. Triangles whose corresponding angles are equal have their correspond- 
ing sides proportional, and vice versa. 

To represent these premises, let us make 
s = similar. 

t = triangles. 

q = having corresponding angles equal. 

r = having corresponding sides proportional. 

Then the premises are expressed by the following equations: 

s = qr, (1) 

tq = tr. (2) 

Reducing by the Rule, or, which amounts to the same thing, bringing the terms 
of these equations to the first side, squaring each equation, and then adding, we 
have 

s + qr — 2 qrs + tq + tr — 2 tqr = 0. (3) 

Let it be required to deduce a description of dissimilar figures formed out of the 
elements expressed by the terms, triangles, having corresponding angles equal, 
having corresponding sides proportional. 

We have from (3), 


tq + qr + rt — 2 tqr 


„ qr — tq — rt + 2 tqr — 1 

1 — s = . (4) 

2 qr — 1 

And fully developing the second member, we find 

1 — s = 0 tqr + 2tq(l — r) + 2fr(l — q) + t( 1 — g)(l — r) 

+0(1 - t)qr + (1 - t)q( 1 - r) + (1 - t)r( 1 - q) 

+(l-t)(l-g)(l-r). (5) 

In the above development two of the terms have the coefficient 2, these must 
be equated to 0 by the Rule, then those terms whose coefficients are 0 being 
rejected, we have 

1 — s = t(l — q)( 1 - r) + (1 - t)q( 1 - r) + (1 - t)r( 1 - q) 

+(l-f)(l-g)(l-r); 
tq( 1 - r) = 0; 

Mi - q) = 0; 


( 6 ) 

( 7 ) 

(8) 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


97 


the direct interpretation of which is 

1st. Dissimilar figures consist of all triangles which have not their corre- 
sponding angles equal and sides proportional, and of all figures not being trian- 
gles which have either their angles equal, and sides not proportional, or their 
corresponding sides proportional, and angles not equal, or neither their corre- 
sponding angles equal nor corresponding sides proportional. 

2nd. There are no triangles whose corresponding angles are equal, and sides 
not proportional. 

3rd. There are no triangles whose corresponding sides are proportional and 
angles not equal. 

11. Such are the immediate interpretations of the final equation. It is seen, in 
accordance with the general theory, that in deducing a description of a particular 
class of objects, viz., dissimilar figures, in terms of certain other elements of the 
original premises, we obtain also the independent relations which exist among 
those elements in virtue of the same premises. And that this is not superfluous 
information, even as respects the immediate object of inquiry, may easily be 
shown. For example, the independent relations may always be made use of 
to reduce, if it be thought desirable, to a briefer form, the expression of that 
relation which is directly sought. Thus if we write (7) in the form 

0 = tq(l - r), 

and add it to (6), we get, since 

i(l — <?)(! — r) + tq( 1 - r) = t( 1 - r), 

1 — s = t(l — r) + (1 — t)q( 1 - r) + (1 - t)r( 1 - q) 

+(l-f)(l-g)(l-r), 

which, on interpretation, would give for the first term of the description of 
dissimilar figures, “Triangles whose corresponding sides are not proportional,” 
instead of the fuller description originally obtained. A regard to convenience 
must always determine the propriety of such reduction. 

12. A reduction which is always advantageous (VII. 15) consists in collecting 
the terms of the immediate description sought, as of the second member of (5) 
or (6), into as few groups as possible. Thus the third and fourth terms of the 
second member of (6) produce by addition the single term (1 — t)(l — q). If this 
reduction be combined with the last, we have 

1 - s = t(l - r) + (1 - t)q{ 1 - r) + (1 - i)(l - q), 
the interpretation of which is 

Dissimilar figures consist of all triangles whose corresponding sides are not 
proportional, and all figures not being triangles which have either their cor- 
responding angles unequal, or their corresponding angles equal, but sides not 
proportional. 

The fulness of the general solution is therefore not a superfluity. While it 
gives us all the information that we seek, it provides us also with the means of 
expressing that information in the mode that is most advantageous. 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


98 


13. Another observation, illustrative of a principle which has already been 
stated, remains to be made. Two of the terms in the full development of 1 — s in 
(5) have 2 for their coefficients, instead of g . It will hereafter be shown that this 
circumstance indicates that the two premises were not independent. To verify 
this, let us resume the equations of the premises in their reduced forms, viz., 

s(l — qr) + qr{ 1 — s) =0, 
tq( 1 — r) + tr( 1 — q) =0. 

Now if the first members of these equations have any common constituents, they 
will appear on multiplying the equations together. If we do this we obtain 

stq( 1 — r) + str(l — q) = 0. 

Whence there will result 

stq{ 1 — r) = 0, str{ 1 — q) = 0, 

these being equations which are cleducible from either of the primitive ones. 
Their interpretations are — 

Similar triangles which have their corresponding angles equal have their cor- 
responding sides proportional. 

Similar triangles which have their corresponding sides proportional have their 
corresponding angles equal. 

And these conclusions are equally deducible from either premiss singly. In 
this respect, according to the definitions laid down, the premises are not inde- 
pendent. 

14. Let us, in conclusion, resume the problem discussed in illustration of the 
first method of this chapter, and endeavour to ascertain, by the present method, 
what may be concluded from the presence of the property C, with reference to 
the properties A and B. 

We found on eliminating the symbols v the following equations, viz.: 


xyiwz + wz) = 0, 

( 1 ) 

yz(xu> + xw) = 0, 

( 2 ) 

xy = wz. 

( 3 ) 


From these we are to eliminate w and determine 2 . Now (1) and (2) already 
satisfy the condition V(l — V) = 0. The third equation gives, on bringing the 
terms to the first side, and squaring 

xy(l — wz) + wz{ 1 — xy) = 0. (4) 

Adding (1) (2) and (4) together, we have 



CHAPTER VIII. OF REDUCTION 


99 


Eliminating w, we get 

(. xyz + yzx + xy){xyz + yzx + xyz + z(l — xy)} = 0. 

Now, on multiplying the terms in the second factor by those in the first succes- 
sively, observing that 

xx = 0, yy = 0, 22 = 0, 
nearly all disappear, and we have only left 

xyz + xyz = 0; (5) 


whence 

0 

2 = — 

xy + xy 

= 0 xy +^xy+ ^ xy + 0 xy 

0 0 _ 

= ^y + -xy, 

furnishing the interpretation. Wherever the property C is found, either the 
property A or the property B will be found with it, but not both of them together. 

From the equation (5) we may readily deduce the result arrived at in the 
previous investigation by the method of arbitrary constant multipliers, as well 
as any other proposed forms of the relation between x, y, and 2 ; e. g. If the 
property B is absent, either A and C will be jointly present, or C will be absent. 
And conversely, If A and C are jointly present, B will be absent. The converse 
part of this conclusion is founded on the presence of a term xz with unity for 
its coefficient in the developed value of y. 



Chapter IX 

ON CERTAIN METHODS OF ABBREVIATION. 


1. Though the three fundamental methods of development, elimination, and 
reduction, established and illustrated in the previous chapters, are sufficient for 
all the practical ends of Logic, yet there are certain cases in which they admit, 
and especially the method of elimination, of being simplified in an important 
degree; and to these I wish to direct attention in the present chapter. I shall 
first demonstrate some propositions in which the principles of the above methods 
of abbreviation are contained, and I shall afterwards apply them to particular 
examples. 

Let us designate as class terms any terms which satisfy the fundamental law 
V(l — V) =0. Such terms will individually be constituents; but, when occurring 
together, will not, as do the terms of a development, necessarily involve the 
same symbols in each. Thus ax + bxy + cyz may be described as an expression 
consisting of three class terms, x, xy, and yz, multiplied by the coefficients a, 
b, c respectively. The principle applied in the two following Propositions, and 
which, in some instances, greatly abbreviates the process of elimination, is that 
of the rejection of superfluous class terms', those being regarded as superfluous 
which do not add to the constituents of the final result. 

Proposition I. 

2. From any equation, V = 0, in which V consists of a series of class terms 
having positive coefficients, we are permitted to reject any term which contains 
another term as a factor, and to change every positive coefficient to unity. 

For the significance of this series of positive terms depends only upon the 
number and nature of the constituents of its final expansion, i.e. of its expansion 
with reference to all the symbols which it involves, and not at all upon the actual 
values of the coefficients (VI. 5). Now let x be any term of the series, and xy 
any other term having a; as a factor. The expansion of x with reference to the 
symbols x and y will be 

xy + x(l-y), 

and the expansion of the sum of the terms x and xy will be 

2 xy + x (1 -y). 


100 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


101 


But by what has been said, these expressions occurring in the first member 
of an equation, of which the second member is 0, and of which all the coefficients 
of the first member are positive, are equivalent; since there must exist simply 
the two constituents xy and x (1 — y) in the final expansion, whence will simply 
arise the resulting equations 


xy = 0, x (1 - y) = 0. 

And, therefore, the aggregate of terms x + xy may be replaced by the single 
term x. 

The same reasoning applies to all the cases contemplated in the Proposition. 
Thus, if the term x is repeated, the aggregate 2x may be replaced by x, because 
under the circumstances the equation x = 0 must appear in the final reduction. 

Proposition II. 

3. Whenever in the process of elimination we have to multiply together two 
factors, each consisting solely of positive terms, satisfying the fundamental law 
of logical symbols, it is permitted to reject from both factors any common term, 
or from either factor any term which is divisible by a term in the other factor; 
provided always, that the rejected term be added to the product of the resulting 
factors. 

In the enunciation of this Proposition, the word “divisible” is a term of 
convenience, used in the algebraic sense, in which xy and x (1 — y) are said to 
be divisible by x. 

To render more clear the import of this Proposition, let it be supposed that 
the factors to be multiplied together are x + y + z and x + yw + t. It is then 
asserted, that from these two factors We may reject the term x, and that from 
the second factor we may reject the term yw, provided that these terms be 
transferred to the final product. Thus, the resulting factors being y + z and t, 
if to their product yt + zt we add the terms x and yw, we have 

x + yw + yt + zt, 

as an expression equivalent to the product of the given factors x + y + z and 
x + yw + t; equivalent namely in the process of elimination. 

Let us consider, first, the case in which the two factors have a common term 
x, and let us represent the factors by the expressions x + P, x + Q, supposing P 
in the one case and Q in the other to be the sum of the positive terms additional 
to x. 

Now, 

(x + P) (x + Q) = x + xP + xQ + PQ. (1) 

But the process of elimination consists in multiplying certain factors together, 
and equating the result to 0. Either then the second member of the above 
equation is to be equated to 0, or it is a factor of some expression which is to 
be equated to 0. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


102 


If the former alternative be taken, then, by the last Proposition, we are 
permitted to reject the terms xP and xQ , inasmuch as they are positive terms 
having another term £ as a factor. The resulting expression is 

x + PQ, 

which is what we should obtain by rejecting x from both factors, and adding it 
to the product of the factors which remain. 

Taking the second alternative, the only mode in which the second member 
of (1) can affect the final result of elimination must depend upon the number 
and nature of its constituents, both which elements are unaffected by the rejec- 
tion of the terms xP and xQ. For that development of x includes all possible 
constituents of which a; is a factor. 

Consider finally the case in which one of the factors contains a term, as xy , 
divisible by a term, x, in the other factor. 

Let x + P and xy + Q be the factors. Now 

(x + P) {xy + Q) = xy + xQ + xyP + PQ. 

But by the reasoning of the last Proposition, the term xyP may be rejected as 
containing another positive term xy as a factor, whence we have 


xy + xQ + PQ 
= xy + {x + P)Q. 

But this expresses the rejection of the term xy from the second factor, and its 
transference to the final product. Wherefore the Proposition is manifest. 

Proposition III. 

4. Ift be any symbol which is retained in the final result of the elimination of 
any other symbols from any system of equations, the result of such elimination 
may be expressed in the form 


Et + E(l-t) = 0, 

in which E is formed by making in the proposed system t = 1, and eliminating 
the same other symbols; and E' by making in the proposed system t = 0, and 
eliminating the same other symbols. 

For let <j> (f) = 0 represent the final result of elimination. Expanding this 
equation, we have 

0(l)t + 0(O)(l-i)=O. 

Now by whatever process we deduce the function <j> (t) from the proposed system 
of equations, by the same process should we deduce </>(l), if in those equations 
t were changed into 1; and by the same process should we deduce <f> (0), if in the 
same equations t were changed into 0. Whence the truth of the proposition is 
manifest. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


103 


5. Of the three propositions last proved, it may be remarked, that though 
quite unessential to the strict development or application of the general theory, 
they yet accomplish important ends of a practical nature. By Prop. 1 we can 
simplify the results of addition; by Prop. 2 we can simplify those of multiplica- 
tion; and by Prop. 3 we can break up any tedious process of elimination into two 
distinct processes, which will in general be of a much less complex character. 
This method will be very frequently adopted, when the final object of inquiry is 
the determination of the value of t, in terms of the other symbols which remain 
after the elimination is performed. 

6. Ex. 1.- Aristotle, in the Nicomachean Ethics, Book II. Cap. 3, having 
determined that actions are virtuous, not as possessing in themselves a certain 
character, but as implying a certain condition of mind in him who performs 
them, viz., that he perform them knowingly, and with deliberate preference, 
and for their own sakes, and upon fixed principles of conduct, proceeds in the 
two following chapters to consider the question, whether virtue is to be referred 
to the genus of Passions, or Faculties, or Habits, together with some other 
connected points. He grounds his investigation upon the following premises, 
from which, also, he deduces the general doctrine and definition of moral virtue, 
of which the remainder of the treatise forms an exposition. 

PREMISES. 

1. Virtue is either a passion (udedoc), or a faculty (ouvapic), or a habit (s£u;). 

2. Passions are not things according to which we are praised or blamed, or 
in which we exercise deliberate preference. 

3. Faculties are not things according to which we are praised or blamed, and 
which are accompanied by deliberate preference. 

4. Virtue is something according to which we are praised or blamed, and 
which is accompanied by deliberate preference. 

5. Whatever art or science makes its work to be in a good state avoids ex- 
tremes, and keeps the mean in view relative to human nature (to psaov . . . itpoc 
ijpbc) 

6. Virtue is more exact and excellent than any art or science. This is an 
argument a fortiori. If science and true art shun defect and extravagance alike, 
much more does virtue pursue the undeviating line of moderation. If they cause 
their work to be in a good state, much more reason have to we to say that 
Virtue causeth her peculiar work to be “in a good state.” Let the final premiss 
be thus interpreted. Let us also pretermit all reference to praise or blame, since 
the mention of these in the premises accompanies only the mention of deliberate 
preference, and this is an element which we purpose to retain. We may then 
assume as our representative symbols- 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


104 


v = virtue. 
p = passions. 

/ = faculties. 
h = habits. 

d = things accompanied by deliberate preference. 

g = things causing their work to be in a good state. 

m = things keeping the mean in view relative to human nature. 

Using, then, q as an indefinite class symbol, our premises will be expressed by 
the following equations: 

v = q{p(l - /) (1 - h) + /(I -p) (1 - h) + h(l -p) (1 - /)} . 

P = q(l-d). 

/ = g(i-d)- 

v = qd. 
g = qm. 
v = qg. 


And separately eliminating from these the symbols q, 

v {l-p(l-f)(l-h)-f(l-p)(l-h)-h(l-p)(l-f)}=0. (1) 

pd = 0. (2) 

fd = 0. (3) 

v (1 — d) = 0. (4) 

9 (1 - rn) = 0. (5) 

«(1-S)=0. (6) 

We shall first eliminate from (2), (3), and (4) the symbol d, and then determine 
v in relation to p, /, and h. Now the addition of (2), (3), and (4) gives 

(P + /) d + v (1 - d) = 0. 

From which, eliminating d in the ordinary way, we find 

ip+f)v = 0. (7) 

Adding this to (1), and determining v, we find 

0 

V P + / + 1 - p (1 - /) (1 - h) - f (1 - p) (1 - h) - h (1 - /) (1 - p ) ' 
Whence by development, 

v= ^h(l- f)(l-p). 

The interpretation of this equation is: Virtue is a habit , and not a faculty or a 
passion. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


105 


Next, we will eliminate /, p, and g from the original system of equations, 
and then determine v in relation to h, d, and m. We will in this case eliminate 
p and / together. On addition of (1), (2), and (3), we get 

H 1 - Pi 1 ~ /X 1 ~h)~ /(I - p)( 1 -h)- h( 1 - p){ 1 - /)} 

+pd + fd = 0. 

Developing this with reference to p and /, we have 

(v + 2 d)pf + (^/i + d)p{ 1 - /) + (v/i + d)(l - p)f 
+v(l - h)(l-p)(l - f ) = 0. 

Whence the result of elimination will be 

(v + 2 d){vh + d){vh + d)v( 1 — h) = 0. 

Now w + 2d = r; + d + (i, which by Prop. I. is reducible to v + d. The product 
of this and the second factor is 


(v + d)(vh + d), 

which by Prop. II. reduces to d + v{vh) or vh + d. 

In like manner, this result, multiplied by the third factor, gives simply vh+d. 
Lastly, this multiplied by the fourth factor, ti(l — h), gives, as the final equation, 

vd(l — h) = 0 (8) 

It remains to eliminate g from (5) and (6). The result is 

i>(l — m) = 0 (9) 

Finally, the equations (4), (8), and (9) give on addition 

t>(l — d) + vd( 1 — h) + t)(l — m) = 0 

from which we have 

0 

1 — d + d(l — h) + 1 — m 
And the development of this result gives 

v = -hdm, 

f which the interpretation is - Virtue is a habit accompanied by deliberate pref- 
erence, and keeping in view the mean relative to human nature. 

Properly speaking, this is not a definition, but a description of virtue. It is 
all , however, that can be correctly inferred from the premises. Aristotle specially 
connects with it the necessity of prudence, to determine the safe and middle line 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


106 


of action; and there is no doubt that the ancient theories of virtue generally par- 
took more of an intellectual character than those (the theory of utility excepted) 
which have most prevailed in modern days. Virtue was regarded as consisting in 
the right state and habit of the whole mind, rather than in the single supremacy 
of conscience or the moral facility. And to some extent those theories were un- 
doubtedly right. For though unqualified obedience to the dictates of conscience 
is an essential element of virtuous conduct, yet the conformity of those dictates 
with those unchanging principles of rectitude (aiwvia ofxatia) which are founded 
in, or which rather are themselves the foundation of the constitution of things, 
is another element. And generally this conformity, in any high degree at least, 
is inconsistent with a state of ignorance and mental hebetude. Reverting to 
the particular theory of Aristotle, it will probably appear to most that it is of 
too negative a character, and that the shunning of extremes does not afford a 
sufficient scope for the expenditure of the nobler energies of our being. Aristotle 
seems to have been imperfectly conscious of this defect of his system, when in 
the opening of his seventh book he spoke of an “heroic virtue” 1 rising above the 
measure of human nature. 

7. I have already remarked (VIII. 1) that the theory of single equations or 
propositions comprehends questions which cannot be fully answered, except in 
connexion with the theory of systems of equations. This remark is exemplified 
when it is proposed to determine from a given single equation the relation, not 
of some single elementary class, but of some compound class, involving in its 
expression more than one element, in terms of the remaining elements. The 
following particular example, and the succeeding general problem, are of this 
nature. 

Ex. 2. — Let us resume the symbolical expression of the definition of wealth 
employed in Chap, VII., viz., 


w = st{p + r(l — p)} , 


wherein, as before, 
w = wealth, 

s = things limited in supply, 
t = things transferable, 
p = things productive of pleasure, 
r = things preventive of pain; 

and suppose it required to determine hence the relation of things transferable 
and productive of pleasure, to the other elements of the definition, viz., wealth, 
things limited in supply, and things preventive of pain. 

The expression for things transferable and productive of pleasure is tp. Let 
us represent this by a new symbol y. We have then the equations 

w = st {p + r (1 — p)} , 

V = tp , 


1 xtjv UTtep ripiac apexriv ripto'Cxiqv xtw xcu Deiav-Nic. Eth. Book vii. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


107 


from which, if we eliminate t and p , we may determine y as a function of w, s, 
and r. The result interpreted will give the relation sought. 

Bringing the terms of these equations to the first side, we have 

w — stp — str (1 — p) = 0. 

y-tp= 0. (3) 

And adding the squares of these equations together, 

w + stp + str (1 — p) — 2wstp — 2wstr (1 — p) + y + tp — 2ytp = 0. (4) 

Developing the first member with respect to t and p, in order to eliminate those 
symbols, we have 

(w + s — 2 ws + 1 — y)tp+ (w + sr — 2 wsr + y) t (1 — p) 

+ (w + y)(l-t)p+(w + y)(l- t) (1 - p) | (5) 

and the result of the elimination of t and p will be obtained by equating to 0 
the product of the four coefficients of 

tp,t(l-p),(l-t)p, and (l-f)(l-p). 

Or, by Prop. 3, the result of the elimination of t and p from the above 
equation will be of the form 


Ey+E'(l-y), 

wherein E is the result obtained by changing in the given equation y into 1, 
and then eliminating t and p\ and E' the result obtained by changing in the 
same equation y into 0, and then eliminating t and p. And the mode in each 
case of eliminating t and p is to multiply together the coefficients of the four 
constituents tp, t, (1 — p), &c. 

If we make y = 1, the coefficients become- 
lst. w (1 — s) + s (1 — w) 

2nd. 1 + w (1 — sr ) + s (1 — w) r, equivalent to 1 by Prop. I. 

3rd and 4th. 1 + w, equivalent to 1 by Prop. I. 

Hence the value of E will be 

w (1 — s) + s (1 — w) . 

Again, in (5) making y = 0, we have for the coefficients- 
lst. 1 + w (1 — s) + s (1 — w), equivalent to 1. 

2nd. w (1 — sr) + sr (1 — w). 

3rd and 4th. w. 

The product of these coefficients gives 


E' = w (1 — sr) . 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


108 


The equation from which y is to be determined, therefore, is 

{w(l — s) + s(l — u>)} y + u>(l — sr)(l — y) = 0, 

w{ 1 — sr) 

' ' ^ w(l — sr) — w(l — s) — s(l — w) ’ 
and expanding the second member, 

y = ^ wsr + ws( 1 — r) + gu>(l — s)r + gic(l — s)(l — r ) 
+0(1 — w)sr + 0(1 — iu)s(l — r) + §(1 — ic)(l — s)r 


+ S( 1 ^w)(l-s)(l-r); 


whence reducing. 


, , 0 0 . 

y = ws( 1 — r) + -wsr + -(1 — u>)(l — s), 
with u;(l — s) = 0. 


(6) 

( 7 ) 


The interpretation of which is- 

lst. Things transferable and productive of pleasure consist of all wealth (lim- 
ited in supply and) not preventive of pain, an indefinite amount of wealth (lim- 
ited in supply and) preventive of pain, and an indefinite amount of what is not 
wealth and not limited in supply. 

2nd. All wealth is limited in supply. 

I have in the above solution written in parentheses that part of the full 
description which is implied by the accompanying independent relation (7). 

8. The following problem is of a more general nature, and will furnish an 
easy practical rule for problems such as the last. 

General Problem. 

Given any equation connecting the symbols x, y..w, z.. 

Required to determine the logical expression of any class expressed in any 
way by the symbols x, y.. in terms of the remaining symbols, w, z, &c. 

Let us confine ourselves to the case in which there are but two symbols, x, 
y, and two symbols, w, z, a case sufficient to determine the general Rule. 

Let V = 0 be the given equation, and let <j>(x, y) represent the class whose 
expression is to be determined. 

Assume t = <f>(x,y), then, from the above two equations, x and y are to be 
eliminated. 

Now the equation V = 0 may be expanded in the form 

Axy + Bx( 1 — y) + (7(1 — x)y + D( 1 — a;)(l — y) = 0, (1) 

A , B, C, and D being functions of the symbols w and 2 . 

Again, as (j>(x, y) represents a class or collection of things, it must consist of 
a constituent, or series of constituents, whose coefficients are 1. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


109 


Wherefore if the full development of </>( x, y) be represented in the form 

axy + bx(l — y) + c{l — x)y + d(l — x)(l — y), 

the coefficients a, b , c, d must each be 1 or 0. 

Now reducing the equation t — <f(x, y) by transposition and squaring, to the 
form 

tl - (f(x, y) + cj)(x, y)( 1 - t) = 0; 
and expanding with reference to x and y, we get 


t( 1 — a) + a( 1 — t)xy + t( 1 — b) + b( 1 — t)x( 1 — y) 
+f(l — c) + c(l — f)(l - x)y 
+t( 1 — d) + d( 1 — i)(l — x)(l — y) = 0; 

whence, adding this to (1), we have 


A + t(l — a) + a(l — t)xy 
+B + t(l — b) + b{l — t)x(l — y) + &c. = 0. 

Let the result of the elimination of x and y be of the form 

Et + E'(l-t) = 0, 

then E will, by what has been said, be the reduced product of what the 
coefficients of the above expansion become when t = 1 , and E' the product of 
the same factors similarly reduced by the condition t = 0. 

Hence E will be the reduced product 

{A + 1 — a){B + 1 — b)(C + 1 - c)(D + 1 - d). 

Considering any factor of this expression, as A + 1 — a, we see that when a = 1 
it becomes A, and when a = 0 it becomes 1 + A, which reduces by Prop. I. to 
1. Hence we may infer that E will be the product of the coefficients of those 
constituents in the development of V whose coefficients in the development of 
4>(x, y) are 1. 

Moreover E' will be the reduced product 

(. A + a)(B + b)(C + c)(D + d ). 

Considering any one of these factors, as A + a, we see that this becomes A 
when a = 0, and reduces to 1 when a = 1 ; and so on for the others. Hence E 
will be the product of the coefficients of those constituents in the development 
of y, whose coefficients in the development <p(x,y) are 0. Viewing these cases 
together, we may establish the following Rule: 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


110 


9. To deduce from a logical equation the relation of any class expressed by 
a given combination of the symbols x, y, &c, to the classes represented by any 
other symbols involved in the given equation. 

Rule -Expand the given equation with reference to the symbols x, y. Then 
form the equation 

Et+E'(l-t) = 0, 

in which E is the product of the coefficients of all those constituents in the above 
development, whose coefficients in the expression of the given class are 1, and 
E' the product of the coefficients of those constituents of the development whose 
coefficients in the expression of the given class are 0. The value of t deduced 
from the above equation by solution and interpretation will be the expression 
required. 

Note.— A lthough in the demonstration of this Ride V is supposed to consist 
solely of positive terms, it may easily be shown that this condition is unnecessary, 
and the Ride general, and that no preparation of the given equation is really 
required. 

10. Ex. 3. -The same definition of wealth being given as in Example 2, 
required an expression for things transferable, but not productive of pleasure, 
t{ 1 — p), in terms of the other elements represented by w, s, and r. 

The equation 

w — stp — sf?’(l — p) = 0, 

gives, when squared, 

w + stp + str( 1 — p) — 2 wstp — 2wstr(l — p) = 0; 
and developing the first member with respect to t and p, 

(w + s — 2ws)tp + (w + sr — 2wsr)t{l — p) + w{l — t)p 

+tu(l - t)(l —p) = 0. 

The coefficients of which it is best to exhibit as in the following equation; 

u>(l — s) + s(l — w)tp + w{l — sr) + sr(l — w)t(l — p) + w{l — t)p 

+tu(l - £)(1 - p) = 0 

Let the function t(l — p) to be determined, be represented by z\ then the 
full development of z in respect of t and p is 

z = 0tp + t( 1 - p) + 0(1 - t)p+ 0(1 — t)(l — p). 

Hence, by the last problem, we have 


Ez + E'(l-z) =0; 
where E = ru(l — sr) + sr(l — w); 
E' = w(l — s) + s(l — w) x w x w = w(l — s); 

. w{l — sr) + sr(l — w)z + w(l — s)(l — z) = 0. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


111 


Hence, 


u;(l — s) 

z = 

2 wsr — ws — sr 

= - wsr + Ou>s(l — r) + -tu(l — s)r + -u>(l — s)(l — r), 

+0(1 — w)sr + jj(l — to)s(l — r) + jj(l — w)(l — s)r 

+ 'j( 1 -w)(l-s)(l-r). 

Or, z = - wsr + -(1 — tw)s(l — r) + -(1 — u>)(l — s), 

with w(l — s) — 0. 

Hence, Things transferable and not productive of pleasure are either wealth 
(limited in supply and preventive of pain); or things which are not wealth, but 
limited in supply and not preventive of pain; or things which are not wealth, and 
are unlimited in supply. 

The following results, deduced in a similar manner, will be easily verified: 

Things limited in supply and productive of pleasure which are not wealth, -are 
intransferable. 

Wealth that is not productive of pleasure is transferable, limited in supply, 
and preventive of pain. 

Things limited in supply which are either wealth, or are productive of plea- 
sure, but not both, -are either transferable and preventive of pain, or intransfer- 
able. 

11. From the domain of natural history a large number of curious examples 
might be selected. I do not, however, conceive that such applications would 
possess any independent value. They would, for instance, throw no light upon 
the true principles of classification in the science of zoology. For the discovery 
of these, some basis of positive knowledge is requisite, -some acquaintance with 
organic structure, with teleological adaptation; and this is a species of knowledge 
which can only be derived from the use of external means of observation and 
analysis. Taking, however, any collection of propositions in natural history, 
a great number of logical problems present themselves, without regard to the 
system of classification adopted. Perhaps in forming such examples, it is better 
to avoid, as superfluous, the mention of that property of a class or species which 
is immediately suggested by its name, e.g. the ring-structure in the annelida, a 
class of animals including the earth-worm and the leech. 

Ex. 4.-1. The annelida are soft-bodied, and either naked or enclosed in a 
tube. 

2. The annelida consist of all invertebrate animals having red blood in a 
double system of circulating vessels. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


112 


Assume a = annelida; 

s = soft-bodied animals; 
n = naked; 

t = enclosed in a tube; 
i = invertebrate; 
r = having red blood, &c. 

Then the propositions given will be expressed by the equations 

a = vsn( 1 — t) + t(l — n); (1) 

a = ir ; (2) 

to which we may add the implied condition, 

nt = 0. (3) 

On eliminating v, and reducing the system to a single equation, we have 

a[l — sn(l — t) — st( 1 — n)\ + a(l — ir) + ir( 1 — a) + nt = 0. (4) 

Suppose that we wish to obtain the relation in which soft-bodied animals 
enclosed in tubes arc placed (by virtue of the premises) with respect to the 
following elements, viz., the possession of red blood, of an external covering, 
and of a vertebral column. 

We must first eliminate a. The result is 

irl — sn(l — t) — st( 1 — n) + nt = 0. 

Then (IX. 9) developing with respect to s and t, and reducing the first 
coefficient by Prop. 1, we have 

nst + ir( 1 — n)s(l — t) + (ir + n)(l — s)t + ir( 1 — s)(l — t) = 0. (5) 

Hence, if st = w, we find 

nw + ir( 1 — n) x (ir + n) x ir( 1 — w) = 0; 
or, 

nw + ir( 1 — n)(l — w) = 0; 

ir( 1 — n ) 

w = ~T a 

ir( 1 — n) — n 

= 0 irn + ir( 1 — n) + 0i(l — r)n + -*(1 — r)(l — n) 

+0(1 — i)rn + jj(l — i)r( 1 — n) + 0(1 — z)(l — r)n 

or, w = ir( 1 — n ) + -i(l — r)(l — n) + -(! — *)(! — n ). 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


113 


Hence, soft-bodied animals enclosed in tubes consist of all invertebrate ani- 
mals having red blood and not naked, and an indefinite remainder of invertebrate 
animals not having red blood and not naked, and of vertebrate animals which 
are not naked. 

And in an exactly similar manner, the following reduced equations, the inter- 
pretation of which is left to the reader, have been deduced from the development 
(5). 


s(l — t) = irn + jji(l — n) + (1 — i) 

(1 - s)t = jj(l - i)r{ 1 - n) + jj(l - r)(l - n) 

(1 - s)(l -t)= jji(l - r) + jj(l - i). 

In none of the above examples has it been my object to exhibit in any special 
manner the power of the method. That, I conceive, can only be fully displayed 
in connexion with the mathematical theory of probabilities. I would, however, 
suggest to any who may be desirous of forming a correct opinion upon this 

point, that they examine by the rules of ordinary logic the following problem, 

before inspecting its solution; remembering at the same time, that whatever 
complexity it possesses might be multiplied indefinitely, with no other effect 
than to render its solution by the method of this work more operose, but not 
less certainly attainable. 

Ex. 5. Let the observation of a class of natural productions be supposed to 
have led to the following general results. 

1st, That in whichsoever of these productions the properties A and C are 
missing, the property E is found, together with one of the properties B and D, 
but not with both. 

2nd, That wherever the properties A and D are found while E is missing, 
the properties B and C will either both be found, or both be missing. 

3rd, That wherever the property A is found in conjunction with either B 
or E, or both of them, there either the property C or the property D will be 
found, but not both of them. And conversely, wherever the property C or D is 
found singly, there the property A will be found in conjunction with either B 
or E, or both of them. 

Let it then be required to ascertain, first, what in any particular instance may 
be concluded from the ascertained presence of the property A, with reference 
to the properties B, C , and D; also whether any relations exist independently 
among the properties B, C, and D. Secondly, what may be concluded in like 
manner respecting the property B , and the properties A, C , and D. 

It will be observed, that in each of the three data, the information conveyed 
respecting the properties A, B , C , and D, is complicated with another element, 
E, about which we desire to say nothing in our conclusion. It will hence be 
requisite to eliminate the symbol representing the property E from the system 
of equations, by which the given propositions will be expressed. 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


114 


Let us represent the property A by x, B by y, C by z, D by w, E by v. The 
data are 


xz = qv(yw + wy)\ 

( 1 ) 

vxw = q(yz + yz ); 

( 2 ) 

xy + xvy = wz + zw ; 

( 3 ) 


x standing for 1 — x, &c., and q being an indefinite class symbol. Eliminating 
q separately from the first and second equations, and adding the results to the 
third equation reduced by (5), Chap. VIII., we get 

xz( 1 — vyw — vwy) + vxw(yz + zy) + (. xy + xvy)(wz + wz) 
+ {wz + zw)( 1 — xy — xvy) = 0. (4) 

From this equation v must be eliminated, and the value of x determined 
from the result. For effecting this object, it will be convenient to employ the 
method of Prop. 3 of the present chapter. 

Let then the result of elimination be represented by the equation 

Ex + E'(l - x) = 0. 

To find E make x = 1 in the first member of (4), we find 

vw{yz + zy) + {y + vy){wz + uiz) + (wz + zw)vy. 

Eliminating v, we have 

(wz + wz) {w(yz + zy) + y(wz + wz) + y(wz + zw)} ; 

which, on actual multiplication, in accordance with the conditions ww = 0, 
22 = 0, &c., gives 

E = wz + ywz 

Next, to find E' make x = 0 in (4), we have 

2(1 — vyw — vyw) + wz + zw. 

whence, eliminating v, and reducing the result by Propositions 1 and 2, we 
find 

E' — wz + zw + ywz\ 

and, therefore, finally we have 

(wz + ywz)x + (wz + zui + ywz)x = 0; 


from which 


( 5 ) 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


115 


wz + zw + ywz 

X == 

wz + zui + ywz — wz — ywz 
wherefore, by development, 


x = 0 yzw + yzw + yzw + 0 yzw 
+0 yzw + yzw + yzw + yzx ; 

or, collecting the terms in vertical columns, 

x = zw + zw + yzw ; (6) 

the interpretation of which is- 

In whatever substances the property A is found, there will also be found 
either the property C or the property D, but not both, or else the properties B, 
C , and D, will all be wanting. And conversely, where either the property C 
or the property D is found singly, or the properties B, C, and D, are together 
missing, there the property A will be found. 

It also appears that there is no independent relation among the properties 
B , C, and D. 

Secondly, we are to find y. Now developing (5) with respect to that symbol, 


(. xwz + xwz + xwz + xzw)y + (xwz + xwz + xzw + xzw)y = 0; 
whence, proceeding as before, 


0 , 

y = xwz + -(xwz + xwz + xzw), 

( 7 ) 

XZW 

= 0 ; 

(8) 

xzzw 

= 0 ; 

(9) 

xzw 

= 0 ; 

( 10 ) 


From (10) reduced by solution to the form 

0 

xz = -u>; 

we have the independent relation -If the property A is absent and C present, 
D is present. Again, by addition and solution (8) and (9) give 

0 _ 

xz + xz = -to. 

Whence we have for the general solution and the remaining independent 
relation: 



CHAPTER IX. METHODS OF ABBREVIATION 


116 


1st. If the property B he present in one of the productions, either the prop- 
erties A, C, and D, are all absent, or some one alone of them is absent. And 
conversely, if they are all absent it may be concluded that the property A is 
present (7). 

2nd. If A and C are both present or both absent, D will be absent, quite 
independently of the presence or absence of B (8) and (9). 

I have not attempted to verify these conclusions. 



Chapter X 


OF THE CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD. 


1. The subject of Primary Propositions has been discussed at length, and we are 
about to enter upon the consideration of Secondary Propositions. The interval 
of transition between these two great divisions of the science of Logic may afford 
a fit occasion for us to pause, and while reviewing some of the past steps of our 
progress, to inquire what it is that in a subject like that with which we have 
been occupied constitutes perfection of method. I do not here speak of that 
perfection only which consists in power, but of that also which is founded in the 
conception of what is fit and beautiful. It is probable that a careful analysis 
of this question would conduct us to some such conclusion as the following, 
viz., that a perfect method should not only be an efficient one, as respects the 
accomplishment of the objects for which it is designed, but should in all its parts 
and processes manifest a certain unity and harmony. This conception would be 
most fully realized if even the very forms of the method were suggestive of 
the fundamental principles, and if possible of the one fundamental principle, 
upon which they are founded. In applying these considerations to the science 
of Reasoning, it may be well to extend our view beyond the mere analytical 
processes, and to inquire what is best as respects not only the mode or form of 
deduction, but also the system of data or premises from which the deduction is 
to be made. 

2. As respects mere power, there is no doubt that the first of the methods 
developed in Chapter VIII. is, within its proper sphere, a perfect one. The 
introduction of arbitrary constants makes us independent of the forms of the 
premises, as well as of any conditions among the equations by which they are 
represented. But it seems to introduce a foreign element, and while it is a more 
laborious, it is also a less elegant form of solution than the second method of 
reduction demonstrated in the same chapter. There are, however, conditions 
under which the latter method assumes a more perfect form than it otherwise 
bears. To make the one fundamental condition expressed by the equation 

x(l — x) = 0, 

the universal type of form, would give a unity of character to both processes 
and results, which would not else be attainable. Were brevity or convenience the 


117 



CHAPTER X. CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD 


118 


only valuable quality of a method, no advantage would flow from the adoption 
of such a principle. For to impose upon every step of a solution the character 
above described, would involve in some instances no slight labour of preliminary 
reduction. But it is still interesting to know that this can be done, and it is even 
of some importance to be acquainted with the conditions under which such a 
form of solution would spontaneously present itself. Some of these points will 
be considered in the present chapter. 

Proposition I. 

3. To reduce any equation among logical symbols to the form V = 0, in which 
V satisfies the law of duality, 


V(1 - V) = 0. 

It is shown in Chap. V. Prop. 4, that the above condition is satisfied when- 
ever V is the sum of a series of constituents. And it is evident from Prop. 2, 
Chap. VI. that all equations are equivalent which, when reduced by transpo- 
sition to the form V = 0, produce, by development of the first member, the 
same series of constituents with coefficients which do not vanish; the particular 
numerical values of those coefficients being immaterial. 

Hence the object of this Proposition may always be accomplished by bringing 
all the terms of an equation to the first side, fidly expanding that member, and 
changing in the result all the coefficients which do not vanish into unity, except 
such as have already that value. 

But as the development of functions containing many symbols conducts us 
to expressions inconvenient from their great length, it is desirable to show how, 
in the only cases which do practically offer themselves to our notice, this source 
of complexity may be avoided. 

The great primary forms of equations have already been discussed in Chapter 
VIII. They are- 


X 

= vY, 

X 

= Y, 

vX 

= vY. 


Whenever the conditions X(1 — X) = 0, Y{\ — Y) =0, are satisfied, we have 
seen that the two first of the above equations conduct us to the forms 


*( 1-30 = 0 - ( 1 ) 

X(1 -Y) + y(l — X) = 0; (2) 

and under the same circumstances it may be shown that the last of them 
gives 



CHAPTER X. CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD 


119 


t,(X(l - V) + F(1 - X)) = 0; (3) 

all which results obviously satisfy, in their first members, the condition 

V(l - V) = 0. 

Now as the above are the forms and conditions under which the equations 
of a logical system properly expressed do actually present themselves, it is al- 
ways possible to reduce them by the above method into subjection to the law 
required. Though, however, the separate equations may thus satisfy the law, 
their equivalent sum (VIII. 4) may not do so, and it remains to show how upon 
it also the requisite condition may be imposed. 

Let us then represent the equation formed by adding the several reduced 
equations of the system together, in the form 

v + v' + v", &c. = 0, (4) 

this equation being singly equivalent to the system from which it was ob- 
tained. We suppose v,v',v", &c. to be class terms (IX. 1) satisfying the condi- 
tions 


i>(l — v) = 0, v'(l — v') = 0, &c. 

Now the full interpretation of (4) would be found by developing the first 
member with respect to all the elementary symbols x, y , &c. which it contains, 
and equating to 0 all the constituents whose coefficients do not vanish; in other 
words, all the constituents which are found in either v, v' , v" , &c. But those 
constituents consist of-lst, such as are found in i>; 2nd, such as are not found in 
v, but are found in v'; 3rd, such as are neither found in v nor v', but are found 
in v" , and so on. Hence they will be such as are found in the expression 

v + (1 — v)v' + (1 — u)(l — v)v" + &c., (5) 

an expression in which no constituents are repeated, and which obviously satis- 
fies the law V(1 — V) = 0. 

Thus if we had the expression 

(1 — t) + V + (1 — z) + tzw, 

in which the terms 1 — t, 1 — z are bracketed to indicate that they are to be 
taken as single class terms, we should, in accordance with (5), reduce it to an 
expression satisfying the condition V(1 — V) = 0, by multiplying all the terms 
after the first by t, then all after the second by 1 — v\ lastly, the term which 
remains after the third by z; the result being 

1 — t + tv + t(l — i>)(l — z) + t( 1 — v)zw. (6) 

4. All logical equations then are reducible to the form V = 0, V satisfy- 
ing the law of duality. But it would obviously be a higher degree of perfection 



CHAPTER X. CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD 


120 


if equations always presented themselves in such a form, without preparation 
of any kind, and not only exhibited this form in their original statement, but 
retained it unimpaired after those additions which are necessary in order to 
reduce systems of equations to single equivalent forms. That they do not spon- 
taneously present this feature is not properly attributable to defect of method, 
but is a consequence of the fact that our premises are not always complete, and 
accurate, and independent. They are not complete when they involve material 
(as distinguished from formal) relations, which are not expressed. They are not 
accurate when they imply relations which are not intended. But setting aside 
these points, with which, in the present instance, we are less concerned, let it 
be considered in what sense they may fail of being independent. 

5. A system of propositions may be termed independent, when it is not 
possible to deduce from any portion of the system a conclusion deducible from 
any other portion of it. Supposing the equations representing those propositions 
all reduced to the form 

V = 0, 

then the above condition implies that no constituent which can be made to 
appear in the development of a particular function V of the system, can be made 
to appear in the development of any other function V' of the same system. When 
this condition is not satisfied, the equations of the system are not independent. 
This may happen in various cases. Let all the equations satisfy in their first 
members the law of duality, then if there appears a positive term x in the 
expansion of one equation, and a term xy in that of another, the equations are 
not independent, for the term x is further developable into xy + x(l — y), and 
the equation 

xy = 0 

is thus involved in both the equations of the system. Again, let a term xy appear 
in one equation, and a term xz in another. Both these may be developed so as 
to give the common constituent xyz. And other cases may easily be imagined 
in which premises which appear at first sight to be quite independent are not 
really so. Whenever equations of the form V = 0 are thus not truly independent, 
though individually they may satisfy the law of duality, 

f/(l - V) = 0, 

the equivalent equation obtained by adding them together will not satisfy that 
condition, unless sufficient reductions by the method of the present chapter 
have been performed. When, on the other hand, the equations of a system both 
satisfy the above law, and are independent of each other, their sum will also 
satisfy the same law. I have dwelt upon these points at greater length than 
would otherwise have been necessary, because it appears to me to be important 
to endeavour to form to ourselves, and to keep before us in all our investigations, 
the pattern of an ideal perfection, — the object and the guide of future efforts. In 
the present class of inquiries the chief aim of improvement of method should be 
to facilitate, as far as is consistent with brevity, the transformation of equations, 
so as to make the fundamental condition above adverted to universal. 



CHAPTER X. CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD 


121 


In connexion with this subject the following Propositions are deserving of 
attention. 

Proposition II. 

If the first member of any equation V = 0 satisfy the condition V(1 — V) = 
0, and if the expression of any symbol t. of that equation be determined as a 
developed function of the other symbols, the coefficients of the expansion can 

only assume the forms 1, 0, 

For if the equation be expanded with reference to t, we obtain as the result, 

Et + E , (l-t), (1) 

E and E' being what V becomes when t is successively changed therein into 1 
and 0. Hence E and E' will themselves satisfy the conditions 

E{ 1 -E) = 0, E\ 1 - E') = 0. (2) 

Now (1) gives 

E ' 

f ~ E' - E' 

the second member of which is to be expanded as a function of the remaining 
symbols. It is evident that the only numerical values which E and E’ can receive 
in the calculation of the coefficients will be 1 and 0. The following cases alone 
can therefore arise: 

E' 1 

1st. E’ = 1, E = 1, then = -. 

’ ’ E' - E 0 

E' 

2nd. E' = 1, E = 0, then — — = 1. 

E — E 
E' 

3rd. E' = 0, E = 1, then = 0. 

’ ’ E' - E 

4th. E' = 0, E = 0, then ^ = jj. 

Whence the truth of the Proposition is manifest. 

6. It may be remarked that the forms 1, 0, and appear in the solution of 
equations independently of any reference to the condition V(1 — V) = 0. But it 
is not so with the coefficient jj. The terms to which this coefficient is attached 
when the above condition is satisfied may receive any other value except the 
three values 1, 0, and g, when that condition is not satisfied. It is permitted, 
and it would conduce to uniformity, to change any coefficient of a development 
not presenting itself in any of the four forms referred to in this Proposition into 
g, regarding this as the symbol proper to indicate that the coefficient to which 
it is attached should be equated to 0. This course I shall frequently adopt. 


Proposition III. 



CHAPTER X. CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD 


122 


7. The result of the elimination of any symbols x, y, &c. from an equation 

V = 0, of which the first member identically satisfies the law of duality, 

V(l - V) = 0, 

may be obtained by developing the given equation with reference to the other 
symbols, and equating to 0 the sum of those constituents whose coefficients in 
the expansion are equal to unity. 

Suppose that the given equation V = 0 involves but three symbols, x, y , and 
t, of which x and y are to be eliminated. Let the development of the equation, 
with respect to t, be 

At + B(l-t) = 0, (1) 

A and B being free from the symbol t. 

By Chap. IX. Prop. 3, the result of the elimination of x and y from the 
given equation will be of the form 

Et+E'(l-t) = 0, (2) 

in which E is the result obtained by eliminating the symbols x and y from the 
equation A = 0, E 1 the result obtained by eliminating from the equation B = 0. 
Now A and B must satisfy the condition 

,4(1 - A) = 0,5(1 - B) = 0 

Hence A (confining ourselves for the present to this coefficient) will either 
be 0 or 1, or a constituent, or the sum of a part of the constituents which 
involve the symbols x and y. If A = 0 it is evident that E = 0; if A is a single 
constituent, or the sum of a part of the constituents involving x and y, E will 
be 0. For the full development of A, with respect to x and y, will contain terms 
with vanishing coefficients, and E is the product of all the coefficients. Hence 
when A = 1, E is equal to A, but in other cases E is equal to 0. Similarly, when 
B = 1, E is equal to B , but in other cases E vanishes. Hence the expression (2) 
will consist of that part, if any there be, of (1) in which the coefficients A, B 
are unity. And this reasoning is general. Suppose, for instance, that V involved 
the symbols x, y, z, t, and that it were required to eliminate x and y. Then if 
the development of V, with reference to 2 and t, were 

zt + xz(l — t) + y( 1 — z)t + (1 — z)( 1 — t), 
the result sought would be 

zt + (1 — z) (1 — t) = 0, 

this being that portion of the development of which the coefficients are unity. 
Hence, if from any system of equations we deduce a single equivalent equation 

V = 0, V satisfying the condition 


v(i - V) = 0, 



CHAPTER X. CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD 


123 


the ordinary processes of elimination may be entirely dispensed with, and 
the single process of development made to supply their place. 

8. It may be that there is no practical advantage in the method thus pointed 
out, but it possesses a theoretical unity and completeness which render it de- 
serving of regard, and I shall accordingly devote a future chapter (XIV.) to its 
illustration. The progress of applied mathematics has presented other and signal 
examples of the reduction of systems of problems or equations to the dominion 
of some central but pervading law. 

9. It is seen from what precedes that there is one class of propositions 
to which all the special appliances of the above methods of preparation are 
unnecessary. It is that which is characterized by the following conditions: 

First, That the propositions are of the ordinary kind, implied by the use of 
the copula is or are, the predicates being particular. 

Secondly, That the terms of the proposition are intelligible without the sup- 
position of any understood relation among the elements which enter into the 
expression of those terms. 

Thirdly, That the propositions are independent. 

We may, if such speculation is not altogether vain, permit ourselves to con- 
jecture that these are the conditions which would be obeyed in the employment 
of language as an instrument of expression and of thought, by unerring beings, 
declaring simply what they mean, without suppression on the one hand, and 
without repetition on the other. Considered both in their relation to the idea 
of a perfect language, and in their relation to the processes of an exact method, 
these conditions are equally worthy of the attention of the student. 



Chapter XI 

OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS, AND OF THE 
PRINCIPLES OF THEIR SYMBOLICAL EXPRESSION. 


1. The doctrine has already been established in Chap. IV., that every logical 
proposition may be referred to one or the other of two great classes, viz., Primary 
Propositions and Secondary Propositions. The former of these classes has been 
discussed in the preceding chapters of this work, and we are now led to the 
consideration of Secondary Propositions, i.e. of Propositions concerning, or 
relating to, other propositions regarded as true or false. The investigation upon 
which we are entering will, in its general order and progress, resemble that 
which we have already conducted. The two inquiries differ as to the subjects 
of thought which they recognise, not as to the formal and scientific laws which 
they reveal, or the methods or processes which are founded upon those laws. 
Probability would in some measure favour the expectation of such a result. It 
consists with all that we know of the uniformity of Nature, and all that we 
believe of the immutable constancy of the Author of Nature, to suppose, that 
in the mind, which has been endowed with such high capabilities, not only 
for converse with surrounding scenes, but for the knowledge of itself, and for 
reflection upon the laws of its own constitution, there should exist a harmony 
and uniformity not less real than that which the study of the physical sciences 
makes known to us. Anticipations such as this are never to be made the primary 
rule of our inquiries, nor are they in any degree to divert us from those labours 
of patient research by which we ascertain what is the actual constitution of 
things within the particular province submitted to investigation. But when the 
grounds of resemblance have been properly and independently determined, it 
is not inconsistent, even with purely scientific ends, to make that resemblance 
a subject of meditation, to trace its extent, and to receive the intimations of 
truth, yet undiscovered, which it may seem to us to convey. The necessity of 
a final appeal to fact is not thus set aside, nor is the use of analogy extended 
beyond its proper sphere, -the suggestion of relations which independent inquiry 
must either verify or cause to be rejected. 

2. Secondary Propositions are those which concern or relate to Propositions 
considered as true or false. The relations of things we express by primary propo- 
sitions. But we are able to make Propositions themselves also the subject of 


124 



CHAPTER XL OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


125 


thought, and to express our judgments concerning them. The expression of any 
such judgment constitutes a secondary proposition. There exists no proposition 
whatever of which a competent degree of knowledge would not enable us to 
make one or the other of these two assertions, viz., either that the proposition is 
true, or that it is false; and each of these assertions is a secondary proposition. 
“It is true that the sun shines;” “It is not true that the planets shine by their 
own light;” are examples of this kind. In the former example the Proposition 
“The sun shines,” is asserted to be true. In the latter, the Proposition, “The 
planets shine by their own light,” is asserted to be false. Secondary propositions 
also include all judgments by which we express a relation or dependence among 
propositions. To this class or division we may refer conditional propositions, 
as, “If the sun shine the day will be fair.” Also most disjunctive propositions, 
as, “Either the sun will shine, or the enterprise will be postponed.” In the for- 
mer example we express the dependence of the truth of the Proposition, “The 
day will be fair,” upon the truth of the Proposition, “The sun will shine.” In 
the latter we express a relation between the two Propositions, “The sun will 
shine,” “The enterprise will be postponed,” implying that the truth of the one 
excludes the truth of the other. To the same class of secondary propositions 
we must also refer all those propositions which assert the simultaneous truth or 
falsehood of propositions, as, “It is not true both that ‘the sun will shine’ and 
that ‘the journey will be postponed.’ ” The elements of distinction which we 
have noticed may even be blended together in the same secondary proposition. 
It may involve both the disjunctive element expressed by either, or, and the 
conditional element expressed by if; in addition to which, the connected propo- 
sitions may themselves be of a compound character. If “the sun shine,” and 
“leisure permit,” then either “the enterprise shall be commenced,” or “some 
preliminary step shall be taken.” In this example a number of propositions are 
connected together, not arbitrarily and unmeaningly, but in such a manner as 
to express a definite connexion between them, -a connexion having reference to 
their respective truth or falsehood. This combination, therefore, according to 
our definition, forms a Secondary Proposition. 

The theory of Secondary Propositions is deserving of attentive study, as well 
on account of its varied applications, as for that close and harmonious analogy, 
already referred to, which it sustains with the theory of Primary Propositions. 
Upon each of these points I desire to offer a few further observations. 

3. I would in the first place remark, that it is in the form of secondary 
propositions, at least as often as in that of primary propositions, that the rea- 
sonings of ordinary life are exhibited. The discourses, too, of the moralist and 
the metaphysician are perhaps less often concerning things and their qualities, 
than concerning principles and hypotheses, concerning truths and the mutual 
connexion and relation of truths. The conclusions which our narrow experience 
suggests in relation to the great questions of morals and society yet unsolved, 
manifest, in more ways than one, the limitations of their human origin; and 
though the existence of universal principles is not to be questioned, the par- 
tial formulae which comprise our knowledge of their application are subject to 
conditions, and exceptions, and failure. Thus, in those departments of inquiry 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


126 


which, from the nature of their subject-matter, should be the most interesting of 
all, much of our actual knowledge is hypothetical. That there has been a strong 
tendency to the adoption of the same forms of thought in writers on speculative 
philosophy, will hereafter appear. Hence the introduction of a general method 
for the discussion of hypothetical and the other varieties of secondary proposi- 
tions, will open to us a more interesting field of applications than we have before 
met with. 

4. The discussion of the theory of Secondary Propositions is in the next 
place interesting, from the close and remarkable analogy which it bears with 
the theory of Primary Propositions. It will appear, that the formal laws to 
which the operations of the mind are subject, are identical in expression in 
both cases. The mathematical processes which are founded on those laws are, 
therefore, identical also. Thus the methods which have been investigated in the 
former portion of this work will continue to be available in the new applications 
to which we are about to proceed. But while the laws and processes of the 
method remain unchanged, the rule of interpretation must be adapted to new 
conditions. Instead of classes of things, we shall have to substitute propositions, 
and for the relations of classes and individuals, we shall have to consider the 
connexions of propositions or of events. Still, between the two systems, however 
differing in purport and interpretation, there will be seen to exist a pervading 
harmonious relation, an analogy which, while it serves to facilitate the conquest 
of every yet remaining difficulty, is of itself an interesting subject of study, and 
a conclusive proof of that unity of character which marks the constitution of 
the human faculties. 


Proposition I. 

5. To investigate the nature of the connexion of Secondary Propositions with 
the idea of Time. 

It is necessary, in entering upon this inquiry, to state clearly the nature of 
the analogy which connects Secondary with Primary Propositions. 

Primary Propositions express relations among things, viewed as component 
parts of a universe within the limits of which, whether coextensive with the 
limits of the actual universe or not, the matter of our discourse is confined. 
The relations expressed are essentially substantive. Some, or all, or none, of the 
members of a given class, are also members of another class. The subjects to 
which primary propositions refer -the relations among those subjects which they 
express-are all of the above character. 

But in treating of secondary propositions, we find ourselves concerned with 
another class both of subjects and relations. For the subjects with which we have 
to do are themselves propositions, so that the question may be asked, -Can we 
regard these subjects also as things , and refer them, by analogy with the previous 
case, to a universe of their own? Again, the relations among these subject 
propositions are relations of coexistent truth or falsehood, not of substantive 
equivalence. We do not say, when expressing the connexion of two distinct 
propositions, that the one is the other, but use some such forms of speech as 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


127 


the following, according to the meaning which we desire to convey: “Either the 
proposition X is true, or the proposition Y is true;” “If the proposition X is 
true, the proposition Y is true;” “The propositions X and Y are jointly true;” 
and so on. 

Now, in considering any such relations as the above, we are not called upon 
to inquire into the whole extent of their possible meaning (for this might involve 
us in metaphysical questions of causation, which are beyond the proper limits of 
science); but it suffices to ascertain some meaning which they undoubtedly pos- 
sess, and which is adequate for the purposes of logical deduction. Let us take, 
as an instance for examination, the conditional proposition, “If the proposition 
X is true, the proposition Y is true.” An undoubted meaning of this proposi- 
tion is, that the time in which the proposition X is true, is time in which the 
proposition Y is true. This indeed is only a relation of coexistence, and may 
or may not exhaust the meaning of the proposition, but it is a relation really 
involved in the statement of the proposition, and further, it suffices for all the 
purposes of logical inference. 

The language of common life sanctions this view of the essential connexion 
of secondary propositions with the notion of time. Thus we limit the application 
of a primary proposition by the word “some,” but that of a secondary propo- 
sition by the word “sometimes.” To say, “Sometimes injustice triumphs,” is 
equivalent to asserting that there are times in which the proposition “Injustice 
now triumphs,” is a true proposition. There are indeed propositions, the truth 
of which is not thus limited to particular periods or conjunctures; propositions 
which are true throughout all time, and have received the appellation of “eternal 
truths.” The distinction must be familiar to every reader of Plato and Aristotle, 
by the latter of whom, especially, it is employed to denote the contrast between 
the abstract verities of science, such as the propositions of geometry which are 
always true, and those contingent or phaenomenal relations of things which are 
sometimes true and sometimes false. But the forms of language in which both 
kinds of propositions are expressed manifest a common dependence upon the 
idea of time; in the one case as limited to some finite duration, in the other as 
stretched out to eternity. 

6. It may indeed be said, that in ordinary reasoning we are often quite 
unconscious of this notion of time involved in the very language we are using. 
But the remark, however just, only serves to show that we commonly reason by 
the aid of words and the forms of a well-constructed language, without attending 
to the ulterior grounds upon which those very forms have been established. The 
course of the present investigation will afford an illustration of the very same 
principle. I shall avail myself of the notion of time in order to determine the laws 
of the expression of secondary propositions, as well as the laws of combination 
of the symbols by which they are expressed. But when those laws and those 
forms are once determined, this notion of time (essential, as I believe it to be, 
to the above end) may practically be dispensed with. We may then pass from 
the forms of common language to the closely analogous forms of the symbolical 
instrument of thought here developed, and use its processes, and interpret its 
results, without any conscious recognition of the idea of time whatever. 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


128 


Proposition II. 

7. To establish a system of notation for the expression of Secondary Propo- 
sitions, and to show that the symbols which it involves are subject to the same 
laws of combination as the corresponding symbols employed in the expression of 
Primary Propositions. 

Let us employ the capital letters X, Y, Z, to denote the elementary propo- 
sitions concerning which we desire to make some assertion touching their truth 
or falsehood, or among which we seek to express some relation in the form of 
a secondary proposition. And let us employ the corresponding small letters x, 
y, z, considered as expressive of mental operations, in the following sense, viz.: 
Let x represent an act of the mind by which we fix our regard upon that portion 
of time for which the proposition X is true; and let this meaning be understood 
when it is asserted that x denotes the time for which the proposition X is true. 
Let us further employ the connecting signs +, =, & c., in the following sense, 

viz.: Let x + y denote the aggregate of those portions of time for which the 
propositions X and Y are respectively true, those times being entirely sepa- 
rated from each other. Similarly let x — y denote that remainder of time which 
is left when we take away from the portion of time for which X is true, that 
(by supposition) included portion for which Y is true. Also, let x — y denote 
that the time for which the proposition X is true, is identical with the time for 
which the proposition Y is true. We shall term x ; the representative symbol of 
the proposition X, &c. 

From the above definitions it will follow, that we shall always have 

x + y = y + x, 

for either member will denote the same aggregate of time. 

Let us further represent by xy the performance in succession of the two op- 
erations represented by y and x, i.e. the whole mental operation which consists 
of the following elements, viz., 1st, The mental selection of that portion of time 
for which the proposition Y is true. 2ndly, The mental selection, out of that 
portion of time, of such portion as it contains of the time in which the propo- 
sition X is true, -the result of these successive processes being the fixing of the 
mental regard upon the whole of that portion of time for which the propositions 
X and Y are both true. 

From this definition it will follow, that we shall always have 


xy = yx. (1) 

For whether we select mentally, first that portion of time for which the 
proposition Y is true, then out of the result that contained portion for which X 
is true; or first, that portion of time for which the proposition X is true, then 
out of the result that contained portion of it for which the proposition Y is true; 
we shall arrive at the same final result, viz., that portion of time for which the 
propositions X and Y are both true. 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


129 


By continuing this method of reasoning it may be established, that the laws 
of combination of the symbols x, y, z, &c., in the species of interpretation here 
assigned to them, are identical in expression with the laws of combination of 
the same symbols, in the interpretation assigned to them in the first part of this 
treatise. The reason of this final identity is apparent. For in both cases it is 
the same faculty, or the same combination of faculties, of which we study the 
operations; operations, the essential character of which is unaffected, whether we 
suppose them to be engaged upon that universe of things in which all existence 
is contained, or upon that whole of time in which all events are realized, and to 
some part, at least, of which all assertions, truths, and propositions, refer. 

Thus, in addition to the laws above stated, we shall have by (4), Chap, II., 
the law whose expression is 

x(y + z) = xy + xz ; (2) 

and more particularly the fundamental law of duality (2) Chap, II., whose 
expression is 


x 2 = x, or, x(l — x) = 0; (3) 

a law, which while it serves to distinguish the system of thought in Logic 
from the system of thought in the science of quantity, gives to the processes 
of the former a completeness and a generality which they could not otherwise 
possess. 

8. Again, as this law (3) (as well as the other laws) is satisfied by the 
symbols 0 and 1, we are led, as before, to inquire whether those symbols do not 
admit of interpretation in the present system of thought. The same course of 
reasoning which we before pursued shows that they do, and warrants us in the 
two following positions, viz.: 

1st, That in the expression of secondary propositions, 0 represents nothing 
in reference to the element of time. 

2nd, That in the same system 1 represents the universe, or whole of time, 
to which the discourse is supposed in any manner to relate. 

As in primary propositions the universe of discourse is sometimes limited to 
a small portion of the actual universe of things, and is sometimes co-extensive 
with that universe; so in secondary propositions, the universe of discourse may 
be limited to a single day or to the passing moment, or it may comprise the whole 
duration of time. It may, in the most literal sense, be “eternal.” Indeed, unless 
there is some limitation expressed or implied in the nature of the discourse, the 
proper interpretation of the symbol 1 in secondary propositions is “eternity;” 
even as its proper interpretation in the primary system is the actually existent 
universe. 

9. Instead of appropriating the symbols x, y, z, to the representation of the 
truths of propositions, we might with equal propriety apply them to represent 
the occurrence of events. In fact, the occurrence of an event both implies, and 
is implied by, the truth of a proposition, viz., of the proposition which asserts 
the occurrence of the event. The one signification of the symbol x necessarily 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


130 


involves the other. It will greatly conduce to convenience to be able to em- 
ploy our symbols in either of these really equivalent interpretations which the 
circumstances of a problem may suggest to us as most desirable; and of this lib- 
erty I shall avail myself whenever occasion requires. In problems of pure Logic 
I shall consider the symbols x, y, &c. as representing elementary propositions, 
among which relation is expressed in the premises. In the mathematical theory 
of probabilities, which, as before intimated (I. 12), rests upon a basis of Logic, 
and which it is designed to treat in a subsequent portion of this work, I shall 
employ the same symbols to denote the simple events, whose implied or required 
frequency of occurrence it counts among its elements. 

Proposition III. 

10. To deduce general Rides for the expression of Secondary Propositions. 

In the various inquiries arising out of this Proposition, fulness of demonstra- 
tion will be the less necessary, because of the exact analogy which they bear 
with similar inquiries already completed with reference to primary propositions. 
We shall first consider the expression of terms; secondly, that of the propositions 
by which they are connected. 

As 1 denotes the whole duration of time, and x that portion of it for which 
the proposition X is true, 1 — x will denote that portion of time for which the 
proposition X is false. 

Again, as xy denotes that portion of time for which the propositions X and 
Y are both true, we shall, by combining this and the previous observation, be 
led to the following interpretations, viz.: 

The expression x(l — y) will represent the time during which the proposition 
X is true, and the proposition Y false. The expression (1 — x)(l — y) will 
represent the time during which the propositions X and Y are simultaneously 
false. 

The expression x(l — y) + y{ 1 — x) will express the time during which either 
X is true or Y true, but not both; for that time is the sum of the times in which 
they are singly and exclusively true. The expression xy + (1 — x)(l — y) will 
express the time during which X and Y are either both true or both false. 

If another symbol 2 presents itself, the same principles remain applicable. 
Thus xyz denotes the time in which the propositions X, Y, and Z are simulta- 
neously true; (1 — x)(l — y)(l — z) the time in which they are simultaneously 
false; and the sum of these expressions would denote the time in which they are 
either true or false together. 

The general principles of interpretation involved in the above examples do 
not need any further illustrations or more explicit statement. 

11. The laws of the expression of propositions may now be exhibited and 
studied in the distinct cases in which they present themselves. There is, how- 
ever, one principle of fundamental importance to which I wish in the first place 
to direct attention. Although the principles of expression which have been laid 
down are perfectly general, and enable us to limit our assertions of the truth 
or falsehood of propositions to any particular portions of that whole of time 



CHAPTER XL OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


131 


(whether it be an unlimited eternity, or a period whose beginning and whose 
end are definitely fixed, or the passing moment) which constitutes the universe 
of our discourse, yet, in the actual procedure of human reasoning, such limi- 
tation is not commonly employed. When we assert that a proposition is true, 
we generally mean that it is true throughout the whole duration of the time to 
which our discourse refers; and when different assertions of the unconditional 
truth or falsehood of propositions are jointly made as the premises of a logical 
demonstration, it is to the same universe of time that those assertions are re- 
ferred, and not to particular and limited parts of it. In that necessary matter 
which is the object or field of the exact sciences every assertion of a truth may 
be the assertion of an “eternal truth.” In reasoning upon transient phaenomena 
(as of some social conjuncture) each assertion may be qualified by an immediate 
reference to the present time, “Now.” But in both cases, unless there is a dis- 
tinct expression to the contrary, it is to the same period of duration that each 
separate proposition relates. The cases which then arise for our consideration 
are the following: 

1st. To express the Proposition, “The proposition X is true. ” 

We are here required to express that within those limits of time to which 
the matter of our discourse is confined the proposition X is true. Now the time 
for which the proposition X is true is denoted by x, and the extent of time to 
which our discourse refers is represented by 1. Hence we have 

x = 1 (4) 

as the expression required. 

2nd. To express the Proposition, “The proposition X is false. ” 

We are here to express that within the limits of time to which our discourse 
relates, the proposition X is false; or that within those limits there is no portion 
of time for which it is true. Now the portion of time for which it is true is x. 
Hence the required equation will be 


x = 0. (5) 

This result might also be obtained by equating to the whole duration of time 
1, the expression for the time during which the proposition X is false, viz., 1 — x. 
This gives 


1 — x = 1, 

whence x = 0. 

3rd. To express the disjunctive Proposition, “Either the proposition X is true 
or the proposition Y is true;” it being thereby implied that the said propositions 
are mutually exclusive, that is to say, that one only of them is true. 

The time for which either the proposition X is true or the proposition Y is 
true, but not both, is represented by the expression x(l — y) + y( 1 — x). Hence 
we have 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


132 


x(l - y) + y(l - x) = 1, (6) 

for the equation required. 

If in the above Proposition the particles either, or, are supposed not to pos- 
sess an absolutely disjunctive power, so that the possibility of the simultaneous 
truth of the propositions X and Y is not excluded, we must add to the first 
member of the above equations the term xy. We shall thus have 


xy + x(l -y) + ( 1- x)y = 1, 

or x + (1 — x)y = 1. (7) 

4th. To express the conditional Proposition, “If the proposition Y is true, 
the proposition X is true. ” 

Since whenever the proposition Y is true, the proposition X is true, it is 
necessary and sufficient here to express, that the time in which the proposition 
Y is true is time in which the proposition X is true; that is to say, that it is 
some indefinite portion of the whole time in which the proposition X is true. 
Now the time in which the proposition Y is true is y, and the whole time in 
which the proposition X is true is x. Let v be a symbol of time indefinite, then 
will vx represent an indefinite portion of the whole time x. Accordingly, we 
shall have 


y = vx 

as the expression of the proposition given. 

12. When v is thus regarded as a symbol of time indefinite, vx may be 
understood to represent the whole, or an indefinite part, or no part, of the 
whole time x; for any one of these meanings may be realized by a particular 
determination of the arbitrary symbol v. Thus, if v be determined to represent 
a time in which the whole time x is included, vx will represent the whole time 
x. If v be determined to represent a time, some part of which is included in the 
time x, but which does not fill up the measure of that time, vx will represent a 
part of the time x. If, lastly, v is determined to represent a time, of which no 
part is common with any part of the time x, vx will assume the value 0, and 
will be equivalent to “no time,” or “never.” 

Now it is to be observed that the proposition, “If Y is true, X is true,” 
contains no assertion of the truth of either of the propositions X and Y . It 
may equally consist with the supposition that the truth of the proposition Y is 
a condition indispensable to the truth of the proposition X, in which case we 
shall have v = 1; or with the supposition that although Y expresses a condition 
which, when realized, assures us of the truth of X, yet X may be true without 
implying the fulfilment of that condition, in which case v denotes a time, some 
part of which is contained in the whole time x; or, lastly, with the supposition 
that the proposition Y is not true at all, in which case v represents some time, 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


133 


no part of which is common with any part of the time x. All these cases are 
involved in the general supposition that v is a symbol of time indefinite. 

5th. To express a proposition in which the conditional and the disjunctive 
characters both exist. 

The general form of a conditional proposition is, “If Y is true, X is true,” 
and its expression is, by the last section, y = vx. We may properly, in analogy 
with the usage which has been established in primary propositions, designate 
Y and X as the terms of the conditional proposition into which they enter; and 
we may further adopt the language of the ordinary Logic, which designates the 
term Y, to which the particle if is attached, the “antecedent” of the proposition, 
and the term X the “consequent.” 

Now instead of the terms, as in the above case, being simple propositions, 
let each or either of them be a disjunctive proposition involving different terms 
connected by the particles either, or, as in the following illustrative examples, 
in which X, Y, Z, &c. denote simple propositions. 

1st. If either X is true or Y is true, then Z is true. 

2nd. If X is true, then either Y is true or Z true. 

3rd. If either X is true or Y is true, then either Z and W are both true, or 
they are both false. 

It is evident that in the above cases the relation of the antecedent to the 
consequent is not affected by the circumstance that one of those terms or both 
are of a disjunctive character. Accordingly it is only necessary to obtain, in 
conformity with the principles already established, the proper expressions for 
the antecedent and the consequent, to affect the latter with the indefinite symbol 
v, and to equate the results. Thus for the propositions above stated we shall 
have the respective equations, 


1st x(l — y) + (1 — x)y = vz. 

2nd. a; = v{y{ 1 — z) + z{ 1 — y)}. 

3rd.x(l — y) + y( 1 — x) = v{zw + (1 — z)( 1 — tu)} 

The rule here exemplified is of general application. 

Cases in which the disjunctive and the conditional elements enter in a manner 
different from the above into the expression of a compound proposition, are 
conceivable, but I am not aware that they are ever presented to us by the natural 
exigencies of human reason, and I shall therefore refrain from any discussion of 
them. No serious difficulty will arise from this omission, as the general principles 
which have formed the basis of the above applications are perfectly general, and 
a slight effort of thought will adapt them to any imaginable case. 

13. In the laws of expression above stated those of interpretation are implic- 
itly involved. The equation 

x = 1 

must be understood to express that the proposition X is true; the equation 

x = 0, 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


134 


that the proposition X is false. The equation 

xy= l 

will express that the propositions X and Y are both true together; and the 
equation 

xy = 0 

that they are not both together true. 

In like manner the equations 


x{l - y) + 2/(1 - x) = 1, 
x{l - y) + y(l - x) = 0, 

will respectively assert the truth and the falsehood of the disjunctive Propo- 
sition, “Either X is true or Y is true.” The equations 


y = vx 
y = v(l-x) 

will respectively express the Propositions, “If the proposition Y is true, the 
proposition X is true.” “If the proposition Y is true, the proposition X is false.” 

Examples will frequently present themselves, in the succeeding chapters of 
this work, of a case in which some terms of a particular member of an equation 
are affected by the indefinite symbol v, and others not so affected. The following 
instance will serve for illustration. Suppose that we have 

y = xz + vx(l — z). 

Here it is implied that the time for which the proposition Y is true consists 
of all the time for which X and Z are together true, together with an indefinite 
portion of the time for which X is true and Z false. From this it may be seen, 
1st, That if Y is true, either X and Z are together true, or X is true and Z 
false; 2ndly, If X and Z are together true, Y is true. The latter of these may 
be called the reverse interpretation, and it consists in taking the antecedent 
out of the second member, and the consequent from the first member of the 
equation. The existence of a term in the second member, whose coefficient is 
unity, renders this latter mode of interpretation possible. The general principle 
which it involves may be thus stated: 

14. PRINCIPLE.-Tny constituent term or terms in a particular member of an 
equation which have for their coefficient unity, may be taken as the antecedent of 
a proposition, of which all the terms in the other member form the consequent. 

Thus the equation 


y = xz + vx{l — z) + (1 — x)(l — z ) 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


135 


would have the following interpretations: 

Direct Interpretation.-// the proposition Y is true, then either X and 
Z are true, or X is true and Z false, or X and Z are both false. 

Reverse Interpretation.-// either X and Z are true, or X and Z are 
false, Y is true. 

The aggregate of these partial interpretations will express the whole signifi- 
cance of the equation given. 

15. We may here call attention again to the remark, that although the idea 
of time appears to be an essential element in the theory of the interpretation 
of secondary propositions, it may practically be neglected as soon as the laws 
of expression and of interpretation are definitely established. The forms to 
which those laws give rise seem, indeed, to correspond with the forms of a 
perfect language. Let us imagine any known or existing language freed from 
idioms and divested of superfluity, and let us express in that language any given 
proposition in a manner the most simple and literal, -the most in accordance 
with those principles of pure and universal thought upon which all languages 
are founded, of which all bear the manifestation, but from which all have more 
or less departed. The transition from such a language to the notation of analysis 
would consist of no more than the substitution of one set of signs for another, 
without essential change either of form or character. For the elements, whether 
things or propositions, among which relation is expressed, we should substitute 
letters; for the disjunctive conjunction we should write +; for the connecting 
copula or sign of relatioin, we should write =. This analogy I need not pursue. 
Its reality and completeness will be made more apparent from the study of those 
forms of expression which will present themselves in subsequent applications of 
the present theory, viewed in more immediate comparison with that imperfect 
yet noble instrument of thought-the English language. 

16. Upon the general analogy between the theory of Primary and that of 
Secondary Propositions, I am desirous of adding a few remarks before dismissing 
the subject of the present chapter. 

We might undoubtedly, have established the theory of Primary Propositions 
upon the simple notion of space, in the same way as that of secondary propo- 
sitions has been established upon the notion of time. Perhaps, had this been 
done, the analogy which we are contemplating would have been in somewhat 
closer accordance with the view of those who regard space and time as merely 
“forms of the human understanding,” conditions of knowledge imposed by the 
very constitution of the mind upon all that is submitted to its apprehension. 
But this view, while on the one hand it is incapable of demonstration, on the 
other hand ties us down to the recognition of “place,” to tco’v, as an essential 
category of existence. The question, indeed, whether it is so or not, lies, I ap- 
prehend, beyond the reach of our faculties; but it may be, and I conceive has 
been, established, that the formal processes of reasoning in primary proposi- 
tions do not require, as an essential condition, the manifestation in space of the 
things about which we reason; that they would remain applicable, with equal 
strictness of demonstration, to forms of existence, if such there be, which lie 
beyond the realm of sensible extension. It is a fact, perhaps, in some degree 



CHAPTER XI. OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


136 


analogous to this, that we are able in many known examples in geometry and 
dynamics, to exhibit the formal analysis of problems founded upon some intel- 
lectual conception of space different from that which is presented to us by the 
senses, or which can be realized by the imagination. 1 I conceive, therefore, 
that the idea of space is not essential to the development of a theory of primary 
propositions, but am disposed, though desiring to speak with diffidence upon 
a question of such extreme difficulty, to think that the idea of time is essen- 
tial to the establishment of a theory of secondary propositions. There seem to 
be grounds for thinking, that without any change in those faculties which are 
concerned in reasoning , the manifestation of space to the human mind might 
have been different from what it is, but not (at least the same) grounds for 
supposing that the manifestation of time could have been otherwise than we 
perceive it to be. Dismissing, however, these speculations as possibly not al- 
together free from presumption, let it be affirmed that the real ground upon 
which the symbol 1 represents in primary propositions the universe of things, 
and not the space they occupy, is, that the sign of identity = connecting the 
members of the corresponding equations, implies that the things which they 
represent are identical, not simply that they are found in the same portion of 
space. Let it in like manner be affirmed, that the reason why the symbol 1 in 
secondary propositions represents, not the universe of events, but the eternity 
in whose successive moments and periods they are evolved, is, that the same 
sign of identity connecting the logical members of the corresponding equations 
implies, not that the events which those members represent are identical, but 
that the times of their occurrence are the same. These reasons appear to me 
to be decisive of the immediate question of interpretation. In a former treatise 
on this subject (Mathematical Analysis of Logic, p. 49), following the theory 
of Wallis respecting the Reduction of Hypothetical Propositions, I was led to 
interpret the symbol 1 in secondary propositions as the universe of “cases” or 
“conjunctures of circumstances;” but this view involves the necessity of a defi- 
nition of what is meant by a “case,” or “conjuncture of circumstances;” and it 
is certain, that whatever is involved in the term beyond the notion of time is 
alien to the objects, and restrictive of the processes, of formal Logic. 


1 Space is presented to us in perception, as possessing the three dimensions of length, 
breadth, and depth. But in a large class of problems relating to the properties of curved 
surfaces, the rotations of solid bodies around axes, the vibrations of elastic media, &c., this 
limitation appears in the analytical investigation to be of an arbitrary character, and if at- 
tention were paid to the processes of solution alone, no reason could be discovered why space 
should not exist in four or in any greater number of dimensions. The intellectual procedure 
in the imaginary world thus suggested can be apprehended by the clearest light of analogy. 

The existence of space in three dimensions, and the views thereupon of the religious and 
philosophical mind of antiquity, are thus set forth by Aristotle:— Meyedoc 6e to pev etp "ev, 
ypappf] to 6' era 5'vo eratteSov, to 6' era Tpia aupa' Ka£ itapa Ta’vTa o'vx "eaTiv "a XXo peyeDop, 
8ta to Tpia TiavTa rival xai to Tpk ttavTT). Kadaitep yap tpaai xai oi Ilvdayopeioi, to Ttav xai Ta 
TtavTa Tote Tpiaiv '’uptaTai. TeXevTf] yap xai peaov xai apxf] tov apidpov "exei tov to’v TiavToc' 
Ta’vTa Se tov Trjc TpiaSop. Aio Tiapa Trie q/vaetoc: eiXriqjoTec "Maiiep vopovc exeiviqc, xai itpop Tap 
ayiaTcia? xpcipeOa tuv Deiov t' 4» apiflp'j) To'vri'ip.-De Caelo, 1. 



Chapter XII 

OF THE METHODS AND PROCESSES TO BE 
ADOPTED IN THE TREATMENT OF SECONDARY 
PROPOSITIONS. 


1. It has appeared from previous researches (XI. 7) that the laws of combina- 
tion of the literal symbols of Logic are the same, whether those symbols are 
employed in the expression of primary or in that of secondary propositions, the 
sole existing difference between the two cases being a difference of interpretation. 
It has also been established (V. 6), that whenever distinct systems of thought 
and interpretation are connected with the same system of formal laws, i.e. , of 
laws relating to the combination and use of symbols, the attendant processes, 
intermediate between the expression of the primary conditions of a problem and 
the interpretation of its symbolical solution, are the same in both. Hence, as 
between the systems of thought manifested in the two forms of primary and 
of secondary propositions, this community of formal law exists, the processes 
which have been established and illustrated in our discussion of the former class 
of propositions will, without any modification, be applicable to the latter. 

2. Thus the laws of the two fundamental processes of elimination and de- 
velopment are the same in the system of secondary as in the system of primary 
propositions. Again, it has been seen (Chap. VI. Prop. 2) how, in primary 
propositions, the interpretation of any proposed equation devoid of fractional 
forms may be effected by developing it into a series of constituents, and equat- 
ing to 0 every constituent whose coefficient does not vanish. To the equations 
of secondary propositions the same method is applicable, and the interpreted 
result to which it finally conducts us is, as in the former case (VI. 6), a system 
of co-existent denials. But while in the former case the force of those denials is 
expended upon the existence of certain classes of things, in the latter it relates 
to the truth of certain combinations of the elementary propositions involved in 
the terms of the given premises. And as in primary propositions it was seen 
that the system of denials admitted of conversion into various other forms of 
propositions (VI. 7), &c., such conversion will be found to be possible here also, 
the sole difference consisting not in the forms of the equations, but in the nature 
of their interpretation. 

3. Moreover, as in primary propositions, we can find the expression of any 


137 



CHAPTER XII. METHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


138 


element entering into a system of equations, in terms of the remaining elements 
(VI. 10), or of any selected number of the remaining elements, and interpret 
that expression into a logical inference, the same object can be accomplished 
by the same means, difference of interpretation alone excepted, in the system of 
secondary propositions. The elimination of those elements which we desire to 
banish from the final solution, the reduction of the system to a single equation, 
the algebraic solution and the mode of its development into an interpretable 
form, differ in no respect from the corresponding steps in the discussion of 
primary propositions. 

To remove, however, any possible difficulty, it may be desirable to collect un- 
der a general Rule the different cases which present themselves in the treatment 
of secondary propositions. 

Rule -Express symbolically the given propositions (XI. 11). 

Eliminate separately from each equation in which it is found the indefinite 
symbol v (VII. 5). 

Eliminate the remaining symbols which it is desired to banish from the final 
solution: always before elimination ’ reducing to a single equation those equations 
in which the symbol or symbols to be eliminated are found (VIII. 7). Collect the 
resulting equations into a single equation V = 0. 

Then proceed according to the particular form in which it is desired to express 
the final relation, as- 

lst. If in the form of a denial, or system of denials, develop the function V, 
and equate to 0 all those constituents whose coefficients do not vanish. 

2ndly. If in the form of a disjunctive proposition, equate to 1 the sum of 
those constituents whose coefficients vanish. 

3rdly. If in the form of a conditional proposition having a simple element, as 
x or l — ai, for its antecedent, determine the algebraic expression of that element, 
and develop that expression. 

4thly. If in the form of a conditional proposition having a compound expres- 
sion, as xy, xy + (1 — x)(l — y), &c., for its antecedent, equate that expression 
to a new symbol t, and determine t as a developed function of the symbols which 
are to appear in the consequent, either by ordinary methods or by the special 
method (IX. 9). 

5thly. Interpret the results by (XI. 13, 14). 

If it only be desired to ascertain whether a particular elementary proposition 
x is true or false, we must eliminate all the symbols but x; then the equation 
x = 1 will indicate that the proposition is true, x = 0 that it is false, 0 = 0 that 
the premises are insufficient to determine whether it is true or false. 

4. Ex. l.-The following prediction is made the subject of a curious discussion 
in Cicero’s fragmentary treatise, De Fato:-“Si quis (Fabius) natus est oriente 
Canicula, is in mari non morietur.” I shall apply to it the method of this chapter. 
Let y represent the proposition, “Fabius was born at the rising of the dogstar;” 
x the proposition, “Fabius will die in the sea.” In saying that x represents the 
proposition, “Fabius, &c.,” it is only meant that a: is a symbol so appropriated 
(XI. 7) to the above proposition, that the equation x = 1 declares, and the 
equation x = 0 denies, the truth of that proposition. The equation we have to 



CHAPTER XII. METHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


139 


discuss will be 

y = v( l-x). (1) 

And, first, let it be required to reduce the given proposition to a negation or 
system of negations (XII. 3). We have, on transposition, 

y — v(l — a;) = 0. 


Eliminating v, 


y {y - (1 - x)} = 0, 
or, y-y( 1 - x) = 0, 

or, yx = 0. (2) 

The interpretation of this result is:-“It is not true that Fabius was born at 
the rising of the dogstar, and will die in the sea.” Cicero terms this form of 
proposition, “Conjunctio ex repugnantibus;” and he remarks that Chrysippus 
thought in this way to evade the difficulty which he imagined to exist in con- 
tingent assertions respecting the future: “Hoc loco Chrysippus aestuans falli 
sperat Chaldaeos casterosque di vinos, neque eos usuros esse conjunctionibus ut 
ita sua percepta pronuntient: Si quis natus est oriente Canicula is in mari non 
morietur; sed potius ita dicant: Non et natus est quis oriente Canicula, et in 
mari morietur. O licentiam jocularem! ... Multa genera sunt enuntiandi, nec ul- 
lum distortius quam hoc quo Chrysippus sperat Chaldaeos contentos Stoicorum 
causa fore.” -Cic. De Fato , 7, 8. 

5. To reduce the given proposition to a disjunctive form. The constituents 
not entering into the first member of (2) are 

x ( l - 2/), (! - x )y, (1 - a;)(l - y). 


Whence we have 


y{l-x) + x(l-y) + (l-x)(l-y) = l. (3) 

The interpretation of which is '.-Either Fabius was born at the rising of the 
dogstar, and will not perish in the sea; or he was not born at the rising of 
the dogstar, and will perish in the sea; or he was not born at the rising of the 
dogstar, and will not perish in the sea. 

In cases like the above, however, in which there exist constituents differing 
from each other only by a single factor, it is, as we have seen (VII. 15), most 
convenient to collect such constituents into a single term. If we thus connect 
the first and third terms of (3), we have 

(1 — y) x + 1 — x = 1; 

and if we similarly connect the second and third, we have 


2/(1 - x) + 1 - y = 1. 



CHAPTER XII. METHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


140 


These forms of the equation severally give the interpretations- 

Either Fabius was not born under the day star, and will die in the sea, or he 
will not die in the sea. 

Either Fabius was born under the day star, and will not die in the sea, or he 
was not bom under the dogstar. 

It is evident that these interpretations are strictly equivalent to the former 
one. 

Let us ascertain, in the form of a conditional proposition, the consequences 
which flow from the hypothesis, that “Fabius will perish in the sea.” 

In the equation (2), which expresses the result of the elimination of v from 
the original equation, we must seek to determine a: as a function of y. 

We have 

x = - = Oy H — (1 — y) on expansion, 

V 0 

or 

the interpretation of which is -If Fabius shall die in the sea, he was not bom at 
the rising of the dogstar. 

These examples serve in some measure to illustrate the connexion which 
has been established in the previous sections between primary and secondary 
propositions, a connexion of which the two distinguishing features are identity 
of process and analogy of interpretation. 

6. Ex. 2. -There is a remarkable argument in the second book of the Republic 
of Plato, the design of which is to prove the immutability of the Divine Nature. 
It is a very fine example both of the careful induction from familiar instances by 
which Plato arrives at general principles, and of the clear and connected logic 
by which he deduces from them the particular inferences which it is his object 
to establish. The argument is contained in the following dialogue: 

“Must not that which departs from its proper form be changed either by itself 
or by another thing? Necessarily so. Are not things which are in the best state 
least changed and disturbed, as the body by meats and drinks, and labours, 
and every species of plant by heats and winds, and such like affections? Is not 
the healthiest and strongest the least changed? Assuredly. And does not any 
trouble from without least disturb and change that soul which is strongest and 
wisest? And as to all made vessels, and furnitures, and garments, according 
to the same principle, are not those which are well wrought, and in a good 
condition, least changed by time and other accidents? Even so. And whatever 
is in a right state, either by nature or by art, or by both these, admits of the 
smallest change from any other thing. So it seems. But God and things divine 
are in every sense in the best state. Assuredly. In this way, then, God should 
least of all bear many forms? Least, indeed, of all. Again, should He transform 
and change Himself? Manifestly He must do so, if He is changed at all. Changes 
He then Himself to that which is more good and fair, or to that which is worse 
and baser? Necessarily to the worse, if he be changed. For never shall we say 
that God is indigent of beauty or of virtue. You speak most rightly, said I, and 



CHAPTER XII. METHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


141 


the matter being so, seems it to you, 0 Adimantus, that God or man willingly 
makes himself in any sense worse? Impossible, said he. Impossible, then, it is, 
said I, that a god should wish to change himself; but ever being fairest and best, 
each of them ever remains absolutely in the same form.” 

The premises of the above argument are the following: 

1st. If the Deity suffers change, He is changed either by Himself or by 
another. 

2nd. If He is in the best state, He is not changed by another. 

3rd. The Deity is in the best state. 

4th. If the Deity is changed by Himself, He is changed to a worse state. 

5th. If He acts willingly, He is not changed to a worse state. 

6th. The Deity acts willingly. 

Let us express the elements of these premises as follows: 

Let x represent the proposition, “The Deity suffers change.” 

y, He is changed by Himself. 

z, He is changed by another. 

s, He is in the best state. 

t, He is changed to a worse state. 

w, He acts willingly. 

Then the premises expressed in symbolical language yield, after elimination 
of the indefinite class symbols v, the following equations: 


y)( i-z) = o, 

(1) 

sz = 0, 

(2) 

S = 1, 

(3) 

o' 

II 

HO 

1 

r— 1 

(4) 

wt = 0, 

(5) 

w = 1. 

(6) 


Retaining x, I shall eliminate in succession z, s, y, t, and w (this being the 
order in which those symbols occur in the above system), and interpret the 
successive results. 

Eliminating z from (1) and (2), we get 


xs( 1 — y) = 0. 

(7) 

Eliminating s from (3) and (7), 


x{i -y) = o. 

(8) 

Eliminating y from (4) and (8), 


x{l — t) = 0. 

(9) 

Eliminating t from (5) and (9), 


xw = 0. 

(10) 



CHAPTER XII. METHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS 


142 


Eliminating w from (6) and (10), 

a: = 0. (11) 

These equations, beginning with (8), give the following results: 

From (8) we have x = j ]y, therefore, If the Deity suffers change, He is 
changed by Himself. 

From (9), x = jji, If the Deity suffers change, He is changed to a worse 
state. 

From (10), x = ^(1 — w). If the Deity suffers change, He does not act 
willingly. 

From (11), The Deity does not suffer change. This is Plato’s result. 

Now I have before remarked, that the order of elimination is indifferent. Let 
us in the present case seek to verify this fact by eliminating the same symbols 
in a reverse order, beginning with w. The resulting equations are, 

t = 0, y = 0, x(l — x) = 0, z = 0, x = 0; 

yielding the following interpretations: 

God is not changed to a worse state. He is not changed by Himself. If He 
suffers change, He is changed by another. He is not changed by another. He is 
not changed. 

We thus reach by a different route the same conclusion. 

Though as an exhibition of the power of the method, the above examples 
are of slight value, they serve as well as more complicated instances would do, 
to illustrate its nature and character. 

7. It may be remarked, as a final instance of analogy between the system of 
primary and that of secondary propositions, that in the latter system also the 
fundamental equation, 

x{l — x) = 0, 

admits of interpretation. It expresses the axiom, A proposition cannot at the 
same time be true and false. Let this be compared with the corresponding 
interpretation (III. 15). Solved under the form 

0 0 

x= z = n i, 

1 — x 0 

by development, it furnishes the respective axioms: “A thing is what it is:” “If 
a proposition is true, it is true:” forms of what has been termed “The principle 
of identity.” Upon the nature and the value of these axioms the most opposite 
opinions have been entertained. Some have regarded them as the very pith and 
marrow of philosophy. Locke devoted to them a chapter, headed, “On Trifling 
Propositions.” 1 In both these views there seems to have been a mixture of 
truth and error. Regarded as supplanting experience, or as furnishing materials 
for the vain and wordy janglings of the schools, such propositions are worse than 
trifling. Viewed, on the other hand, as intimately allied with the very laws and 
conditions of thought, they rise into at least a speculative importance. 

1 Essay on the Human Understanding, Book IV. Chap. viii. 



Chapter XIII 

ANALYSIS OF A PORTION OF DR. SAMUEL 
CLARKE’s “DEMONSTRATION OF THE BEING AND 
ATTRIBUTES OF GOD,” AND OF A PORTION OF 
THE “ETHICA ORDINE GEOMETRICO 
DEMONSTRATA” OF SPINOZA. 


1. The general order which, in the investigations of the following chapter, 
I design to pursue, is the following. I shall examine what are the actual 
premises involved in the demonstrations of some of the general propositions 
of the above treatises, whether those premises be expressed or implied. By the 
actual premises I mean whatever propositions are assumed in the course of the 
argument, without being proved, and are employed as parts of the foundation 
upon which the final conclusion is built. The premises thus determined, I shall 
express in the language of symbols, and I shall then deduce from them by the 
methods developed in the previous chapters of this work, the most important 
inferences which they involve, in addition to the particular inferences actually 
drawn by the authors. I shall in some instances modify the premises by the omis- 
sion of some fact or principle which is contained in them, or by the addition or 
substitution of some new proposition, and shall determine how by such change 
the ultimate conclusions are affected. In the pursuit of these objects it will not 
devolve upon me to inquire, except incidentally, how far the metaphysical prin- 
ciples laid down in these celebrated productions are worthy of confidence, but 
only to ascertain what conclusions may justly be drawn from given premises; 
and in doing this, to exemplify the perfect liberty which we possess as concerns 
both the choice and the order of the elements of the final or concluding propo- 
sitions, viz., as to determining what elementary propositions are true or false, 
and what are true or false under given restrictions, or in given combinations. 

2. The chief practical difficulty of this inquiry will consist, not in the ap- 
plication of the method to the premises once determined, but in ascertaining 
what the premises are. In what area regarded as the most rigorous examples of 
reasoning applied to metaphysical questions, it will occasionally be found that 
different trains of thought are blended together; that particular but essential 
parts of the demonstration are given parenthetically, or out of the main course 


143 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


144 


of the argument; that the meaning of a premiss may be in some degree am- 
biguous; and, not unfrequently, that arguments, viewed by the strict laws of 
formal reasoning, are incorrect or inconclusive. The difficulty of determining 
and distinctly exhibiting the true premises of a demonstration may, 

in such cases, be very considerable. But it is a difficulty which must be 
overcome by all who would ascertain whether a particular conclusion is proved 
or not, whatever form they may be prepared or disposed to give to the ulterior 
process of reasoning. It is a difficulty, therefore, which is not peculiar to the 
method of this work, though it manifests itself more distinctly in connexion with 
this method than with any other. So intimate, indeed, is this connexion, that it 
is impossible, employing the method of this treatise, to form even a conjecture 
as to the validity of a conclusion, without a distinct apprehension and exact 
statement of all the premises upon which it rests. In the more usual course 
of procedure, nothing is, however, more common than to examine some of the 
steps of a train of argument, and thence to form a vague general impression of 
the scope of the whole, without any such preliminary and thorough analysis of 
the premises which it involves. 

The necessity of a rigorous determination of the real premises of a demon- 
stration ought not to be regarded as an evil; especially as, when that task is 
accomplished, every source doubt or ambiguity is removed. In employing the 
method of this treatise, the order in which premises are arranged, the mode of 
connexion which they exhibit, with every similar circumstance may be esteemed 
a matter of indifference, and the process inference is conducted with a precision 
which might almost termed mechanical. 

3. The “Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God,” consists of a 
series of propositions or theorems, each of them proved by means of premises 
resolvable, for the most part, into two distinct classes, viz., facts of observation, 
such as the existence of a material world, the phenomenon of motion, &c. , and 
hypothetical principles, the authority and universality of which are supposed 
to be recognised a priori. It is, of course, upon the truth of the latter, as- 
suming the correctness of the reasoning, that the validity of the demonstration 
really depends. But whatever may be thought of its claims in this respect, it 
is unquestionable that, as an intellectual performance, its merits are very high. 
Though the trains of argument of which it consists are not in general very clearly 
arranged, they are almost always specimens of correct Logic, and they exhibit 
a subtlety of apprehension and a force of reasoning which have seldom been 
equalled, never perhaps surpassed. We see in them the consummation of those 
intellectual efforts which were awakened in the realm of metaphysical inquiry, 
at a period when the dominion of hypothetical principles was less questioned 
than it now is, and when the rigorous demonstrations of the newly risen school 
of mathematical physics seemed to have furnished a model for their direction. 
They appear to me for this reason (not to mention the dignity of the subject of 
which they treat) to be deserving of high consideration; and I do not deem it a 
vain or superfluous task to expend upon some of them a careful analysis. 

4. The Ethics of Benedict Spinoza is a treatise, the object of which is to 
prove the identity of God and the universe, and to establish, upon this doctrine, 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


145 


a system of morals and of philosophy. The analysis of its main argument is 
extremely difficult, owing not to the complexity of the separate propositions 
which it involves, but to the use of vague definitions, and of axioms which, 
through a like defect of clearness, it is perplexing to determine whether we 
ought to accept or to reject. While the reasoning of Dr. Samuel Clarke is in 
part verbal, that of Spinoza is so in a much greater degree; and perhaps this 
is the reason why, to some minds, it has appeared to possess a formal cogency, 
to which in reality it possesses no just claim. These points will, however, be 
considered in the proper place. 

CLARKE’S DEMONSTRATION. 

Proposition I. 

5. 11 Something has existed from eternity.'" 

The proof is as follows:- 

“For since something now is, ’tis manifest that something always was. Oth- 
erwise the things that now are must have risen out of nothing, absolutely and 
without cause. Which is a plain contradiction in terms. For to say a thing is 
produced, and yet that there is no cause at all of that production, is to say that 
something is effected when it is effected by nothing, that is, at the same time 
when it is not effected at all. Whatever exists has a cause of its existence, either 
in the necessity of its own nature, and thus it must have been of itself eternal: 
or in the will of some other being, and then that other being must, at least in 
the order of nature and causality, have existed before it.” 

Let us now proceed to analyze the above demonstration. Its first sentence 
is resolvable into the following propositions: 

1st. Something is. 

2nd. If something is, either something always was, or the things that now 
are must have risen out of nothing. 

The next portion of the demonstration consists of a proof that the second of 
the above alternatives, viz., “The things that now are have risen out of nothing,” 
is impossible, and it may formally be resolved as follows: 

3rd. If the things that now are have risen out of nothing, something has been 
effected, and at the same time that something has been effected by nothing. 

4th. If that something has been effected by nothing, it has not been effected 
at all. 

The second portion of this argument appears to be a mere assumption of 
the point to be proved, or an attempt to make that point clearer by a different 
verbal statement. 

The third and last portion of the demonstration contains a distinct proof 
of the truth of either the original proposition to be proved, viz., “Something 
always was,” or the point proved in the second part of the demonstration, viz., 
the untenable nature of the hypothesis, that “the things that now are have risen 
out of nothing.” It is resolvable as follows :- 

5th. If something is, either it exists by the necessity of its own nature, or it 
exists by the will of another being. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


146 


6th. If it exists by the necessity of its own nature, something always was. 

7th. If it exists by the will of another being, then the proposition, that the 
things which exist have arisen out of nothing, is false. 

The last proposition is not expressed in the same form in the text of Dr. 
Clarke; but his expressed conclusion of the prior existence of another Being is 
clearly meant as equivalent to a denial of the proposition that the things which 
now are have risen out of nothing. 

It appears, therefore, that the demonstration consists of two distinct trains 
of argument: one of those trains comprising what I have designated as the first 
and second parts of the demonstration; the other comprising the first and third 
parts. Let us consider the latter train. 

The premises are:- 

lst. Something is. 

2nd. If something is, either something always was, or the things that now 
are have risen out of nothing. 

3rd. If something is, either it exists in the necessity of its own nature, or it 
exists by the will of another being. 

4th. If it exists in the necessity of its own nature, something always was. 

5th. If it exists by the will of another being, then the hypothesis, that the 
things which now are have risen out of nothing, is false. 

We must now express symbolically the above proposition. 

Let 

x = Something is. 

y = Something always was. 

z = The things which now are have risen from nothing. 

p = It exists in the necessity of its own nature 
(i.e. the something spoken of above). 

q = It exists by the will of another Being. 

It must be understood, that by the expression, Let x = “Something is,” is 
meant no more than that x is the representative symbol of that proposition (XI. 
7), the equations x = 1, x = 0, respectively declaring its truth and its falsehood. 

The equations of the premises are:- 
1st. x = 1; 

2nd. x = v[y( 1 — x) + z( 1 — j/)]; 

3rd. x = v[p(l — q) + q(l — p)\; 

4th. p = vy\ 

5th. q = v(l — z); 

and on eliminating the several indefinite symbols v, we have 


1 — x — 0; 

(1) 

[yz + (1 - y)(l - z)] = 0; 

(2) 

¦\pq+ (1 -p)(l - <?)] = 0 ; 

(3) 

1 

*2 

II 

O 

(4) 

qz = 0. 

(5) 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


147 


6. First, I shall examine whether any conclusions are deducible from the 
above, concerning the truth or falsity of the single propositions represented by 
the symbols y, z, p, q , viz., of the propositions, “Something always was;” “The 
things which now are have risen from nothing;” “The something which is exists 
by the necessity of its own nature;” “The something which is exists by the will 
of another being.” 

For this purpose we must separately eliminate all the symbols but y, all these 
but z, &c. The resulting equation will determine whether any such separate 
relations exist. 

To eliminate x from (1), (2), and (3), it is only necessary to substitute in 
(2) and (3) the value of x derived from (1). We find as the results, 


yz + (1 - y){ 1 ~z) = 0. 
pq + (l-p)(l -q) = 0. 

To eliminate p we have from (4) and (7), by addition, 

p{ i -y)+pq + 0--p)0--q) = o| 

whence we find, 


(l-y)(l-q) = 0. 

To eliminate q from (5) and (9), we have 

QZ + (1 - y)(l - q) = 0; 

whence we find 


( 6 ) 

( 7 ) 

(8) 

(9) 


x(l-y) = 0. (10) 

There now remain but the two equations (6) and (10), which, on addition, 
give 


yz + l-y = 0. 

Eliminating from this equation z, we have 

1 - y = 0,or, y = 1. (11) 

Eliminating from the same equation y, we have 

z = 0. (12) 

The interpretation of (11) is 
Something always was. 

The interpretation of (12) is 

The things which are have not risen from nothing. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


148 


Next resuming the system (6), (7), with the two equations (4), (5), let us 
determine the two equations involving p and q respectively. 

To eliminate y we have from (4) and (6), 

pi 1 - y) + v z + (! - j/)(i -z) = (o); 

whence 


(p + 1 — z)z = 0, or, pz = 0. 
To eliminate z from (5) and (13), we have 


whence we get, 


qz + pz = 0; 


(13) 


0 = 0 . 

There remains then but the equation (7), from which eliminating q , we have 
0 = 0 for the final equation, in p. 

Hence there is no conclusion derivable from the premises affirming the simple 
truth or falsehood of the proposition, “The something which is exists in the 
necessity of its own nature. ” And as, on eliminating p, there is the same result, 
0 = 0, for the ultimate equation in q , it also follows, that there is no conclusion 
deducible from the premises as to the simple truth or falsehood of the proposition, 
“The something which is exists by the will of another Being. ” 

Of relations connecting more than one of the propositions represented by the 
elementary symbols, it is needless to consider any but that which is denoted by 
the equation (7) connecting p and q, inasmuch as the propositions represented 
by the remaining symbols are absolutely true or false independently of any 
connexion of the kind here spoken of. The interpretation of (7), placed under 
the form 


p ( i - q) + 9(1 -p) = 1, is, 

The something which is, either exists in the necessity of its own nature, or 
by the will of another being. 

I have exhibited the details of the above analysis with a, perhaps, needless 
fulness and prolixity, because in the examples which will follow, I propose rather 
to indicate the steps by which results are obtained, than to incur the danger of 
a wearisome frequency of repetition. The conclusions which have resulted from 
the above application of the method are easily verified by ordinary reasoning. 

The reader will have no difficulty in applying the method to the other train 
of premises involved in Dr. Clarke’s first Proposition, and deducing from them 
the two first of the conclusions to which the above analysis has led. 


Proposition II. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


149 


7. Some one unchangeable and independent Being has existed from eternity. 

The premises from which the above proposition is prove are the following: 

1st. Something has always existed. 

2nd. If something has always existed, either there has existed some one 
unchangeable and independent being, or the whole of existing things has been 
comprehended in a succession of changeable and dependent beings. 

3rd. If the universe has consisted of a succession of changeable and dependent 
beings, either that series has had a cause from without, or it has had a cause 
from within. 

4th. It has not had a cause from without (because it includes, by hypothesis, 
all things that exist). 

5th. It has not had a cause from within (because no part is necessary, and 
if no part is necessary, the whole cannot be necessary). 

Omitting, merely for brevity, the subsidiary proofs contained in the paren- 
theses of the fourth and fifth premiss, we may represent the premises as follows: 


Let x 

V 

z 

P 

q 


Something has always existed. 

There has existed some one unchangeable and independent being. 
There has existed a succession of changeable and dependent beings. 
That series has had a cause from without. 

That series has had a cause from within. 


Then we have the following system of equations, viz.: 


1st. x 
2nd. x 
3rd. z 
4th. p 
5th. q 


i; 

v{y{l -z)+ z( 1 - y)}; 

v{p( i - q) + (i -p)q}\ 
0 ; 


0 : 


which, on the separate elimination of the indefinite symbols v, gives 


l — x = 0; 

(1) 

x{yz+ (1 - y)(l - z)} = 0; 

(2) 

z{pq+ (1 -p)(l - q)} = 0; 

(3) 

p = 0; 

(4) 

q = 0. 

(5) 


The elimination from the above system of x, p, q , and y, conducts to the 
equation 


z = 0. 


And the elimination of x, p, q , and z, conducts in a similar manner to the 
equation 


y = i- 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


150 


Of which equations the respective interpretations are: 

1st. The whole of existing things has not been comprehended in a succession 
of changeable and dependent beings. 

2nd. There has existed some one unchangeable and independent being. 

The latter of these is the proposition which Dr. Clarke proves. As, by the 
above analysis, all the propositions represented by the literal symbols x, y, z, 
p, q , are determined as absolutely true or false, it is needless to inquire into the 
existence of any further relations connecting those propositions together. 

Another proof is given of Prop. II., which for brevity I pass over. It may be 
observed, that the “impossibility of infinite succession,” the proof of which forms 
a part of Clarke’s argument, has commonly been assumed as a fundamental 
principle of metaphysics, and extended to other questions than that of causation. 
Aristotle applies it to establish the necessity of first principles of demonstration; 
1 the necessity of an end (the good), in human actions, &c. 2 There is, perhaps, 
no principle more frequently referred to in his writings. By the schoolmen it 
was similarly applied to prove the impossibility of an infinite subordination of 
genera and species, and hence the necessary existence of universals. Apparently 
the impossibility of our forming a definite and complete conception of an infinite 
series, i.e. of comprehending it as a whole , has been confounded with a logical 
inconsistency, or contradiction in the idea itself. 

8. The analysis of the following argument depends upon the theory of Pri- 
mary Propositions. 

Proposition III. 

That, unchangeable and independent Being must be self- existent. 

The premises are:- 

1. Every being must either have come into existence out of nothing, or it 
must have been produced by some external cause, or it must be self-existent. 

2. No being has come into existence out of nothing. 

3. The unchangeable and independent Being has not been produced by an 
external cause. 

For the symbolical expression of the above, let us assume, 


x = Beings which have arisen out of nothing. 
y = Beings which have been produced by an external cause. 
z = Beings which are self-existent. 
w = The unchangeable and independent Being. 

Then we have 

x(l - y)( 1 - z) + y(l - ®)(1 - z) + z( 1 - x)(l -y)=l, (1) 

* = 0 , ( 2 ) 

w = v(l-y), (3) 

1 Metaphysics, III. 4; Anal. Post. I, 19, et seq. 

2 Nic. Ethics, Book I. Cap. II. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


151 


from the last of which eliminating v, 

wy = 0. (4) 

Whenever, as above, the value of a symbol is given as 0 or 1, it is best 
eliminated by simple substitution. Thus the elimination of x gives 


y(l - z) + z(l - y) = 1; 

or, yz + (1 - y)(l - z) = 0. 

Now adding (4) and (6), and eliminating y, we get 


( 5 ) 

( 6 ) 


w(l — z) = 0, 
w = vz ; 

the interpretation of which is,- The unchangeable and independent being is 
necessarily self- existing. 

Of (5), in its actual form, the interpretation is , -Every being has either been 
produced by an external cause, or it is self-existent. 

9. In Dr. Samuel Clarke’s observations on the above proposition occurs a 
remarkable argument, designed to prove that the material world is not the self- 
existent being above spoken of. The passage to which I refer is the following: 

“If matter be supposed to exist necessarily, then in that necessary existence 
there is either included the power of gravitation, or not. If not, then in a world 
merely material, and in which no intelligent being presides, there never could 
have been any motion; because motion, as has been already shown, and is now 
granted in the question, is not necessary of itself. But if the power of gravitation 
be included in the pretended necessary existence of matter: then, it following 
necessarily that there must be a vacuum (as the incomparable Sir Isaac Newton 
has abundantly demonstrated that there must, if gravitation be an universal 
quality or affection of matter), it follows likewise, that matter is not a necessary 
being. For if a vacuum actually be, then it is plainly more than possible for 
matter not to be.”-(pp. 25, 26). 

It will, upon attentive examination, be found that the actual premises in- 
volved in the above demonstration are the following: 

1st. If matter is a necessary being, either the property of gravitation is 
necessarily present, or it is necessarily absent. 

2nd. If gravitation is necessarily absent, and the world is not subject to any 
presiding Intelligence, motion does not exist. 

3rd. If the property of gravitation is necessarily present, existence of a 
vacuum is necessary. 

4th. If the existence of a vacuum is necessary, matter is not necessary being. 

5th. If matter is a necessary being, the world is not subject to a presiding 
Intelligence. 

6th. Motion exists. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


152 


Of the above premises the first four are expressed in the demonstration; the 
fifth is implied in the connexion of its first and second sentences; and the sixth 
expresses a fact, which the author does not appear to have thought it necessary 
to state, but which is obviously a part of the ground of his reasoning. Let us 
represent the elementary propositions in the following manner: 


Let x 

y 

t 

z 

w 

V 


Matter is a necessary being. 

Gravitation is necessarily present. 

Gravitation is necessarily absent. 

The world is merely material, and not subject to any presiding Intelligence. 
Motion exists. 

A vacuum is necessary. 


Then the system of premises will be represented by the following equations, 
in which q is employed as the symbol of time indefinite: 


x = q{y(l-t) + (l-y)t}. 
tz = q( 1 — w). 

y = qv. 
v = q(l — x). 
x = qz. 
w = 1. 

From which, if we eliminate the symbols q , we have the following system, 


viz.: 

x{yt + (l - y)(l - 1)} = 0. (1) 

tzw = 0. (2) 

2/(1 - v) = 0. (3) 

vx = 0. (4) 

x{l — z) = 0. (5) 

1 - w = 0. (6) 


Now if from these equations we eliminate w, v, z, y, and t, we obtain the 
equation 

x = 0, 

which expresses the proposition, Matter is not a necessary being. This is Dr. 
Clarke’s conclusion. If we endeavour to eliminate any other set of five symbols 
(except the set v, z, y, t, and x, which would give w = 1), we obtain a result 
of the form 0 = 0. It hence appears that there are no other conclusions ex- 
pressive of the absolute truth or falsehood of any of the elementary propositions 
designated by single symbols. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


153 


Of conclusions expressed by equations involving two symbols, there exists 
but the following, viz.:- If the world is merely material, and not subject to a 
presiding Intelligence, gravitation is not necessarily absent. This conclusion is 
expressed by the equation 

tz = 0, whence z = q{ 1 — t). 

If in the above analysis we suppress the concluding premiss, expressing the 
fact of the existence of motion, and leave the hypothetical principles which are 
embodied in the remaining premises untouched, some remarkable conclusions 
follow. To these I shall direct attention in the following chapter. 

10. Of the remainder of Dr. Clarke’s argument I shall briefly state the 
substance and connexion, dwelling only on certain portions of it which are of a 
more complex character than the others, and afford better illustrations of the 
method of this work. 

In Prop. IV. it is shown that the substance or essence of the self-existent 
being is incomprehensible. The tenor of the reasoning employed is, that we are 
ignorant of the essential nature of all other things, -much more, then, of the 
essence of the self-existent being. 

In Prop. V. it is contended that “though the substance or essence of the 
self-existent being is itself absolutely incomprehensible to us, yet many of the 
essential attributes of his nature are strictly demonstrable, as well as his exis- 
tence.” 

In Prop. VI. it is argued that “the self-existent being must of necessity be 
infinite and omnipresent;” and it is contended that his infinity must be “an 
infinity of fulness as well as of immensity.” The ground upon which the demon- 
stration proceeds is, that an absolute necessity of existence must be independent 
of time, place, and circumstance, free from limitation, and therefore excluding 
all imperfection. And hence it is inferred that the self-existent being must be “a 
most simple, unchangeable, incorruptible being, without parts, figure, motion, 
or any other such properties as we find in matter.” 

The premises actually employed may be exhibited as follows: 

1. If a finite being is self-existent, it is a contradiction to suppose it not to 
exist. 

2. A finite being may, without contradiction, be absent from one place. 

3. That which may without contradiction be absent from one place may 
without contradiction be absent from all places. 

4. That which may without contradiction be absent from all places may 
without contradiction be supposed not to exist. 

Let us assume 

x = Finite beings. 

y = Things self-existent. 

2 = Things which it is a contradiction to suppose not to exist. 

w = Things which may be absent without contradiction from one place. 

t = Things which without contradiction may be absent from every place. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 154 

We have on expressing the above, and eliminating the indefinite symbols, 

xy{ 1 - z) = 0. (1) 

x(l -w)= 0. (2) 

w(l-t)= 0. (3) 

tz = 0. (4) 

Eliminating in succession t, w, and z, we get 


xy = 0, 
y= 

the interpretation of which is - Whatever is self-existent is infinite. 

In Prop. vii. it is argued that the self-existent being must of necessity be 
One. The order of the proof is, that the self-existent being is “necessarily exis- 
tent,” that “necessity absolute in itself is simple and uniform, and without any 
possible difference or variety,” that all “variety or difference of existence” im- 
plies dependence; and hence that “whatever exists necessarily is the one simple 
essence of the self-existent being.” 

The conclusion is also made to flow from the following premises: — 

1. If there are two or more necessary and independent beings, either of them 
may be supposed to exist alone. 

2. If either may be supposed to exist alone, it is not a contradiction to 
suppose the other not to exist. 

3. If it is not a contradiction to suppose this, there are not two necessary 
and independent beings. 

Let us represent the elementary propositions as follows :- 

x = there exist two necessary independent beings. 

y = either may be supposed to exist alone. 

2 = it is not a contradiction to suppose the other not to exist. 

We have then, on proceeding as before, 


-y) = o. 

(1) 

y( 1 - z) = 0. 

(2) 

zx = 0. 

(3) 


Eliminating y and z, we have 


Whence, There do not exist two necessary and independent beings. 

11. To the premises upon which the two previous propositions rest, it is well 
known that Bishop Butler, who at the time of the publication of the “Demon- 
stration,” was a student in a non-conformist academy, made objection in some 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


155 


celebrated letters, which, together with Dr. Clarke’s replies to them, are usually 
appended to editions of the work. The real question at issue is the validity 
of the principle, that “whatsoever is absolutely necessary at all is absolutely 
necessary in every part of space, and in every point of duration,” — a principle 
assumed in Dr. Clarke’s reasoning, and explicitly stated in his reply to Butler’s 
first letter. In his second communication Butler says: “I do not conceive that 
the idea of ubiquity is contained in the idea of self-existence, or directly follows 
from it, any otherwise than as whatever exists must exist somewhere .” That 
is to say, necessary existence implies existence in some part of space, but not 
in every part. It does not appear that Dr. Clarke was ever able to dispose 
effectually of this objection. The whole of the correspondence is extremely cu- 
rious and interesting. The objections of Butler are precisely those which would 
occur to an acute mind impressed with the conviction, that upon the sifting 
of first principles, rather than upon any mechanical dexterity of reasoning, the 
successful investigation of truth mainly depends. And the replies of Dr. Clarke, 
although they cannot be admitted as satisfactory, evince, in a remarkable de- 
gree, that peculiar intellectual power which is manifest in the work from which 
the discussion arose. 

12. In Prop. VIII. it is argued that the self-existent and original cause of all 
things must be an Intelligent Being. 

The main argument adduced in support of this proposition is, that as the 
cause is more excellent than the effect, the self-existent being, as the cause and 
original of all things, must contain in itself the perfections of all things; and that 
Intelligence is one of the perfections manifested in a part of the creation. It is 
further argued that this perfection is not a modification of figure, divisibility, 
or any of the known properties of matter; for these are not perfections, but 
limitations. To this is added the a posteriori argument from the manifestation 
of design in the frame of the universe. 

There is appended, however, a distinct argument for the existence of an 
intelligent self-existent being, founded upon the phaenomenal existence of motion 
in the universe. I shall briefly exhibit this proof, and shall apply to it the method 
of the present treatise. 

The argument, omitting unimportant explanations, is as follows:- 

”’Tis evident there is some such a thing as motion in the world; which 
either began at some time or other, or was eternal. If it began in time, then the 
question is granted that the first cause is an intelligent being.... On the contrary, 
if motion was eternal, either it was eternally caused by some eternal intelligent 
being, or it must of itself be necessary and self-existent, or else, without any 
necessity in its own nature, and without any external necessary cause, it must 
have existed from eternity by an endless successive communication. If motion 
was eternally caused by some eternal intelligent being, this also is granting 
the question as to the present dispute. If it was of itself necessary and self- 
existent, then it follows that it must be a contradiction in terms to suppose any 
matter to be at rest. And yet, at the same time, because the determination 
of this self-existent motion must be every way at once, the effect of it would 
be nothing else but a perpetual rest.... But if it be said that motion, without 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


156 


any necessity in its own nature, and without any external necessary cause, has 
existed from eternity merely by an endless successive communication, as Spinoza 
inconsistently enough seems to assert, this I have before shown (in the proof of 
the second general proposition of this discourse) to be a plain contradiction. 
It remains, therefore, that motion must of necessity be originally caused by 
something that is intelligent.” 

The premises of the above argument may be thus disposed: 

1. If motion began in time, the first cause is an intelligent being. 2. If 
motion has existed from eternity, either it has been eternally caused by some 
eternal intelligent being, or it is self-existent, or it must have existed by endless 
successive communication. 

3. If motion has been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being, the 
first cause is an intelligent being. 

4. If it is self-existent, matter is at rest and not at rest. 

5. That motion has existed by endless successive communication, and that 
at the same time it is not self-existent, and has not been eternally caused by 
some eternal intelligent being, is false. 

To express these propositions, let us assume — 


x 

1 — x 

y 

P 

q 

r 

s 


Motion began in time (and therefore) 

Motion has existed from eternity. 

The first cause is an intelligent being. 

Motion has been eternally caused by some eternal intelligent being. 
Motion is self-existent. 

Motion has existed by endless successive communication. 

Matter is at rest. 


The equations of the premises then are — 


x = vy. 

1 — x = v {p (1 — q) (1 — r) + q (1 — p) (1 — r) + r (1 — p) (1 — q)} . 
p = vy. 

q = vs (1 — s) = 0. 
r(l~q)(l-p) = 0 . 

Since, by the fourth equation, q = 0, we obtain, on substituting for q its value 
in the remaining equations, the system 

x — vy, 1 — x = v {p (1 — r) + r (1 — p ) } * 

P = vy, r (1 — p) =0, 

from which eliminating the indefinite symbols v, we have the final reduced 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


157 


system, 


x(i - y) = o, 

(1) 

(1 - x) {pr + (1 - p) (1 - r)} = 0, 

(2) 

pO- - y) = o. 

(3) 

r (1 — p) =0. 

(4) 

We shall first seek the value of y, the symbol involved in Dr. 
First, eliminating x from (1) and (2), we have 

Clarke’s conclusion. 

(1 - y){pr + (1 - p){ 1 - r)} = 0. 

(5) 


Next, to eliminate r from (4) and (5), we have 

r(l ~ p) + (1 - y){pr + (1 - p)(l - r)} = 0, 
{1 - p + (1 - y)p} x (1 - y)(l - p) = 0; 


whence 

(1-J/)(1-P) =0. (6) 

Lastly, eliminating p from (3) and (6), we have 

1 - 2 / = 0 , 

y = i, 

which expresses the required conclusion, The first cause is an intelligent 
being. 

Let us now examine what other conclusions are deducible from the premises. 
If we substitute the value just found for y in the equations (1), (2), (3), (4), 
they are reduced to the following pair of equations, viz., 

(1 — x){pr+ (l -p)(l — r)} = 0, r(l—p)=0. (7) 

Eliminating from these equations x, we have 

r(l — p) = 0, whence r = vp, 

which expresses the conclusion, If motion has existed by endless successive com- 
munication, it has been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being. 

Again eliminating, from the given pair, r, we have 

(1 - x)(l -p) = 0, 
or, 1 — x = vp, 

which expresses the conclusion, If motion has existed from eternity, it has been 
eternally caused by some eternal intelligent being. 

Lastly, from the same original pair eliminating p, we get 


(1 — x)r = 0, 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


158 


which, solved in the form 

1 — x = r( 1 — r), 

gives the conclusion, If motion has existed from eternity, it has not existed 
by an endless successive communication. 

Solved under the form 

r = vx, 

the above equation leads to the equivalent conclusion, If motion exists by an 
endless successive communication, it began in time. 

13. Now it will appear to the reader that the first and last of the above 
four conclusions are inconsistent with each other. The two consequences drawn 
from the hypothesis that motion exists by an endless successive communication, 
viz., 1st, that it has been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being; 2ndly, 
that it began in time, — are plainly at variance. Nevertheless, they are both 
rigorous deductions from the original premises. The opposition between them 
is not of a logical, but of what is technically termed a material, character. This 
opposition might, however, have been formally stated in the premises. We 
might have added to them a formal proposition, asserting that “whatever is 
externally caused by an eternal intelligent being, does not begin in time.” Had 
this been done, no such opposition as now appears in our conclusions could 
have presented itself. Formal logic can only take account of relations which are 
formally expressed (VI. 16); and it may thus, in particular instances, become 
necessary to express, in a formal manner, some connexion among the premises 
which, without actual statement, is involved in the very meaning of the language 
employed. 

To illustrate what has been said, let us add to the equations (2) and (4) the 
equation 

px = 0, 

which expresses the condition above adverted to. We have 

(1 - x){pr + (1 - p)( 1 - r)} + r( 1 — p) +px = 0. (8) 

Eliminating p from this, we find simply 

r = 0, 

which expresses the proposition, Motion does not exist by an endless successive 
communication. If now we substitute for r its value in (8), we have 

(1 — x)(l — p) + px = 0, or, 1 — x = p; 

whence we have the interpretation, If motion has existed from eternity, it has 
been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being; together with the converse 
of that proposition. 

In Prop. IX. it is argued, that “the self-existent and original cause of all 
things is not a necessary agent, but a being endued with liberty and choice.” 
The proof is based mainly upon his possession of intelligence, and upon the 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


159 


existence of final causes, implying design and choice. To the objection that the 
supreme cause operates by necessity for the production of what is best, it is 
replied, that this is a necessity of fitness and wisdom, and not of nature. 

14. In Prop. X. it is argued, that “the self-existent being, the supreme 
cause of all things, must of necessity have infinite power.” The ground of the 
demonstration is, that as “all the powers of all things are derived from him, 
nothing can make any difficulty or resistance to the execution of his will.” It is 
defined that the infinite power of the self-existent being does not extend to the 
“making of a thing which implies a contradiction,” or the doing of that “which 
would imply imperfection (whether natural or moral) in the being to whom such 
power is ascribed,” but that it does extend to the creation of matter, and of an 
immaterial, cogitative substance, endued with a power of beginning motion, and 
with a liberty of will or choice. Upon this doctrine of liberty it is contended that 
we are able to give a satisfactory answer to “that ancient and great question, 
tcoDev to xaxov, what is the cause and original of evil?” The argument on this 
head I shall briefly exhibit, 

“All that we call evil is either an evil of imperfection, as the want of certain 
faculties or excellencies which other creatures have; or natural evil, as pain, 
death, and the like; or moral evil, as all kinds of vice. The first of these is 
not properly an evil; for every power, faculty, or perfection, which any creature 
enjoys, being the free gift of God,. . . it is plain the want of any certain faculty 
or perfection in any kind of creatures, which never belonged to their natures 
is no more an evil to them, than their never having been created or brought 
into being at all could properly have been called an evil. The second kind of 
evil, which we call natural evil, is either a necessary consequence of the former, 
as death to a creature on whose nature immortality was never conferred; and 
then it is no more properly an evil than the former. Or else it is counterpoised 
on the whole with as great or greater good, as the afflictions and sufferings 
of good men, and then also it is not properly an evil; or else, lastly, it is a 
punishment, and then it is a necessary consequence of the third and last kind 
of evil, viz., moral evil. And this arises wholly from the abuse of liberty which 
God gave to His creatures for other purposes, and which it was reasonable and 
fit to give them for the perfection and order of the whole creation. Only they, 
contrary to God’s intention and command, have abused what was necessary to 
the perfection of the whole, to the corruption and depravation of themselves. 
And thus all sorts of evils have entered into the world without any diminution 
to the infinite goodness of the Creator and Governor thereof.” — p. 112. 

The main premises of the above argument may be thus stated: 

1st. All reputed evil is either evil of imperfection, or natural evil, or moral 
evil. 

2nd. Evil of imperfection is not absolute evil. 

3rd. Natural evil is either a consequence of evil of imperfection, or it is 
compensated with greater good, or it is a consequence of moral evil. 

4th. That which is either a consequence of evil of imperfection, or is com- 
pensated with greater good, is not absolute evil. 

5th. All absolute evils are included in reputed evils. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


160 


To express these premises let us assume — 

w = reputed evil. 
x = evil of imperfection. 
y = natural evil. 
z = moral evil. 

p — consequence of evil of imperfection. 
q = compensated with greater good, 
r = consequence of moral evil. 
t = absolute evil. 

Then, regarding the premises as Primary Propositions, of which all the predi- 
cates are particular, and the conjunctions either, or, as absolutely disjunctive, 
we have the following equations: 

w = v {a;(l - y)( 1 -q) + y(l - x){l - z) + z(l - x)(l - y)j 

x = w(l — t). 

y = v {p( 1 - g)(l - r) + q( 1 - p)(l - r) + r( 1 - p)( 1 - q)j 

p{l - q) + q{l - p) =v(l-t). 

t = vw . 

From which, if we separately eliminate the symbol v, we have 

w {1 “ x{\ - y)(l - z) - ?/(l -x)(l-z)- z( 1 -x)(l- 2 /)} = 0, (1) 

xt = 0, (2) 

V {1 - p(l - g)(l — r) - q{ 1 - p)(l - r) - r(l -p)( 1 - q)j = 0, (3) 

{p(l-q)+q(l-p)}t = 0, (4) 

t( l-w)=0. (5) 

Let it be required, first, to find what conclusion the premises warrant us 
in forming respecting absolute evils, as concerns their dependence upon moral 
evils, and the consequences of moral evils. 

For this purpose we must determine t in terms of z and r. 

The symbols w, x, y, p, q must therefore be eliminated. The process is easy, 
as any set of the equations is reducible to a single equation by addition. 
Eliminating w from (1) and (5), we have 

t{ 1 - x(l - 2/)(l - z) - 2/(1 - a;)(l - z) - z( 1 - x)(l - y)} = 0. (6) 

The elimination of p from (3) and (4) gives 

yqr + yqt + yt(l - r)(l - q) = 0. (7) 

The elimination of q from this gives 


yt( 1 - r) = 0. 


(8) 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


161 


The elimination of x between (2) and (6) gives 

t{yz+ (1 - y)(l — z)} = 0. (9) 

The elimination of y from (8) and (9) gives 

f( 1 — z){ 1 — r) = 0. 


This is the only relation existing between the elements t, z, and r. We hence 
get 

0 

1 (1 - *0(1 - r) 

= \ ZT + ~ ^ + H*' 1 “ Z ^ r + 0(1 “ ~ r ) 


the interpretation of which is, Absolute evil is either moral evil, or it is, if not 
moral evil, a consequence of moral evil. 

Any of the results obtained in the process of the above solution furnish us 
with interpretations. Thus from (8) we might deduce 


0 0 0 .,, 0 ., 

* = ^(TTT) = o sr + o (1 - y)r + o (1 - s)(1 - r) 


whence, Absolute evils are either natural evils, which are the consequences of 
moral evils, or they are not natural evils at all. 

A variety of other conclusions may be deduced from the given equations in 
reply to questions which may be arbitrarily proposed. Of such I shall give a few 
examples, without exhibiting the intermediate processes of solution. 

Quest. 1. — Can any relation be deduced from the premises connecting the 
following elements, viz.: absolute evils, consequences of evils of imperfection, 
evils compensated with greater good? 

Ans . — No relation exists. If we eliminate all the symbols but z, p, q, the 
result is 0 = 0. 

Quest. 2. — Is any relation implied between absolute evils, evils of imperfec- 
tion, and consequences of evils of imperfection. 

Ans. — The final relation between x, t, and p is 


0 0 , , 
= Qyr+ 


xt + pt = 0; 


whence 


0 

t = 

p + x 


jj(! -pX 1 -x). 


Therefore, Absolute evils are neither evils of imperfection, nor consequences of 
evils of imperfection. Quest. 3. — Required the relation of natural evils to evils 
of imperfection and evils compensated with greater good. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


162 


We find 


0 

pq 


pqy = 0, 

- <l) + ~P)- 


Therefore, Natural evils are either consequences of evils of imperfection which 
are not compensated with greater good, or they are not consequences of evils of 
imperfection at all. 

Quest. 4. — In what relation do those natural evils which are not moral 
evils stand to absolute evils and the consequences of moral evils? 

If y{\ — z) = s, we find, after elimination, 


fs(l — r) = 0; 


0 


0 0 /, 


Therefore, Natural evils, which are not moral evils, are either absolute evils, 
which are the consequences of moral evils, or they are not absolute evils at all. 

The following conclusions have been deduced in a similar manner. The 
subject of each conclusion will show of what particular things a description was 
required, and the predicate will show what elements it was designed to involve: 


Absolute evils, which are not consequences of moral evils, are moral and not 
natural evils. 

Absolute evils which are not moral evils are natural evils, which are the 
consequences of moral evils. 

Natural evils which are not consequences of moral evils are not absolute evils. 

Lastly, let us seek a description of evils which are not absolute, expressed in 
terms of natural and moral evils. 

We obtain as the final equation, 

1 -t = yz+ jjy(l - z) + jj(l - y)z + (1 - y)( 1 - z). 

The direct interpretation of this equation is a necessary truth, but the reverse 
interpretation is remarkable. Evils which are both natural and moral, and evils 
which are neither natural nor moral, are not absolute evils. 

This conclusion, though it may not express a truth, is certainly involved in 
the given premises, as formally stated. 

15. Let us take from the same argument a somewhat fuller system of 
premises, and let us in those premises suppose that the particles, either, or, 
are not absolutely disjunctive, so that in the meaning of the expression, “ei- 
ther evil of imperfection, or natural evil, or moral evil,” we include whatever 
possesses one or more of these qualities. 

Let the premises be — 

1. All evil (w) is either evil of imperfection (x), or natural evil (y), or moral 
evil ( z ). 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


163 


2. Evil of imperfection (x) is not absolute evil (t). 

3. Natural evil ( y ) is either a consequence of evil of imperfection ( p ), or it 
is compensated with greater good ( q ), or it is a consequence of moral evil (r). 

4. Whatever is a consequence of evil of imperfection ( p ) is not absolute evil 

(<). 

5. Whatever is compensated with greater good ( q ) is not absolute evil ( t ). 

6. Moral evil ( z ) is a consequence of the abuse of liberty («). 

7. That which is a consequence of moral evil (r) is a consequence of the 
abuse of liberty (u). 

8. Absolute evils are included in reputed evils. 

The premises expressed in the usual way give, after the elimination of the 
indefinite symbols v, the following equations: 


w(l - x)(l - y)(l - z ) =0, (1) 

xt = 0, (2) 

¦y(l-p)(l- q)(l-r) =0, (3) 

pt = 0, (4) 

qt = 0, (5) 

z{l - u) = 0, (6) 

r( 1 -«) = <), (7) 

t( 1 - w) = 0. (8) 


Each of these equations satisfies the condition V(1 — V) = 0. 

The following results are easily deduced — 

Natural evil is either absolute evil, which is a consequence of moral evil, or 
it is not absolute evil at all. 

All evils are either absolute evils, which are consequences of the abuse of 
liberty, or they are not absolute evils. 

Natural evils are either evils of imperfection, which are not absolute evils, or 
they are not evils of imperfection at all. 

Absolute evils are either natural evils, which are consequences of the abuse 
of liberty, or they are not natural evils, and at the same time not evils of im- 
perfection. 

Consequences of the abuse of liberty include all natural evils which are ab- 
solute evils, and are not evils of imperfection, with an indefinite remainder of 
natural evils which are not absolute, and of evils which are not natural. 

16. These examples will suffice for illustration. The reader can easily sup- 
ply others if they are needed. We proceed now to examine the most essential 
portions of the demonstration of Spinoza. 

DEFINITIONS. 

1. By a cause of itself (causa sui), I understand that of which the essence 
involves existence, or that of which the nature cannot be conceived except as 
existing. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


164 


2. That thing is said to be finite or bounded in its own kind (in suo genere 
finita) which may be bounded by another thing of the same kind; e. g. Body is 
said to be finite, because we can always conceive of another body greater than 
a given one. So thought is bounded by other thought. But body is not bounded 
by thought, nor thought by body. 

3. By substance, I understand that which is in itself (in se), and is conceived 
by itself (per se concipitur), i.e. , that whose conception does not require to be 
formed from the conception of another thing. 

4. By attribute, I understand that which the intellect perceives in substance, 
as constituting its very essence. 

5. By mode, I understand the affections of substance, or that which is in 
another thing, by which thing also it is conceived. 

6. By God, I understand the Being absolutely infinite, that is the substance 
consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses an eternal and infinite 
essence. 

Explanation. — I say absolutely infinite, not infinite in its own kind. For to 
whatever is only infinite in its own kind we may deny the possession of (some) 
infinite attributes. But when a thing is absolutely infinite, whatsoever expresses 
essence and involves no negation belongs to its essence. 

7. That thing is termed free, which exists by the sole necessity of its own 
nature, and is determined to action by itself alone; necessary , or rather con- 
strained, which is determined by another thing to existence and action, in a 
certain and determinate manner. 

8. By eternity, I understand existence itself, in so far as it is conceived 
necessarily to follow from the sole definition of the eternal thing. 

Explanation. — For such existence, as an eternal truth, is conceived as the 
essence of the thing, and therefore cannot be explained by mere duration or 
time, though the latter should be conceived as without beginning and without 
end. 


AXIOMS. 

1. All things which exist are either in themselves in se or in another thing. 

2. That which cannot be conceived by another thing ought to be conceived 
by itself. 

3. From a given determinate cause the effect necessarily follows, and, con- 
trariwise, if no determinate cause be granted, it is impossible that an effect 
should follow. 

4. The knowledge of the effect depends upon, and involves, the knowledge 
of the cause. 

5. Things which have nothing in common cannot be understood by means 
of each other; or the conception of the one does not involve the conception of 
the other. 

6. A true idea ought to agree with its own object. ( Idea vera debet cum suo 
ideato convenire.) 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


165 


7. Whatever can be conceived as non-existing does not involve existence in its 
essence. Other definitions are implied, and other axioms are virtually assumed, 
in some of the demonstrations. Thus, in Prop. I., “Substance is prior in nature 
to its affections,” the proof of which consists in a mere reference to Defs. 3 
and 5, there seems to be an assumption of the following axiom, viz., “That by 
which a thing is conceived is prior in nature to the thing conceived.” Again, 
in the demonstration of Prop. V. the converse of this axiom is assumed to be 
true. Many other examples of the same kind occur. It is impossible, therefore, 
by the mere processes of Logic, to deduce the whole of the conclusions of the 
first book of the Ethics from the axioms and definitions which are prefixed to 
it, and which are given above. In the brief analysis which will follow, I shall 
endeavour to present in their proper order what appear to me to be the real 
premises, whether formally stated or implied, and shall show in what manner 
they involve the conclusions to which Spinoza was led. 

17. I conceive, then, that in the course of his demonstration, Spinoza effects 
several parallel divisions of the universe of possible existence, as, 

1st. Into things which are in themselves, x, and things which are in some 
other thing, x'\ whence, as these classes of thing together make up the universe, 
we have 


x + x' = 1; (Ax. I.) 
or, x = 1 — x' . 

2nd. Into things which are conceived by themselves, y, and things which are 
conceived through some other thing, y' \ whence 

V = 1 - y' ¦ (Ax. ii) 

3rd. Into substance, z, and modes, z' ; whence 

z = l — z'. (Def. hi. V.) 

4th. Into things free, /, and things necessary,/'; whence 

/ = 1 - /'• (Def. vii.) 

5th. Into things which are causes and self-existent, e, and things caused by 
some other thing, e'; whence 

e = 1 — e'. (Def. i. Ax. vii.) 

And his reasoning proceeds upon the expressed or assumed principle, that these 
divisions are not only parallel, but equivalent. Thus in Def. ill., Substance is 
made equivalent with that which is conceived by itself; whence 

z = y. 

Again, Ax. iv., as it is actually applied by Spinoza, establishes the identity of 
cause with that by which a thing is conceived; whence 


y = e. 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


166 


Again, in Def. VII., things free are identified with things self-existent; whence 

/ = e. 

Lastly, in Def. V mode is made identical with that which is in another thing; 
whence z' = x' , and therefore, 

z = x. 

All these results may be collected together into the following series of equations, 
viz.: 


x=y=z=f=e=l— x' = 1 — y' = 1 — f = 1 — z' = 1 — e' . 

And any two members of this series connected together by the sign of equality 
express a conclusion, whether drawn by Spinoza or not, which is a legitimate 
consequence of his system. Thus the equation 

z = 1 — e , 

expresses the sixth proposition of his system, viz., One substance cannot be 
produced by another. Similarly the equation 

z = e, 

expresses his seventh proposition, viz., “It pertains to the nature of substance 
to exist.” This train of deduction it is unnecessary to pursue. Spinoza applies 
it chiefly to the deduction according to his views of the properties of the Divine 
Nature, having first endeavoured to prove that the only substance is God. In the 
steps of this process, there appear to me to exist some fallacies, dependent chiefly 
upon the ambiguous use of words, to which it will be necessary here to direct 
attention. 18. In Prop. V. it is endeavoured to show, that “There cannot exist 
two or more substances of the same nature or attribute.” The proof is virtually 
as follows: If there are more substances than one, they are distinguished either 
by attributes or modes; if by attributes, then there is only one substance of 
the same attribute; if by modes, then, laying aside these as non-essential, there 
remains no real ground of distinction. Hence there exists but one substance 
of the same attribute. The assumptions here involved are inconsistent with 
those which are found in other parts of the treatise. Thus substance, Def. IV., 
is apprehended by the intellect through the means of attribute. By Def. VI. 
it may have many attributes. One substance may, therefore, conceivably be 
distinguished from another by a difference in some of its attributes, while others 
remain the same. 

In Prop. VIII. it is attempted to show that, All substance is necessarily 
infinite. The proof is as follows. There exists but one substance, of one attribute, 
Prop. V.; and it pertains to its nature to exist, Prop. VII. It will, therefore, 
be of its nature to exist either as finite or infinite. But not as finite, for, by 
Def. II. it would require to be bounded by another substance of the same nature, 
which also ought to exist necessarily, Prop. vil. Therefore, there would be two 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


167 


substances of the same attribute, which is absurd, Prop. V. Substance, therefore, 
is infinite. 

In this demonstration the word “finite” is confounded with the expression, 
“Finite in its own kind,” Def. II. It is thus assumed that nothing can be finite, 
unless it is bounded by another thing of the same kind. This is not consistent 
with the ordinary meaning of the term. Spinoza’s use of the term finite tends to 
make space the only form of substance, and all existing things but affections of 
space, and this, I think, is really one of the ultimate foundations of his system. 

The first scholium applied to the above Proposition is remarkable. I give 
it in the original words: “Quum finitum esse revera sit ex parte negatio, et 
infinitum absoluta affirmatio existentiae alicujus naturae, sequitur ergo ex sola 
Prop. vil. omnem substantiam debere esse infinitam.” Now this is in reality an 
assertion of the principle affirmed by Clarke, and controverted by 

Butler (XIII. 11), that necessary existence implies existence in every part of 
space. Probably this principle will be found to lie at the basis of every attempt 
to demonstrate, a priori, the existence of an Infinite Being. 

From the general properties of substance above stated, and the definition 
of God as the substance consisting of infinite attributes, the peculiar doctrines 
of Spinoza relating to the Divine Nature necessarily follow. As substance is 
self-existent, free, causal in its very nature, the thing in which other things 
are, and by which they are conceived; the same properties are also asserted 
of the Deity. He is self-existent, Prop. XI.; indivisible, Prop. XIII.; the only 
substance, Prop, xiv.; the Being in which all things are, and by which all things 
are conceived, Prop. XV.; free, Prop. XVII.; the immanent cause of all things, 
Prop, xviii. The proof that God is the only substance is drawn from Def. VI., 
which is interpreted into a declaration that “God is the Being absolutely infinite, 
of whom no attribute which expresses the essence of substance can be denied.” 
Every conceivable attribute being thus assigned by definition to Him, and it 
being determined in Prop. V. that there cannot exist two substances of the 
same attribute, it follows that God is the only substance. 

Though the “Ethics” of Spinoza, like a large portion of his other writings, 
is presented in the geometrical form, it does not afford a good praxis for the 
symbolical method of this work. Of course every train of reasoning admits, when 
its ultimate premises are truly determined, of being treated by that method; 
but in the present instance, such treatment scarcely differs, except in the use of 
letters for words, from the processes employed in the original demonstrations. 
Reasoning which consists so largely of a play upon terms defined as equivalent, 
is not often met with; and it is rather on account of the interest attaching to 
the subject, than of the merits of the demonstrations, highly as by some they 
are esteemed, that I have devoted a few pages here to their exposition. 

19. It is not possible, I think, to rise from the perusal of the arguments of 
Clarke and Spinoza without a deep conviction of the futility of all endeavours 
to establish, entirely a priori, the existence of an Infinite Being, His attributes, 
and His relation to the universe. The fundamental principle of all such specula- 
tions, viz., that whatever we can clearly conceive, must exist, fails to accomplish 
its end, even when its truth is admitted. For how shall the finite comprehend 



CHAPTER XIII. CLARKE AND SPINOZA 


168 


the infinite? Yet must the possibility of such conception be granted, and in 
something more than the sense of a mere withdrawal of the limits of phaenom- 
enal existence, before any solid ground can be established for the knowledge, 
a priori, of things infinite and eternal. Spinoza’s affirmation of the reality of 
such knowledge is plain and explicit: “Mens humana adaequatum habet cogni- 
tionem aeternae et infinitae essentiae Dei” (Prop. XLVII., Part 2nd). Let this be 
compared with Prop. XXXIV., Part 2nd: “Omnis idea quae in nobis est absoluta 
sive adaequata et perfecta, vera est;” and with Axiom VI., Part 1st, “Idea vera 
debet cum suo ideato convenire.” Moreover, this species of knowledge is made 
the essential constituent of all other knowledge: “De natura rationis est res sub 
quadam aeternitatis specie percipere” (Prop. XLIV., Cor. II., Part 2nd). Were 
it said, that there is a tendency in the human mind to rise in contemplation 
from the particular towards the universal, from the finite towards the infinite, 
from the transient towards the eternal; and that this tendency suggests to us, 
with high probability, the existence of more than sense perceives or understand- 
ing comprehends; the statement might be accepted as true for at least a large 
number of minds. There is, however, a class of speculations, the character of 
which must be explained in part by reference to other causes, — impatience of 
probable or limited knowledge, so often all that we can really attain to; a desire 
for absolute certainty where intimations sufficient to mark out before us the 
path of duty, but not to satisfy the demands of the speculative intellect, have 
alone been granted to us; perhaps, too, dissatisfaction with the present scene 
of things. With the undue predominance of these motives, the more sober pro- 
cedure of analogy and probable induction falls into neglect. Yet the latter is, 
beyond all question, the course most adapted to our present condition. To infer 
the existence of an intelligent cause from the teeming evidences of surrounding 
design, to rise to the conception of a moral Governor of the world, from the 
study of the constitution and the moral provisions of our own nature;- these, 
though but the feeble steps of an understanding limited in its faculties and its 
materials of knowledge, are of more avail than the ambitious attempt to arrive 
at a certainty unattainable on the ground of natural religion. And as these were 
the most ancient, so are they still the most solid foundations, Revelation being 
set apart, of the belief that the course of this world is not abandoned to chance 
and inexorable fate. 



Chapter XIV 

EXAMPLE OF THE ANALYSIS OF A SYSTEM OF 
EQUATIONS BY THE METHOD OF REDUCTION TO 
A SINGLE EQUIVALENT EQUATION V = 0, 
WHEREIN V SATISFIES THE CONDITION 

V{1 - V) = 0. 


1. Let us take the remarkable system of premises employed in the previous 
Chapter, to prove that “Matter is not a necessary being;” and suppressing the 
6th premiss, viz., Motion exists, — examine some of the consequences which flow 
from the remaining premises. This is in reality to accept as true Dr. Clarke’s 
hypothetical principles; but to suppose ourselves ignorant of the fact of the 
existence of motion. Instances may occur in which such a selection of a portion 
of the premises of an argument may lead to interesting consequences, though it 
is with other views that the present example has been resumed. The premises 
actually employed will be — 

1. If matter is a necessary being, either the property of gravitation is neces- 
sarily present, or it is necessarily absent. 

2. If gravitation is necessarily absent, and the world is not subject to any 
presiding intelligence, motion does not exist. 

3. If gravitation is necessarily present, a vacuum is necessary. 

4. If a vacuum is necessary, matter is not a necessary being. 

5. If matter is a necessary being, the world is not subject to a presiding 
intelligence. 

If, as before, we represent the elementary propositions by the following no- 
tation, viz.: 

x = Matter is a necessary being. 
y = Gravitation is necessarily present. 
w = Motion exists. 
t = Gravitation is necessarily absent. 

z = The world is merely material, and not subject to a presiding intelligence. 
v = A vacuum is necessary. 


169 



CHAPTER XIV. EXAMPLE OF ANALYSIS 


170 


We shall on expression of the premises and elimination of the indefinite class 
symbols (q), obtain the following system of equations: 

xyt + xyt = 0, 
tzw = 0, 
yv = 0, 
vx = 0, 
xz = 0; 

in which for brevity y stands for 1 — y, t for 1 — t, and so on; whence, also, 
1 — t = t, 1 — y = y, &c. 

As the first members of these equations involve only positive terms, we can 
form a single equation by adding them together (VIII. Prop. 2), viz.: 

xyt + xyt + yv + vx + xz + tzw = 0, 

and it remains to reduce the first member so as to cause it to satisfy the condition 
V(1 - V) = 0. 

For this purpose we will first obtain its development with reference to the 
symbols x and y. The result is — 

(t + v + v + z + tzw)xy + (t + v + z + tzw)xy 
+(u + tzw)xy + tzwxy = 0. 

And our object will be accomplished by reducing the four coefficients of the 
development to equivalent forms, themselves satisfying the condition required. 
Now the first coefficient is, since v + v = 1, 

1 + t + z + tzw, 

which reduces to unity (IX. Prop. 1). 

The second coefficient is 


t + v + z + tzw; 


and its reduced form (X. 3) is 

t + tv + tvz + tvzw. 

The third coefficient, v + tzw, reduces by the same method to v + tzwv; and 
the last coefficient tzw needs no reduction. Hence the development becomes 

xy + (t + tv + tvz + tvzw ) xy + (v + tzwv ) xy + tzwxy = 0; (1) 

and this is the form of reduction sought. 

2. Now according to the principle asserted in Prop. III., Chap. X., the whole 
relation connecting any particular set of the symbols in the above equation may 
be deduced by developing that equation with reference to the particular symbols 



CHAPTER XIV. EXAMPLE OF ANALYSIS 


171 


in question, and retaining in the result only those constituents whose coefficients 
are unity. Thus, if x and y are the symbols chosen, we are immediately con- 
ducted to the equation 

xy = 0, 


whence we have 

0 n X 

y = 

with the interpretation, If gravitation is necessarily present, matter is not a 
necessary being. 

Let us next seek the relation between x and w. Developing (1) with respect 
to those symbols, we get 


(y + ty + tvy + tvzy + tvzy) xw + (y + ty + tvy + tvzy) xw 

+ ivy + tzvy + tzy) xw + vyxw = 0. 

The coefficient of xw, and it alone, reduces to unity. For tvzy + tvzy = tvy , and 
tvy + tvy = ty, and ty + ty = y, and lastly, y + y = 1. This is always the mode 
in which such reductions take place. Hence we get 


xw = 0, 

of which the interpretation is, If motion exists, matter is not a necessary being. 
If, in like manner, we develop (1) with respect to x and z, we get the equation 


xz = 0, 



with the interpretation, If matter is a necessary being, the world is merely ma- 
terial, and without a presiding intelligence. 

This, indeed, is only the fifth premiss reproduced, but it shows that there is 
no other relation connecting the two elements which it involves. 

If we seek the whole relation connecting the elements x, w, and y, we find, 
on developing (1) with reference to those symbols, and proceeding as before, 

xy + xwy = 0. 


Suppose it required to determine hence the consequences of the hypothesis, 
“Motion does not exist,” relatively to the questions of the necessity of matter, 
and the necessary presence of gravitation. We find 


w = 



xy 

or, 1 — w = xy + 


-xy 

xy 

1 0 _ 

-xy + xy+ -x; 

-x, with xy = 0. 



CHAPTER XIV. EXAMPLE OF ANALYSIS 


172 


The direct interpretation of the first equation is, If motion does not exist, either 
matter is a necessary being, and gravitation is not necessarily present, or matter 
is not a necessary being. 

The reverse interpretation is, If matter is a necessary being, and gravitation 
not necessary, motion does not exist. 

In exactly the same mode, if we sought the full relation between x, z, and 
w, we should find 

xzw + xz = 0. 


From this we may deduce 


z = xw + -x, 


with xw = 0. 


Therefore, If the world is merely material, and not subject to any presiding 
intelligence, either matter is a necessary being, and motion does not exist, or 
matter is not a necessary being. 

Also, reversely, If matter is a necessary being, and there is no such thing as 
motion, the world is merely material. 

3. We might, of course, extend the same method to the determination of 
the consequences of any complex hypothesis u, such as, “The world is merely 
material, and without any presiding intelligence (z), but motion exists” (w), 
with reference to any other elements of doubt or speculation involved in the 
original premises, such as, “Matter is a necessary being” (x), “Gravitation is a 
necessary quality of matter,” (y). We should, for this purpose, connect with the 
general equation (1) a new equation, 


u = wz, 


reduce the system thus formed to a single equation, V = 0, in which V satisfies 
the condition V(1 — V) = 0, and proceed as above to determine the relation 
between u, x, and y, and finally it as a developed function of x and y. But 
it is very much better to adopt the methods of Chapters VIII. and IX. I shall 
here simply indicate a few results, with the leading steps of their deduction, and 
leave their verification to the reader’s choice. 

In the problem last mentioned we find, as the relation connecting x, y, w, 
and z, 

xw + xwy + xwyz = 0. 

And if we write u = xy, and then eliminate the symbols x and y by the general 
problem, Chap. IX., we find 

xu + xyu = 0, 


whence 


u = -xy - 

0 y 


0 xy - 


wz = 


0 

0 


x with xy = 0. 


wherefore 



CHAPTER XIV. EXAMPLE OF ANALYSIS 


173 


Hence, If the world is merely material, and without a presiding intelligence, and 
at the same time motion exists, matter is not a necessary being. 

Now it has before been shown that if motion exists, matter is not a necessary 
being , so that the above conclusion tells us even less than we had before ascer- 
tained to be (inferentially) true. Nevertheless, that conclusion is the proper and 
complete answer to the question which was proposed, which was, to determine 
simply the consequences of a certain complex hypothesis. 4. It would thus be 
easy, even from the limited system of premises before us, to deduce a great 
variety of additional inferences, involving, in the conditions which are given, 
any proposed combinations of the elementary propositions. If the condition is 
one which is inconsistent with the premises, the fact will be indicated by the 
form of the solution. The value which the method will assign to the combina- 
tion of symbols expressive of the proposed condition will be 0. If, on the other 
hand, the fulfilment of the condition in question imposes no restriction upon the 
propositions among which relation is sought, so that every combination of those 
propositions is equally possible, — the fact will also be indicated by the form of 
the solution. Examples of each of these cases are subjoined. 

If in the ordinary way we seek the consequences which would flow from the 
condition that matter is a necessary being , and at the same time that motion 
exists , as affecting the Propositions, The world is merely material, and without 
a presiding intelligence , and, Gravitation is necessarily present, we shall obtain 
the equation 

xw = 0, 

which indicates that the condition proposed is inconsistent with the premises, 
and therefore cannot be fulfilled. 

If we seek the consequences which would flow from the condition that Matter 
is not a necessary being , and at the same time that Motion does exist, with refer- 
ence to the same elements as above, viz., the absence of a presiding intelligence, 
and the necessity of gravitation, -we obtain the following result, 

, , 0 0 . , 0 . , 0 . 

(1 - x)w = -yz + -y(l -z) + -(1 - y)z + - (1 — 2/)(l - z), 

which might literally be interpreted as follows: 

If matter is not a necessary being, and motion exists, then either the world 
is merely material and without a presiding intelligence, and gravitation is nec- 
essary, or one of these two results follows without the other, or they both fail of 
being true. Wherefore of the four possible combinations, of which some one is 
true of necessity, and of which of necessity one only can be true, it is affirmed 
that any one may be true. Such a result is a truism — a mere necessary truth. 
Still it contains the only answer which can be given to the question proposed. 

I do not deem it necessary to vindicate against the charge of laborious trifling 
these applications. It may be requisite to enter with some fulness into details 
useless in themselves, in order to establish confidence in general principles and 
methods. When this end shall have been accomplished in the subject of the 
present inquiry, let all that has contributed to its attainment, but has afterwards 
been found superfluous, be forgotten. 



Chapter XV 

THE ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC AND ITS MODERN 
EXTENSIONS, EXAMINED BY THE METHOD OF 
THIS TREATISE. 


1. The logical system of Aristotle, modified in its details, but unchanged in its 
essential features, occupies so important a place in academical education, that 
some account of its nature, and some brief discussion of the leading problems 
which it presents, seem to be called for in the present work. It is, I trust, in no 
narrow or harshly critical spirit that I approach this task. My object, indeed, 
is not to institute any direct comparison between the time-honoured system of 
the schools and that of the present treatise; but, setting truth above all other 
considerations, to endeavour to exhibit the real nature of the ancient doctrine, 
and to remove one or two prevailing misapprehensions respecting its extent and 
sufficiency. 

That which may be regarded as essential in the spirit and procedure of the 
Aristotelian, and of all cognate systems of Logic, is the attempted classification 
of the allowable forms of inference, and the distinct reference of those forms, col- 
lectively or individually, to some general principle of an axiomatic nature, such 
as the “dictum of Aristotle:” Whatsoever is affirmed or denied of the genus may 
in the same sense be affirmed or denied of any species included under that genus. 
Concerning such general principles it may, I think, be observed, that they either 
state directly, but in an abstract form, the argument which they are supposed to 
elucidate, and, so stating that argument, affirm its validity; or involve in their 
expression technical terms which, after definition, conduct us again to the same 
point, viz., the abstract statement of the supposed allowable forms of inference. 
The idea of classification is thus a pervading element in those systems. Further- 
more, they exhibit Logic as resolvable into two great branches, the one of which 
is occupied with the treatment of categorical, the other with that of hypotheti- 
cal or conditional propositions. The distinction is nearly identical with that of 
primary and secondary propositions in the present work. The discussion of the 
theory of categorical propositions is, in all the ordinary treatises of Logic, much 
more full and elaborate than that of hypothetical propositions, and is occupied 
partly with ancient scholastic distinctions, partly with the canons of deductive 
inference. To the latter application only is it necessary to direct attention here. 


174 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


175 


2. Categorical propositions are classed under the four following heads, viz.: 


1st. Universal affirmative Propositions: 
2nd. Universal negative 
3rd. Particular affirmative 

4th. Particular negative 


TYPE 

All y’s are X’s. 

No y’s are X’s. 

Some U’s are X’s. 
Some P’s are not X’s. 


To these forms, four others have recently been added, so as to constitute in 
the whole eight forms (see the next article) susceptible, however, of reduction 
to six, and subject to relations which have been discussed with great fulness 
and ability by Professor De Morgan, in his Formal Logic. A scheme somewhat 
different from the above has been given to the world by Sir W. Hamilton, and 
is made the basis of a method of syllogistic inference, which is spoken of with 
very high respect by authorities on the subject of Logic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

The processes of Formal Logic, in relation to the above system of proposi- 
tions, are described as of two kinds, viz., “Conversion” and “Syllogism.” By 
Conversion is meant the expression of any proposition of the above kind in an 
equivalent form, but with a reversed order of terms. By Syllogism is meant the 
deduction from two such propositions having a common term, whether subject 
or predicate, of some third proposition inferentially involved in the two, and 
forming the “conclusion.” It is maintained by most writers on Logic, that these 
processes, and according to some, the single process of Syllogism, furnish the 
universal types of reasoning, and that it is the business of the mind, in any train 
of demonstration, to conform itself, whether consciously or unconsciously, to the 
particular models of the processes which have been classified in the writings of 
logicians. 

3. The course which I design to pursue is to show how these processes of 
Syllogism and Conversion may be conducted in the most general manner upon 
the principles of the present treatise, and, viewing them thus in relation to a 
system of Logic, the foundations of which, it is conceived, have been laid in the 
ultimate laws of thought, to seek to determine their true place and essential 
character. 

The expressions of the eight fundamental types of proposition in the language 
of symbols are as follows: 


1. All y’s are X’s, 

2. No y’s are X’s, 

3. Some y’s are X’s, 

4. Some y’s are not-X’s, 

5. All not-y’s are X’s, 

6. No not-y’s are X’s, 

7. Some not-y’s are X’s, 

8. Some not-y’s are not-. 


y = vx. 

V = v( 1 - x). 
vy = vx. 
vy = v(l — x). 

1 — y = vx. (1) 

1 — y = v(l — x). 
v(l — y) = vx. 

’s,i>(l — y) = u(l — x). 


In referring to these forms, it will be convenient to apply, in a sense shortly to 
be explained, the epithets of logical quantity, “universal” and “particular,” and 

1 Thomson’s Outlines of the Laws of Thought, p. 177. 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


176 


of quality, “affirmative” and “negative,” to the terms of propositions, and not 
to the propositions themselves. We shall thus consider the term “All Y’s,” as 
universal-affirmative; the term “Y’s,” or “Some h’s,” as particular-affirmative; 
the term “All not- Y’s,” as universal-negative; the term “Some not-Y’s,” as 
particular-negative. The expression “No Y’s,’ 5 is not properly a term of a propo- 
sition, for the true meaning of the proposition, “No Y’s are X’s,” is “All Y’s 
are not-X’s.” The subject of that proposition is, therefore, universal-affirmative, 
the predicate particular-negative. That there is a real distinction between the 
conceptions of “men” and “not men” is manifest. This distinction is all that I 
contemplate when applying as above the designations of affirmative and nega- 
tive, without, however, insisting upon the etymological propriety of the applica- 
tion to the terms of propositions. The designations positive anil privative would 
have been more appropriate, but the former term is already employed in a fixed 
sense in other parts of this work. 

4. From the symbolical forms above given the laws of conversion immediately 
follow. Thus from the equation 


y = vx, 

representing the proposition, “All Y’s are X’s,” we deduce, on eliminating v, 

y{ 1 - x) = 0, 

which gives by solution with reference to 1 — x, 

0 , 

1 ~ x = o(i-y); 

the interpretation of which is, 

All not-X’s are not-Y’s. 

This is an example of what is called “negative conversion.” In like manner, 
the equation 

V = v{ 1 - x), 

representing the proposition, “No Y’s are X’s,” gives 

x = 

the interpretation of which is, “No X’s are Y’s.” This is an example of what 
is termed simple conversion; though it is in reality of the same kind as the 
conversion exhibited in the previous example. All the examples of conversion 
which have been noticed by logicians are either of the above kind, or of that 
which consists in the mere transposition of the terms of a proposition, without 
altering their quality, as when we change 


vy = vx, representing, Some Y’s are X’s, 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


177 


into 

vx — vy, representing, Some A’s are Y’ s; 

or they involve a combination of those processes with some auxiliary process of 
limitation, as when from the equation 

y = vx, representing, All Y’s are A’s, 
we deduce on multiplication by v, 

vy — vx, representing, Some V’s are A’s, 

and hence 

vx = vy, representing, Some A’s are y’s. 

In this example, the process of limitation precedes that of transposition. 

From these instances it is seen that conversion is a particular application of 
a much more general process in Logic, of which many examples have been given 
in this work. That process has for its object the determination of any element 
in any proposition, however complex, as a logical function of the remaining ele- 
ments. Instead of confining our attention to the subject and predicate, regarded 
as simple terms, we can take any element or any combination of elements enter- 
ing into either of them; make that element, or that combination, the “subject” 
of a new proposition; and determine what its predicate shall be, in accordance 
with the data afforded to us. It may be remarked, that even the simple forms of 
propositions enumerated above afford some ground for the application of such a 
method, beyond what the received laws of conversion appear to recognise. Thus 
the equation 

y = vx, representing, All y’s are A’s, 
gives us, in addition to the proposition before deduced, the three following: 

1st. y( 1 — x) = 0. There are no y’s that are not-A’s. 

2nd. 1 — y = jjx + (1 — x). Things that are not-y’s include all 

things that are not-A’s, and an 
indefinite remainder of things 
that are A’s. 

3rd. x = y + jj(l — y). Things that are A’s include all things 

that are y’s, and an indefinite 
remainder of things that are not- 

y’s. 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


178 


These conclusions, it is true, merely place the given proposition in other and 
equivalent forms, but such and no more is the office of the received mode of 
“negative conversion.” 

Furthermore, these processes of conversion are not elementary, but they are 
combinations of processes more simple than they, more immediately dependent 
upon the ultimate laws and axioms which govern the use of the symbolical in- 
strument of reasoning. This remark is equally applicable to the case of Syllogism, 
which we proceed next to consider. 

5. The nature of syllogism is best seen in the particular instance. Suppose 
that we have the propositions, 


All X’s are Y’s, 

All F’s are Z’s. 

From these we may deduce the conclusion, 

All A’s are Z’s. 

This is a syllogistic inference. The terms X and Z are called the extremes, and 
y is called the middle term. The function of the syllogism generally may now 
be defined. Given two propositions of the kind whose species are tabulated in 
(1), and involving one middle or common term Y, which is connected in one of 
the propositions with an extreme X, in the other with an extreme Z; required 
the relation connecting the extremes X and Z. The term Y may appear in its 
affirmative form, as, All y’s, Some y’s; or in its negative form, as, All not-y’s, 
Some not-y’s; in either proposition, without regard to the particular form which 
it assumes in the other. 

Nothing is easier than in particular instances to resolve the Syllogism by the 
method of this treatise. Its resolution is, indeed, a particular application of the 
process for the reduction of systems of propositions. Taking the examples above 
given, we have, 


x = vy, 
y = v'z\ 

whence by substitution, 

x = vv'z, 

which is interpreted into 

All A’s are Z’s. 

Or, proceeding rigorously in accordance with the method developed in (VIII. 7), 
we deduce 

x{l -y) = 0, y(l ~ z) = 0. 

Adding these equations, and eliminating y , we have 


x{\ — z) = 0; 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


179 


whence x = ^z, or, All X’s are Z’s. 

And in the same way may any other case be treated. 

6. Quitting, however, the consideration of special examples, let us examine 
the general forms to which all syllogism may be reduced. 

Proposition I. 

To deduce the general rules of Syllogism. 

By the general rules of Syllogism, I here mean the rules applicable to premises 
admitting of every variety both of quantity and of quality in their subjects and 
predicates, except the combination of two universal terms in the same proposi- 
tion. The admissible forms of propositions are therefore those of which a tabular 
view is given in (1). 

Let X and Y be the elements or things entering into the first premiss, Z and 
Y those involved in the second. Two cases, fundamentally different in character, 
will then present themselves. The terms involving Y will either be of like or 
of unlike quality , those terms being regarded as of like quality when they both 
speak of “Y’s,” or both of “Not-y’s,” as of unlike quality when one of them 
speaks of “y’s,” and the other of “Not-y’s.” Any pair of premises, in which the 
former condition is satisfied, may be represented by the equations 

vx = v'y, (1) 

wz = w'y, (2) 

for we can employ the symbol y to represent either “All y’s,” or “All not-y’s,” 
since the interpretation of the symbol is purely conventional. If we employ y 
in the sense of “All not-y’s,” then 1 — y will represent “All y’s,” and no other 
change will be introduced. An equal freedom is permitted with respect to the 
symbols x and z, so that the equations (1) and (2) may, by properly assigning 
the interpretations of x, y, and z, be made to represent all varieties in the 
combination of premises dependent upon the quality of the respective terms. 
Again, by assuming proper interpretations to the symbols v, v', w, w', in those 
equations, all varieties with reference to quantity may also be represented. Thus, 
if we take v = 1, and represent by v' a class indefinite, the equation (1) will 
represent a universal proposition according to the ordinary sense of that term, 
i. e., a proposition with universal subject and particular predicate. We may, in 
fact, give to subject and predicate in either premiss whatever quantities (using 
this term in the scholastic sense) we please, except that by hypothesis, they 
must not both be universal. The system (1), (2), represents, therefore, with 
perfect generality, the possible combinations of premises which have like middle 
terms. 

7. That our analysis may be as general as the equations to which it is 
applied, let us, by the method of this work, eliminate y from (1) and (2), and 
seek the expressions for x, 1 — x, and vx, in terms of 2 and of the symbols v, 
v 1 , w, w'. The above will include all the possible forms of the subject of the 
conclusion. The form i>(l — x) is excluded, inasmuch as we cannot from the 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


180 


interpretation vx = Some X’s, given in the premises, interpret u(l — x) as Some 
not-X’s. The symbol v, when used in the sense of “some,” applies to that term 
only with which it is connected in the premises. 

The results of the analysis are as follows: 

x = \yv'ww' + -{ut/(l — w) (l — w') + ww ' (l — v ) (l — v') + (l — v) (l — w )}] 2 : 

+ - w') + 1 - c}(i - 2 :), (i.) 

1 — X = [v(l — v'){ww' + (l — w) (l — w') } + v(\ — w)w' 

+ (i — w) (i — w') + ww' (l — V ) (l — v') + (l — l>) (l — ll>)}] 2 : 

+ [u(l — w)w' + jj{ui/(l — w') + 1 — zj}] (l — z), (II.) 

vx = {vv'ww' + —1:1/ (l — w) (l — w')}z + -(l — vj ')(1 — 2 :). (HI.) 

Each of these expressions involves in its second member two terms, of one 
of which 2 : is a factor, of the other 1 — z. But syllogistic inference does not, as a 
matter of form, admit of contrary classes in its conclusion, as of Z’s and not-Z’s 
together. 

We must, therefore, in order to determine the rules of that species of in- 
ference, ascertain under what conditions the second members of any of our 
equations are reducible to a single term. 

The simplest form is (HI-), and it is reducible to a single term if w' = 1. 
The equation then becomes 

vx = vv'wz, (3) 

the first member is identical with the extreme in the first premiss; the second is 
of the same quantity and quality as the extreme in the second premiss. For since 
w' = 1, the second member of (2), involving the middle term y , is universal; 
therefore, by the hypothesis, the first member is particular, and therefore, the 
second member of (3), involving the same symbol w in its coefficient, is particular 
also. Hence we deduce the following law. 

Condition of Inference.- One middle term, at least, universal. 

Rule of Inference. — Equate the extremes. 

From an analysis of the equations (I.) and (II.), it will further appear, that 
the above is the only condition of syllogistic inference when the middle terms 
are of like quality. Thus the second member of (I.) reduces to a single term, if 
w' = 1 and v = 1; and the second member of (II.) reduces to a single term, if 
w’ = 1, v = 1, w = 1. In each of these cases, it is necessary that w' = 1, the 
solely sufficient condition before assigned. 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


181 


Consider, secondly, the case in which the middle terms are of unlike quality. 
The premises may then be represented under the forms 

vx = v'y, (4) 

wz = w (l — y)\ (5) 

and if, as before, we eliminate y, and determine the expressions of x, 1 — x, and 
vx, we get 

x = [vv'(l — w)w' + jj{«tti/(l — v) + (1 — u)(l — t/)(l — w ) 

+ t/(l — iu)(l — w')}] 

+ [vv'w' + ^{(1 — u)(l — v') + v'(l — to 7 )}] (1 — z). (IV.) 

I — x = [ww'v + u(l — t/)(l — w) + -{wru/(l — V ) 

+ (1 — u)(l — i/)(l — w) + v'(l — tu)(l — w')}] z 
+ [v(l - v') + ^{v'(l - w') + (1 - v)(l - u')}] (1 ^ z). (V.) 

vx = {uf/(l — w)w' + -uu 7 (l — ru)(l — w')}z 

+ {vv'w' + ^uu'(l — u; , )}(l — z). (VI.) 

Now the second member of (VI.) reduces to a single term relatively to z, if 
w = 1, giving 

vx = {vv'w 1 + -vv'(l — u/)}(l — z); 

the second member of which is opposite, both in quantity and quality, to the 
corresponding extreme, wz, in the second premiss. For since w = 1 , wz is 
universal. But the factor vv' indicates that the term to which it is attached 
is particular, since by hypothesis v and v' are not both equal to 1. Hence we 
deduce the following law of inference in the case of like middle terms: 

First Condition of Inference. — .4f least one universal extreme. 

Rule of Inference. — Change the quantity and quality of that extreme, 
and equate the result to the other extreme. 

Moreover, the second member of (V.) reduces to a single term if v 1 = 1, 
w' = 1; it then gives 

1 — x = {vw + -(1 — u)w}z. 

Now since v' = 1, w' = 1, the middle terms of the premises are both universal, 
therefore the extremes vx, wz, are particular. But in the conclusion the extreme 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


182 


involving x is opposite, both in quantity and quality, to the extreme vx in the 
first premiss, while the extreme involving 3 agrees both in quantity and quality 
with the corresponding extreme wz in the second premiss. Hence the following 
general law: 

Second Condition of Inference. — Two universal middle terms. 

Rule of Inference. — Change the quantity and quality of either extreme, 
and equate the result to the other extreme unchanged. 

There are in the case of unlike middle terms no other conditions or rules of 
syllogistic inference than the above. Thus the equation (IV.), though reducible 
to the form of a syllogistic conclusion, when w = 1 and v = 1 , does not thereby 
establish a new condition of inference; since, by what has preceded, the single 
condition v = 1 , or w = 1 , would suffice. 

8. The following examples will sufficiently illustrate the general rules of 
syllogism above given: 


1. All Y’s are X’s. 

All Z’s are V’s. 

This belongs to Case 1. All Y’s is the universal middle term. The extremes 
equated give as the conclusion 


All Z’s are X’s; 

the universal term, All Z’s, becoming the subject; the particular term (some) 
X’s, the predicate. 


2. All X’s are Y’s. 

No Z’s are V’s. 

The proper expression of these premises is 

All X’s are y’s. 

All Z’s are not-V’s. 

They belong to Case 2, and satisfy the first condition of inference. The middle 
term, y’s, in the first premiss, is particular-affirmative; that in the second pre- 
miss, not-V’s, particular-negative. If we take All Z’s as the universal extreme, 
and change its quantity and quality according to the rule, we obtain the term 
Some not-Z’s, and this equated with the other extreme, All X’s, gives, 

All X’s are not-Xs, i. e., No X’s are Z’s. 

If we commence with the other universal extreme, and proceed similarly, we 
obtain the equivalent result, 


No Z’s are X’s. 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


183 


3. All Y' s are X’s. 

All not-X’s are Z’s. 

Here also the middle terms are unlike in quality. The premises therefore belong 
to Case 2, and there being two universal middle terms, the second condition of 
inference is satisfied. If by the rule we change the quantity and quality of the 
first extreme, (some) X’s, we obtain All not-X’s, which, equated with the other 
extreme, gives 

All not-X’s are Z’s. 

The reverse order of procedure would give the equivalent result, 

All not-Xs are X’s. 

The conclusions of the two last examples would not be recognised as valid 
in the scholastic system of Logic, which virtually requires that the subject of 
a proposition should be affirmative. They are, however, perfectly legitimate 
in themselves, and the rules by which they are determined form undoubtedly 
the most general canons of syllogistic inference. The process of investigation 
by which they are deduced will probably appear to be of needless complexity; 
and it is certain that they might have been obtained with greater facility, and 
without the aid of any symbolical instrument whatever. It was, however, my 
object to conduct the investigation in the most general manner, and by an 
analysis thoroughly exhaustive. With this end in view, the brevity or prolixity 
of the method employed is a matter of indifference. Indeed the analysis is 
not properly that of the syllogism, but of a much more general combination of 
propositions; for we are permitted to assign to the symbols v, v 1 , w, w\ any 
class-interpretations that we please. To illustrate this remark, I will apply the 
solution (I.) to the following imaginary case: 

Suppose that a number of pieces of cloth striped with different colours were 
submitted to inspection, and that the two following observations were made 
upon them: 

1st. That every piece striped with white and green was also striped with 
black and yellow, and vice versa. 

2nd. That every piece striped with red and orange was also striped with 
blue and yellow, and vice versa. Suppose it then required to determine how 
the pieces marked with green stood affected with reference to the colours white, 
black, red, orange, and blue. 

Here if we assume v = white, x = green, v ’ = black, y = yellow, w = red, 
2 = orange, w’ = blue, the expression of our premises will be 

vx = v’y , 
wz = w'y , 

agreeing with the system (1) (2). The equation (I.) then leads to the following 
conclusion: 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


184 


Pieces striped with green are either striped with orange, white, black, red, 
and blue, together, all pieces possessing which character are included in those 
striped with green; or they are striped with orange, white, and black, but not 
with red or blue; or they are striped with orange, red, and blue, but not with 
white or black; or they are striped with orange, but not with white or red; or 
they are striped with white and black, but not with blue or orange; or they are 
striped neither with white nor orange. 

Considering the nature of this conclusion, neither the symbolical expression 
(I.) by which it is conveyed, nor the analysis by which that expression is deduced, 
can be considered as needlessly complex. 

9. The form in which the doctrine of syllogism has been presented in this 
chapter affords ground for an important observation. We have seen that in 
each of its two great divisions the entire discussion is reducible, so far, at least, 
as concerns the determination of rules and methods, to the analysis of a pair 
of equations, viz., of the system (1), (2), when the premises have like middle 
terms, and of the system (4), (5), when the middle terms are unlike. Moreover, 
that analysis has been actually conducted by a method founded upon certain 
general laws deduced immediately from the constitution of language, Chap. II. 
confirmed by the study of the operations of the human mind, Chap. III., and 
proved to be applicable to the analysis of all systems of equations whatever, 
by which propositions, or combinations of propositions, can be represented, 
Chap. VIII. Here, then, we have the means of definitely resolving the question, 
whether syllogism is indeed the fundamental type of reasoning, — whether the 
study of its laws is co-extensive with the study of deductive logic. For if it be so, 
some indication of the fact must be given in the systems of equations upon the 
analysis of which we have been engaged. It cannot be conceived that syllogism 
should be the one essential process of reasoning, and yet the manifestation of 
that process present nothing indicative of this high quality of pre-eminence. No 
sign, however, appears that the discussion of all systems of equations expressing 
propositions is involved in that of the particular system examined in this chapter. 
And yet writers on Logic have been all but unanimous in their assertion, not 
merely of the supremacy, but of the universal sufficiency of syllogistic inference 
in deductive reasoning. The language of Archbishop Whately, always clear 
and definite, and on the subject of Logic entitled to peculiar attention, is very 
express on this point. “For Logic,” he says, “which is, as it were, the Grammar 
of Reasoning, does not bring forward the regular Syllogism as a distinct mode of 
argumentation, designed to be substituted for any other mode; but as the form 
to which all correct reasoning may be ultimately reduced.” 2 And Mr. Mill, in a 
chapter of his System of Logic, entitled, “Of Ratiocination or Syllogism,” having 
enumerated the ordinary forms of syllogism, observes, “All valid ratiocination, 
all reasoning by which from general propositions previously admitted, other 
propositions, equally or less general, are inferred, may be exhibited in some of 
the above forms.” And again: “We are therefore at liberty, in conformity with 
the general opinion of logicians, to consider the two elementary forms of the first 

2 Elements of Logic, p. 13, ninth edition. 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


185 


figure as the universal types of all correct ratiocination.” In accordance with 
these views it has been contended that the science of Logic enjoys an immunity 
from those conditions of imperfection and of progress to which all other sciences 
are subject; 3 and its origin from the travail of one mighty mind of old has, by a 
somewhat daring metaphor, been compared to the mythological birth of Pallas. 

As Syllogism is a species of elimination, the question before us manifestly 
resolves itself into the two following ones: — 1st. Whether all elimination is re- 
ducible to Syllogism; 2ndly. Whether deductive reasoning can with propriety be 
regarded as consisting only of elimination. I believe, upon careful examination, 
the true answer to the former question to be, that it is always theoretically pos- 
sible so to resolve and combine propositions that elimination may subsequently 
be effected by the syllogistic canons, but that the process of reduction would 
in many instances be constrained and unnatural, and would involve operations 
which are not syllogistic. To the second question I reply, that reasoning cannot, 
except by an arbitrary restriction of its meaning, be confined to the process of 
elimination. No definition can suffice which makes it less than the aggregate 
of the methods which are founded upon the laws of thought, as exercised upon 
propositions; and among those methods, the process of elimination, eminently 
important as it is, occupies only a place. 

Much of the error, as I cannot but regard it, which prevails respecting the 
nature of the Syllogism and the extent of its office, seems to be founded in 
a disposition to regard all those truths in Logic as primary which possess the 
character of simplicity and intuitive certainty, without inquiring into the relation 
which they sustain to other truths in the Science, or to general methods in 
the Art, of Reasoning. Aristotle’s dictum de omni et nullo is a self-evident 
principle, but it is not found among those ultimate laws of the reasoning faculty 
to which all other laws, however plain and self-evident, admit of being traced, 
and from which they may in strictest order of scientific evolution be deduced. 
For though of every science the fundamental truths are usually the most simple 
of apprehension, yet is not that simplicity the criterion by which their title to 
be regarded as fundamental must be judged. This must be sought for in the 
nature and extent of the structure which they are capable of supporting. Taking 
this view, Leibnitz appears to me to have judged correctly when he assigned to 
the “principle of contradiction” a fundamental place in Logic; 4 for we have seen 
the consequences of that law of thought of which it is the axiomatic expression 
(III. 15). But enough has been said upon the nature of deductive inference and 
upon its constitutive elements. The subject of induction may probably receive 
some attention in another part of this work. 

10. It has been remarked in this chapter that the ordinary treatment of hy- 
pothetical, is much more defective than that of categorical, propositions. What 
is commonly termed the hypothetical syllogism appears, indeed, to be no syllo- 
gism at all. 

Let the argument — 

3 Introduction to Kant’s “Logik.” 

4 Nouveaux Essais sur l’entendement humain. Liv. IV. cap. 2. Theodicee Pt. I. sec. 44. 



CHAPTER XV. ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC 


186 


If A is B, C is D , 

But A is -B, 

Therefore C is D, 
be put in the form — 

If the proposition X is true, Y is true, 

But X is true, 

Therefore Y is true; 

wherein by X is meant the proposition A is B , and by Y, the proposition C 
is D. It is then seen that the premises contain only two terms or elements, 
while a syllogism essentially involves three. The following would be a genuine 
hypothetical syllogism: 

If X is true, Y is true; 

If Y is true, Z is true; 

If X is true, Z is true. 

After the discussion of secondary propositions in a former part of this work, 
it is evident that the forms of hypothetical syllogism must present, in every re- 
spect, an exact counterpart to those of categorical syllogism. Particular Propo- 
sitions, such as, “Sometimes if X is true, Y is true,” may be introduced, and the 
conditions and rules of inference deduced in this chapter for categorical syllo- 
gisms may, without abatement, be interpreted to meet the corresponding cases 
in hypotheticals. 

11. To what final conclusions are we then led respecting the nature and 
extent of the scholastic logic? I think to the following: that it is not a science, 
but a collection of scientific truths, too incomplete to form a system of them- 
selves, and not sufficiently fundamental to serve as the foundation upon which 
a perfect system may rest. It does not, however, follow, that because the logic 
of the schools has been invested with attributes to which it has no just claim, 
it is therefore undeserving of regard. A system which has been associated with 
the very growth of language, which has left its stamp upon the greatest ques- 
tions and the most famous demonstrations of philosophy, cannot be altogether 
unworthy of attention. Memory, too, and usage, it must be admitted, have 
much to do with the intellectual processes; and there are certain of the canons 
of the ancient logic which have become almost inwoven in the very texture of 
thought in cultured minds. But whether the mnemonic forms, in which the 
particular rules of conversion and syllogism have been exhibited, possess any 
real utility, — whether the very skill which they are supposed to impart might 
not, with greater advantage to the mental powers, be acquired by the unassisted 
efforts of a mind left to its own resources, — are questions which it might still be 
not unprofitable to examine. As concerns the particular results deduced in this 
chapter, it is to be observed, that they are solely designed to aid the inquiry 
concerning the nature of the ordinary or scholastic logic, and its relation to a 
more perfect theory of deductive reasoning. 



Chapter XVI 


ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES 


1. Before the expiration of another year just two centuries will have rolled 
away since Pascal solved the first known question in the theory of Probabilities, 
and laid, in its solution, the foundations of a science possessing no common 
share of the attraction which belongs to the more abstract of mathematical 
speculations. The problem which the Chevalier de Mere, a reputed gamester, 
proposed to the recluse of Port Royal (not yet withdrawn from the interests of 
science^By the more distracting contemplation of the “greatness and the misery 
of man”), was the first of a long series of problems, destined to call into existence 
new methods in mathematical analysis, and to render valuable service in the 
practical concerns of life. Nor does the interest of the subject centre merely 
in its mathematical connexion, or its associations of utility. The attention is 
repaid which is devoted to the theory of Probabilities as an independent object 
of speculation, — to the fundamental modes in which it has been conceived, — 
to the great secondary principles which, as in the contemporaneous science of 
Mechanics, have gradually been annexed to it, — and, lastly, to the estimate of 
the measure of perfection which has been actually attained. I speak here of that 
perfection which consists in unity of conception and harmony of processes. Some 
of these points it is designed very briefly to consider in the present chapter. 

2. A distinguished writer 1 2 has thus stated the fundamental definitions of the 
science: 

“The probability of an event is the reason we have to believe that it has 
taken place, or that it will take place.” 

“The measure of the probability of an event is the ratio of the number of cases 
favourable to that event, to the total number of cases favourable or contrary, 
and all equally possible” (equally likely to happen). 

From these definitions it follows that the word probability , in its mathemati- 
cal acceptation, has reference to the state of our knowledge of the circumstances 
under which an event may happen or fail. With the degree of information which 

1 See in particular a letter addressed by Pascal to Fermat, who had solicited his attention 
to a mathematical problem (Port Royal, par M. de Sainte Beuve); also various passages in 
the collection of Fragments published by M. Prosper Faugere. 

2 Poisson, Recherches sur la Probability des Jugemens. 


187 



CHAPTER XVI. ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. 


188 


we possess concerning the circumstances of an event, the reason we have to think 
that it will occur, or, to use a single term, our expectation of it, will vary. Prob- 
ability is expectation founded upon partial knowledge. A perfect acquaintance 
with all the circumstances affecting the occurrence of an event would change 
expectation into certainty, and leave neither room nor demand for a theory of 
probabilities. 

3. Though our expectation of an event grows stronger with the increase of 
the ratio of the number of the known cases favourable to its occurrence to the 
whole number of equally possible cases, favourable or unfavourable, it would be 
unphilosophical to affirm that the strength of that expectation, viewed as an 
emotion of the mind, is capable of being referred to any numerical standard. 
The man of sanguine temperament builds high hopes where the timid despair, 
and the irresolute are lost in doubt. As subjects of scientific inquiry, there is 
some analogy between opinion and sensation. The thermometer and the care- 
fully prepared photographic plate indicate, not the intensity of the sensations 
of heat and light, but certain physical circumstances which accompany the pro- 
duction of those sensations. So also the theory of probabilities contemplates the 
numerical measure of the circumstances upon which expectation is founded; and 
this object embraces the whole range of its legitimate applications. The rules 
which we employ in life-assurance, and in the other statistical applications of the 
theory of probabilities, are altogether independent of the mental phaenomena of 
expectation. They are founded upon the assumption that the future will bear 
a resemblance to the past; that under the same circumstances the same event 
will tend to recur with a definite numerical frequency; not upon any attempt to 
submit to calculation the strength of human hopes and fears. 

Now experience actually testifies that events of a given species do, under 
given circumstances, tend to recur with definite frequency, whether their true 
causes be known to us or unknown. Of course this tendency is, in general, only 
manifested when the area of observation is sufficiently large. The judicial records 
of a great nation, its registries of births and deaths, in relation to age and sex, 
&c., present a remarkable uniformity from year to year. In a given language, 
or family of languages, the same sounds, and successions of sounds, and, if it 
be a written language, the same characters and successions of characters recur 
with determinate frequency. The key to the rude Ogham inscriptions, found 
in various parts of Ireland, and in which no distinction of words could at first 
be traced, was, by a strict application of this principle, recovered. 3 The same 
method, it is understood, has been applied 4 to the deciphering of the cuneiform 
records recently disentombed from the ruins of Nineveh by the enterprise of Mr. 
Layard. 

4. Let us endeavour from the above statements and definitions to form a 
conception of the legitimate object of the theory of Probabilities. 

''The discovery is due to the Rev. Charles Graves, Professor of Mathematics in the Uni- 
versity of Dublin.- Vide Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, Feb. 14, 1848. Professor 
Graves informs me that he has verified the principle by constructing sequence tables for all 
the European languages. 

4 By the learned Orientalist, Dr. Edward Hincks. 



CHAPTER XVI. ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. 


189 


Probability, it has been said, consists in the expectation founded upon a 
particular kind of knowledge, viz., the knowledge of the relative frequency of 
occurrence of events. Hence the probabilities of events, or of combinations 
of events, whether deduced from a knowledge of the particular constitution of 
things under which they happen, or derived from the long-continued observation 
of a past series of their occurrences and failures, constitute, in all cases, our data. 
The probability of some connected event, or combination of events, constitutes 
the corresponding qucesitum, or object sought. Now in the most general, yet 
strict meaning of the term “event,” every combination of events constitutes also 
an event. The simultaneous occurrence of two or more events, or the occurrence 
of an event under given conditions, or in any conceivable connexion with other 
events, is still an event. Using the term in this liberty of application, the object 
of the theory of probabilities might be thus defined. Given the probabilities 
of any events, of whatever kind, to find the probability of some other event 
connected with them. 

5. Events may be distinguished as simple or compound, the latter term 
being applied to such events as consist in a combination of simple events (I. 13). 
In this manner we might define it as the practical end of the theory under 
consideration to determine the probability of some event, simple or compound, 
from the given probabilities of other events, simple or compound, with which, 
by the terms of its definition, it stands connected. 

Thus if it is known from the constitution of a die that there is a probability, 

measured by the fraction -, that the result of any particular throw will be an 

6 


ace, and if it is required to determine the probability that there shall occur one 
ace, and only one, in two successive throws, we may state the problem in the 
order of its data and its qucesitum, as follows: 

First Datum. — Probability of the event that the first throw will give an 


ace 


1 

6 


Second Datum. — Probability of the event that the second throw will give 


an ace = 


1 

6 


QUjESITUM. — Probability of the event that either the first throw will give an 
ace, and the second not an ace; or the first will not give an ace, and the second 
will give one. 

Here the two data are the probabilities of simple events defined as the first 
throw giving an ace, and the second throw giving an ace. The quaesitum is 
the probability of a compound event, — a certain disjunctive combination of the 
simple events involved or implied in the data. Probably it will generally happen, 
when the numerical conditions of a problem are capable of being deduced, as 
above, from the constitution of things under which they exist, that the data 
will be the probabilities of simple events, and the qucesitum the probability of 
a compound event dependent upon the said simple events. Such is the case 
with a class of problems which has occupied perhaps an undue share of the 
attention of those who have studied the theory of probabilities, viz., games of 
chance and skill, in the former of which some physical circumstance, as the 



CHAPTER XVI. ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. 


190 


constitution of a die, determines the probability of each possible step of the 
game, its issue being some definite combination of those steps; while in the 
latter, the relative dexterity of the players, supposed to be known a priori, 
equally determines the same element. But where, as in statistical problems, the 
elements of our knowledge are drawn, not from the study of the constitution 
of things, but from the registered observations of Nature or of human society, 
there is no reason why the data which such observations afford should be the 
probabilities of simple events. On the contrary, the occurrence of events or 
conditions in marked combinations (indicative of some secret connexion of a 
causal character) suggests to us the propriety of making such concurrences, 
profitable for future instruction by a numerical record of their frequency. Now 
the data which observations of this kind afford are the probabilities of compound 
events. The solution, by some general method, of problems in which such data 
are involved, is thus not only essential to the perfect development of the theory 
of probabilities, but also a perhaps necessary condition of its application to a 
large and practically important class of inquiries. 

6. Before we proceed to estimate to what extent known methods may be 
applied to the solution of problems such as the above, it will be advantageous 
to notice, that there is another form under which all questions in the theory of 
probabilities may be viewed; and this form consists in substituting for events 
the propositions which assert that those events have occurred, or will occur; and 
viewing the element of numerical probability as having reference to the truth of 
those propositions, not to the occurrence of the events concerning which they 
make assertion. Thus, instead of considering the numerical fraction p as ex- 
pressing the probability of the occurrence of an event E, let it be viewed as 
representing the probability of the truth of the proposition X, which asserts 
that the event E will occur. Similarly, instead of any probability, q , being con- 
sidered as referring to some compound event, such as the concurrence of the 
events E and F, let it represent the probability of the truth of the proposition 
which asserts that E and F will jointly occur; and in like manner, let the trans- 
formation be made from disjunctive and hypothetical combinations of events to 
disjunctive and conditional propositions. Though the new application thus as- 
signed to probability is a necessary concomitant of the old one, its adoption will 
be attended with a practical advantage drawn from the circumstance that we 
have already discussed the theory of propositions, have defined their principal 
varieties, and established methods for determining, in every case, the amount 
and character of their mutual dependence. Upon this, or upon some equivalent 
basis, any general theory of probabilities must rest. I do not say that other 
considerations may not in certain cases of applied theory be requisite. The data 
may prove insufficient for definite solution, and this defect it may be thought 
necessary to supply by hypothesis. Or, where the statement of large numbers 
is involved, difficulties may arise after the solution, from this source, for which 
special methods of treatment are required. But in every instance, some form of 
the general problem as above stated (Art. 4) is involved, and in the discussion of 
that problem the proper and peculiar work of the theory consists. I desire it to 
be observed, that to this object the investigations of the following chapters are 



CHAPTER XVI. ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. 


191 


mainly devoted. It is not intended to enter, except incidentally, upon questions 
involving supplementary hypotheses, because it is of primary importance, even 
with reference to such questions (I. 17), that a general method, founded upon 
a solid and sufficient basis of theory, be first established. 

7. The following is a summary, chiefly taken from Laplace, of the principles 
which have been applied to the solution of questions of probability. They are 
consequences of its fundamental definitions already stated, and may be regarded 
as indicating the degree in which it has been found possible to render those 
definitions available. 

Principle 1st. If p be the probability of the occurrence of any event, 1 — p 
will be the probability of its non-occurrence. 

2nd. The probability of the concurrence of two independent events is the 
product of the probabilities of those events. 

3rd. The probability of the concurrence of two dependent events is equal 
to the product of the probability of one of them by the probability that if that 
event occur, the other will happen also. 

4th. The probability that if an event, E, take place, an event, F, will also 
take place, is equal to the probability of the concurrence of the events E and 
F , divided by the probability of the occurrence of E. 

5th. The probability of the occurrence of one or the other of two events 
which cannot concur is equal to the sum of their separate probabilities. 

6th. If an observed event can only result from some one of n different causes 
which are a priori equally probable, the probability of any one of the causes is 
a fraction whose numerator is the probability of the event, on the hypothesis of 
the existence of that cause, and whose denominator is the sum of the similar 
probabilities relative to all the causes. 

7th. The probability of a future event is the sum of the products formed by 
multiplying the probability of each cause by the probability that if that cause 
exist, the said future event will take place. 

8. Respecting the extent and the relative sufficiency of these principles, the 
following observations may be made. 

1st. It is always possible, by the due combination of these principles, to 
express the probability of a compound event, dependent in any manner upon 
independent simple events whose distinct probabilities are given. A very large 
proportion of the problems which have been actually solved are of this kind, 
and the difficulty attending their solution has not arisen from the insufficiency 
of the indications furnished by the theory of probabilities, but from the need of 
an analysis which should render those indications available when functions of 
large numbers, or series consisting of many and complicated terms, are thereby 
introduced. It may, therefore, be fully conceded, that all problems having for 
their data the probabilities of independent simple events fall within the scope 
of received methods. 

2ndly. Certain of the principles above enumerated, and especially the sixth 
and seventh, do not presuppose that all the data are the probabilities of simple 
events. In their peculiar application to questions of causation, they do, how- 
ever, assume, that the causes of which they take account are mutually exclusive, 



CHAPTER XVI. ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. 


192 


so that no combination of them in the production of an effect is possible. If, 
as before explained, we transfer the numerical probabilities from the events 
with which they are connected to the propositions by which those events are 
expressed, the most general problem to which the aforesaid principles are ap- 
plicable may be stated in the following order of data and qucesita. 

DATA. 

1st. The probabilities of the n conditional propositions: 

If the cause A\ exist, the event E will follow; 

” A 2 ” E 


” A n ” E 

2nd. The condition that the antecedents of those propositions are mutually 
conflicting. 


REQUIREMENTS. 

The probability of the truth of the proposition which declares the occurrence 
of the event E; also, when that proposition is known to be true, the probabilities 
of truth of the several propositions which affirm the respective occurrences of 
the causes A 1 ,A 2 ... A n . 

Here it is seen, that the data are the probabilities of a series of compound 
events, expressed by conditional propositions. But the system is obviously a very 
limited and particular one. For the antecedents of the propositions are subject 
to the condition of being mutually exclusive, and there is but one consequent, 
the event E, in the whole system. It does not follow, from our ability to discuss 
such a system as the above, that we are able to resolve problems whose data are 
the probabilities of any system of conditional propositions; far less that we can 
resolve problems whose data are the probabilities of any system of propositions 
whatever. And, viewing the subject in its material rather than its formal aspect, 
it is evident, that the hypothesis of exclusive causation is one which is not often 
realized in the actual world, the phsenomena of which seem to be, usually, the 
products of complex causes, the amount and character of whose co-operation is 
unknown. Such is, without doubt, the case in nearly all departments of natural 
or social inquiry in which the doctrine of probabilities holds out any new promise 
of useful applications. 

9. To the above principles we may add another, which has been stated in 
the following terms by the Savilian Professor of Astronomy in the University of 
Oxford. 5 

“Principle 8. If there be any number of mutually exclusive hypotheses, 
hi, h 2 , / 13 , • • • of which the probabilities relative to a particular state of infor- 
mation are pi,p 2 ,p 3 , . . . and if new information be given which changes the 
probabilities of some of them, suppose of h rn+ \ and all that follow, without 

5 On certain Questions relating to the Theory of Probabilities; by W. F. Donkin, M. A., F. 
R. S., Szc. Philosophical Magazine, May, 1851. 



CHAPTER XVI. ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. 


193 


having otherwise any reference to the rest ; then the probabilities of these latter 
have the same ratios to one another, after the new information, that they had 
before, that is, 

Pi : Vi '¦ P3 ¦ ¦ ¦ : Pm = Pi : P2 ¦ P3 ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Pm, 

where the accented letters denote the values after the new information has been 
acquired.” 

This principle is apparently of a more fundamental character than the most 
of those before enumerated, and perhaps it might, as has been suggested by 
Professor Donkin, be regarded as axiomatic. It seems indeed to be founded in 
the very definition of the measure of probability, as “the ratio of the number of 
cases favourable to an event to the total number of cases favourable or contrary, 
and all equally possible.” For, adopting this definition, it is evident that in 
whatever proportion the number of equally possible cases is diminished, while 
the number of favourable cases remains unaltered, in exactly the same propor- 
tion will the probabilities of any events to which these cases have reference be 
increased. And as the new hypothesis, viz., the diminution of the number of 
possible cases without affecting the number of them which are favourable to the 
events in question, increases the probabilities of those events in a constant ratio, 
the relative measures of those probabilities remain unaltered. If the principle 
we are considering be then, as it appears to be, inseparably involved in the very 
definition of probability, it can scarcely, of itself conduct us further than the 
attentive study of the definition would alone do, in the solution of problems. 
From these considerations it appears to be doubtful whether, without some aid 
of a different kind from any that has yet offered itself to our notice, any consid- 
erable advance, either in the theory of probabilities as a branch of speculative 
knowledge, or in the practical solution of its problems can be hoped for. And 
the establishment, solely upon the basis of any such collection of principles as 
the above, of a method universally applicable to the solution of problems, with- 
out regard either to the number or to the nature of the propositions involved in 
the expression of their data, seems to be impossible. For the attainment of such 
an object other elements are needed, the consideration of which will occupy the 
next chapter. 



Chapter XVII 


DEMONSTRATION OF A GENERAL METHOD FOR 
THE SOLUTION OF PROBLEMS IN THE THEORY 
OF PROBABILITIES. 


1. It has been defined (XVI. 2), that “the measure of the probability of an event 
is the ratio of the number of cases favourable to that event, to the total number 
of cases favourable or unfavourable, and all equally possible.” In the following 
investigations the term probability will be used in the above sense of “measure 
of probability.” 

From the above definition we may deduce the following conclusions. 

I. When it is certain that an event will occur, the probability of that event, 
in the above mathematical sense, is 1. For the cases which are favourable to the 
event, and the cases which are possible, are in this instance the same. 

Hence, also, if p be the probability that an event x will happen, 1 — p will 
be the probability that the said event will not happen. To deduce this result 
directly from the definition, let in be the number of cases favourable to the 
event x, n the number of cases possible, then n ~ m is the number of cases 
unfavourable to the event x. Hence, by definition, 

Tfi 

— = probability that x will happen. 

n 

n — m 

= probability that x will not happen. 

n 


But 

n — m m 

= 1 = 1 — p. 

n n 

II. The probability of the concurrence of any two events is the product of the 
probability of either of those events by the probability that if that event occur, 
the other will occur also. 

Let to be the number of cases favourable to the happening of the first event, 
and n the number of equally possible cases unfavourable to it; then the prob- 

TTl 

ability of the first event is, by definition, . Of the to cases favourable 

to + n 


194 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


195 


to the first event, let l cases be favourable to the conjunction of the first and 

second events, then, by definition, — is the probability that if the first event 

to 

happen, the second also will happen. Multiplying these fractions together, we 
have 

m l l 
m + n to to + n 

But the resulting fraction m l +n has for its numerator the number of cases 
favourable to the conjunction of events, and for its denominator, the number 
to + n of possible cases. Therefore, it represents the probability of the joint 
occurrence of the two events. 

Hence, if p be the probability of any event x , and q the probability that if x 
occur y will occur, the probability of the conjunction xy will be pq. 

III. The probability that if an event x occur, the event y will occur, is 
a fraction whose numerator is the probability of their joint occurrence, and 
denominator the probability of the occurrence of the event x. 

This is an immediate consequence of Principle 2nd. 

IV. The probability of the occurrence of some one of a series of exclusive 
events is equal to the sum of their separate probabilities. 

For let n be the number of possible cases; mi the number of those cases 

favourable to the first event; m 2 the number of cases favourable to the second, 

&c. Then the separate probabilities of the events are — -, — -, &c. Again, as the 

n n 

events are exclusive, none of the cases favourable to one of them is favourable to 
another; and, therefore, the number of cases favourable to some one of the series 
will be mi + m 2 . . . , and the probability of some one of the series happening 

will be — . But this is the sum of the previous fractions, — -, — -, 

n n n 

&c. Whence the principle is manifest. 2. Definition. — Two events are said 

to be independent when the probability of the happening of either of them is 
unaffected by our expectation of the occurrence or failure of the other. 

From this definition, combined with Principle II., we have the following 
conclusion: 

V. The probability of the concurrence of two independent events is equal to 
the product of the separate probabilities of those events. 

For if p be the probability of an event x, q that of an event y regarded as 
quite independent of x, then is q also the probability that if x occur y will occur. 
Hence, by Principle II., pq is the probability of the concurrence of x and y 
Under the same circumstances, the probability that x will occur and y not 
occur will be p{ 1 — q). For p is the probability that x will occur, and 1 — q 
the probability that y will not occur. In like manner (1 — p)( 1 — q) will be the 
probability that both the events fail of occurring. 

3. There exists yet another principle, different in kind from the above, but 
necessary to the subsequent investigations of this chapter, before proceeding 
to the explicit statement of which I desire to make one or two preliminary 
observations. 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


196 


I would, in the first place, remark that the distinction between simple and 
compound events is not one founded in the nature of events themselves, but 
upon the mode or connexion in which they are presented to the mind. How 
many separate particulars, for instance, are implied in the terms “To be in 
health,” “To prosper,” &c., each of which might still be regarded as expressing 
a “simple event” ? The prescriptive usages of language, which have assigned to 
particular combinations of events single and definite appellations, and have left 
unnumbered other combinations to be expressed by corresponding combinations 
of distinct terms or phrases, is essentially arbitrary. When, then, we designate 
as simple events those which are expressed by a single verb, or by what gram- 
marians term a simple sentence, we do not thereby imply any real simplicity 
in the events themselves, but use the term solely with reference to grammati- 
cal expression. 4. Now if this distinction of events, as simple or compound, is 
not founded in their real nature, but rests upon the accidents of language, it 
cannot affect the question of their mutual dependence or independence. If my 
knowledge of two simple events is confined to this particular fact, viz., that the 
probability of the occurrence of one of them is p, and that of the other q; then 
I regard the events as independent, and thereupon affirm that the probability 
of their joint occurrence is pq. But the ground of this affirmation is not that 
the events are simple ones, but that the data afford no information whatever 
concerning any connexion or dependence between them. When the probabilities 
of events are given, but all information respecting their dependence withheld, 
the mind regards them as independent. And this mode of thought is equally 
correct whether the events, judged according to actual expression, are simple 
or compound, i.e. , whether each of them is expressed by a single verb or by a 
combination of verbs. 

5. Let it, however, be supposed that, together with the probabilities of 
certain events, we possess some definite information respecting their possible 
combinations. For example, let it be known that certain combinations are ex- 
cluded from happening, and therefore that the remaining combinations alone 
are possible. Then still is the same general principle applicable. The mode in 
which we avail ourselves of this information in the calculation of the probability 
of any conceivable issue of events depends not upon the nature of the events 
whose probabilities and whose limits of possible connexion are given. It matters 
not whether they are simple or compound. It is indifferent from what source, or 
by what methods, the knowledge of their probabilities and of their connecting 
relations has been derived. We must regard the events as independent of any 
connexion beside that of which we have information, deeming it of no conse- 
quence whether such information has been explicitly conveyed to us in the data, 
or thence deduced by logical inference. And this leads us to the statement of the 
general principle in question, viz.: 

VI. The events whose probabilities are given are to be regarded as indepen- 
dent of any connexion but such as is either expressed, or necessarily implied, 
in the data; and the mode in which our knowledge of that connexion is to be 
employed is independent of the nature of the source from which such knowledge 
has been derived. 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


197 


The practical importance of the above principle consists in the circumstance, 
that whatever may be the nature of the events whose probabilities are given, — 
whatever the nature of the event whose probability is sought, we are always 
able, by an application of the Calculus of Logic, to determine the expression of 
the latter event as a definite combination of the former events, and definitely 
to assign the whole of the implied relations connecting the former events with 
each other. In other words, we can determine what that combination of the 
given events is whose probability is required, and what combinations of them 
are alone possible. It follows then from the above principle, that we can reason 
upon those events as if they were simple events, whose conditions of possible 
combination had been directly given by experience, and of which the probability 
of some definite combination is sought. The possibility of a general method in 
probabilities depends upon this reduction. 

6. As the investigations upon which we are about to enter are based upon 
the employment of the Calculus of Logic, it is necessary to explain certain terms 
and modes of expression which are derived from this application. 

By the event x, I mean that event of which the proposition which affirms 
the occurrence is symbolically expressed by the equation 

x = 1. 

By the event (f>(x, y, z, . . . ), I mean that event of which the occurrence is ex- 
pressed by the equation 

4>{x,y,z,...) = 1. 

Such an event may be termed a compound event, in relation to the simple 
events x, y, z, which its conception involves. Thus, if x represent the event “It 
rains,” y the event “It thunders,” the separate occurrences of those events being 
expressed by the logical equations 

x = l, y= 1, 

then will x(l — y) + y{ 1 — x) represent the event or state of things denoted by 
the Proposition, “It either rains or thunders, but not both;” the expression of 
that state of things being 


-y) + 2/(1 - x) = 1. 

If for brevity we represent the function phi(x , y, z , . . . ), used in the above ac- 
ceptation by V, it is evident (VI. 13) that the law of duality 

V(1 - V) = 0, 


will be identically satisfied. 

The simple events x, y, z will be said to be “conditioned” when they are 
not free to occur in every possible combination; in other words, when some 
compound event depending upon them is precluded from occurring. Thus the 
events denoted by the propositions, “It rains,” “It thunders,” are “conditioned” 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


198 


if the event denoted by the proposition, “It thunders, but does not rain,” is 
excluded from happening, so that the range of possible is less than the range 
of conceivable combination. Simple unconditioned events are by definition in- 
dependent. 

Any compound event is similarly said to be conditioned if it is assumed that 
it can only occur under a certain condition, that is, in combination with some 
other event constituting, by its presence, that condition. 

7. We shall proceed in the natural order of thought, from simple and uncon- 
ditioned, to compound and conditioned events. 


Proposition I. 


1st. If p, q, r are the respective probabilities of any unconditioned simple 
events x, y, z, the probability of any compound event V will be [ V ], this function 
[V] being formed by changing, in the function V, the symbols x, y, z into p, q, 
r, &c. 

2ndly. Under the same circumstances, the probability that if the event V 
occur, any other event V' will also occur, will be ^ V X ^ , wherein \VV'] denotes 
the result obtained by multiplying together the logical functions V and V' , and 
changing in the residt x, y, z, &c. into p, q, r, &c. 

Let us confine our attention in the first place to the possible combinations of 
the two simple events, x and y, of which the respective probabilities are p and 
q. The primary combinations of those events (V.ll), and their corresponding 
probabilities, are as follows: 


EVENTS. 

xy, 

x{I - y ), 
(1 - x)y, 


Concurrence of x and y, 
Occurrence of x without y, 
Occurrence of y without x, 
Conjoint failure of x and y, 


PROBABILITIES. 

pq. 

p( 1 - <?)¦ 

(1 -p)q- 

(1 -p)(l - q). 


We see that in these cases the probability of the compound event represented 
by a constituent is the same function of p and q as the logical expression of that 
event is of x and y; and it is obvious that this remark applies, whatever may 
be the number of the simple events whose probabilities are given, and whose 
joint existence or failure is involved in the compound event of which we seek 
the probability. 

Consider, in the second place, any disjunctive combination of the above 
constituents. The compound event, expressed in ordinary language as the oc- 
currence of “either the event x without the event y, or the event y without the 
event x” is symbolically expressed in the form ,t(1 — y) + y(I — x), and its prob- 
ability, determined by Principles iv. and V., is p{ 1 — q) + g(l — p). The latter 
of these expressions is the same function of p and q as the former is of x and 
y. And it is obvious that this is also a particular illustration of a general rule. 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


199 


The events which are expressed by any two or more constituents are mutually 
exclusive. The only possible combination of them is a disjunctive one, expressed 
in ordinary language by the conjunction or, in the language of symbolical logic 
by the sign +. Now the probability of the occurrence of some one out of a set 
of mutually exclusive events is the sum of their separate probabilities, and is 
expressed by connecting the expressions for those separate probabilities by the 
sign +. Thus the law above exemplified is seen to be general. The probabil- 
ity of any unconditioned event V will be found by changing in V the symbols 
x,y,z,... into p,q,r,... 

8. Again, by Principle III., the probability that if the event V occur, the 
event V' will occur with it, is expressed by a fraction whose numerator is the 
probability of the joint occurrence of V and V' , and denominator the probability 
of the occurrence of V . 

Now the expression of that event, or state of things, which is constituted 
by the joint occurrence of the events V and V ' , will be formed by multiplying 
together the expressions V and V' according to the rules of the Calculus of 
Logic; since whatever constituents are found in both V and V' will appear in 
the product, and no others. Again, by what has just been shown, the proba- 
bility of the event represented by that product will be determined by changing 
therein x, y, z into p,q,r, . . . Hence the numerator sought will be what [VV 7 ] by 
definition represents. And the denominator will be [V], wherefore 


Probability that if V occur, V' will occur with it 


[W] 

M ' 


9. For example, if the probabilities of the simple events x,y,z are p,q,r 
respectively, and it is required to find the probability that if either x or y occur, 
then either y or z will occur, we have for the logical expressions of the antecedent 
and consequent — 


1st. Either x or y occurs, x{l — y) + y( 1 — x). 

2nd. Either y or z occurs, y( 1 — z) + z( 1 — y). 

If now we multiply these two expressions together according to the rules of 
the Calculus of Logic, we shall have for the expression of the concurrence of 
antecedent and consequent, 

xz{ 1 - y) + y( 1 - x){l - 20- 

Changing in this result x, y, z into p, q, r, and similarly transforming the expres- 
sion of the antecedent, we find for the probability sought the value 

pr(l -q) + q(l-p)(l - r) 

pO- - q) + qO- - p) 

The special function of the calculus, in a case like the above, is to supply the 
office of the reason in determining what are the conjunctures involved at once 
in the consequent and the antecedent. But the advantage of this application is 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


200 


almost entirely prospective, and will be made manifest in a subsequent propo- 
sition. 


Proposition II. 


10. It is known that the probabilities of certain simple events x,y, z, . . . are 
p,q,r,. . . respectively when a certain condition V is satisfied; V being in expres- 
sion a function of x,y, z, . . . . Required the absolute probabilities of the events 
x, y, z, . . . , that is, the probabilities of their respective occurrence independently 
of the condition V. 

Let, p' , q' , r' , &c., be the probabilities required, i. e. the probabilities of the 
events x, y, z,.., regarded not only as simple, but as independent events. Then 
by Prop. I. the probabilities that these events will occur when the condition V , 
represented by the logical equation V = 1, is satisfied, are 

M [yv] [zV] . 

M ’ [V] ’ [v] ’ •’ 

in which [xV] denotes the result obtained by multiplying V by x, according to 
the rules of the Calculus of Logic, and changing in the result x, y, z, into p ' , 
(/, r' , &c. But the above conditioned probabilities are by hypothesis equal to 
p,q,r, . . . respectively. Hence we have, 


[xV\ 


= p, 





= r, &c., 


from which system of equations equal in number to the quantities p' ,q' ,r' , , 
the values of those quantities may be determined. 

Now xV consists simply of those constituents in V of which a; is a factor. 
Let this sum be represented by V x , and in like manner let yV be represented by 
Vy, &c. Our equations then assume the form 


[Va\ =n M 

[P] [P] 


q, &C., 


where [V x \ denotes the results obtained by changing in V x the symbols x, y, z, 
& c., into p\ q' , r' , &c. 

To render the meaning of the general problem and the principle of its solution 
more evident, let us take the following example. Suppose that in the drawing of 
balls from an urn attention had only been paid to those cases in which the balls 
drawn were either of a particular colour, “white,” or of a particular composition, 
“marble,” or were marked by both these characters, no record having been kept 
of those cases in which a ball that was neither white nor of marble had been 
drawn. Let it then have been found, that whenever the supposed condition was 
satisfied, there was a probability p that a white ball would be drawn, arid a 
probability q that a marble ball would be drawn: and from these data alone let 
it be required to find the probability that in the next drawing, without reference 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


201 


at all to the condition above mentioned, a white ball will be drawn; also the 
probability that a marble ball will be drawn. 

Here if x represent the drawing of a white ball, y that of a marble ball, the 
condition V will be represented by the logical function 

xy + x{ 1 - y) + (1 - x)y. 

Hence we have 

V x = xy + x(l -y)=x, V y = xy + (1 - x)y = y, 

whence 

[V x \ = p; [V y ] = q- 

and the final equations of the problem are 

P' = </' = 

p'q' + p'[l - q') + g'(l - p') P ’ pfq' + p'{l - q') + q'(I - p') 

from which we find 

/ P+9-1 , P+9-1 

P = , 9 = • 

9 P 

It is seen that p' and q' are respectively proportional to p and g, as by 
Professor Donkin’s principle they ought to be. The solution of this class of 
problems might indeed, by a direct application of that principle, be obtained. 

To meet a possible objection, I here remark, that the above reasoning does 
not require that the drawings of a white and a marble ball should be indepen- 
dent, in virtue of the physical constitution of the balls. The assumption of their 
independence is indeed involved in the solution, but it does not rest upon any 
prior assumption as to the nature of the balls, and their relations, or freedom 
from relations, of form, colour, structure, &c. It is founded upon our total ig- 
norance of all these things. Probability always has reference to the state of our 
actual knowledge, and its numerical value varies with varying information. 

Proposition III. 

11. To determine in any question of probabilities the logical connexion of 
the quaesitum with the data; that is, to assign the event whose probability is 
sought, as a logical function of the event whose probabilities are given. 

Let S', T, &c., represent any compound events whose probabilities are given, 
S and T being in expression known functions of the symbols x, y, z, &c., rep- 
resenting simple events. Similarly let W represent any event whose probability 
is sought, W being also a known function of x, y, z, &c. As S, T, . . . W must 
satisfy the fundamental law of duality, we are permitted to replace them by 
single logical symbols, s,t,...w. Assume then 


s = S,t = T,w = W. 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


202 


These, by the definition of S,T,. . . W, will be a series of logical equations 
connecting the symbols s,t,...w, with the symbols x,y,z . . . 

By the methods of the Calculus of Logic we can eliminate from the above 
system any of the symbols x,y, z, ... , representing events whose probabilities 
are not given, and determine w as a developed function of s, t, &c., and of such 
of the symbols x, y, z, &c., if any such there be, as correspond to events whose 
probabilities are given. The result will be of the form 

w = A + OB + — C + — Zl, 

where A, B , C, and D comprise among them all the possible constituents which 
can be formed from the symbols s, t, &c., i. e. from all the symbols representing 
events whose probabilities are given. 

The above will evidently be the complete expression of the relation sought. 
For it fully determines the event W, represented by the single symbol w, as a 
function or combination of the events similarly denoted by the symbols s, t, &c., 
and it assigns by the laws of the Calculus of Logic the condition 

D — 0, 

as connecting the events s, t, &c., among themselves. We may, therefore, by 
Principle VI., regard s, t, &c., as simple events, of which the combination w, 
and the condition with which it is associated D , are definitely determined. 

Uniformity in the logical processes of reduction being desirable, I shall here 
state the order which will generally be pursued. 

12. By (vm. 8), the primitive equations are reducible to the forms 

s(l -S) + 5(1 - s) = 0; 

t(l-T) + T(l-t) =0; (1) 


w(l — W) — W{\ — w) =0; 

under which they can be added together without impairing their significance. 
We can then eliminate the symbols x , y, z, either separately or together. If the 
latter course is chosen, it is necessary, after adding together the equations of the 
system, to develop the result with reference to all the symbols to be eliminated, 
and equate to 0 the product of all the coefficients of the constituents (vii. 9). 

As w is the symbol whose expression is sought, we may also, by Prop. III. 
Chap. IX., express the result of elimination in the form 

Ew + E'( 1 — w) = 0. 

E and E' being successively determined by making in the general system (1), 
w = 1 and w = 0, and eliminating the symbols x, y, z, . . . Thus the single 
equations from which E and E' are to be respectively determined become 

s(l - S) + 5(1 — s) + t(l - T) + T(1 — t) . . . + 1 — W = 0; 
s(l - S) + 5(1 - s) + t( 1 - T) + T(1 - t) + W = 0. 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


203 


From these it only remains to eliminate x, y , z, &c., and to determine w by 
subsequent development. In the process of elimination we may, if needful, avail 
ourselves of the simplifications of Props. I. and II. Chap. ix. 

13. Should the data, beside informing us of the probabilities of events, 
further assign among them any explicit connexion, such connexion must be 
logically expressed, and the equation or equations thus formed be introduced 
into the general system. 


Proposition IV. 


14. Given the probabilities of any system of events; to determine by a general 
method the consequent or derived probability of any other event. 

As in the last Proposition, let S, T, &c., be the events whose probabilities 
are given, W the event whose probability is sought, these being known functions 
of x, y, z, &c. Let us represent the data as follows: 

Probability of S = p; 

Probability of T = q; 

and so on, p, q, &c., being known numerical values. If then we represent the 
compound event S by s, T by t, and W by to, we find by the last proposition, 

w = A + OB + —C + ~ D\ (2) 

A, B , C, and D being functions of s, t, &c. Moreover the data (1) are trans- 
formed into 

Prob. s = p, Prob. t = q, &c. (3) 

Now the equation (2) is resolvable into the system 


w = A + qC 
D = 0, 


( 4 ) 


q being an indefinite class symbol (VI. 12). But since by the properties of 
constituents (V. Prop. III.), we have 


A + B + C + D= 1, 


the second equation of the above system may be expressed in the form 

A + B + C= 1. 


If we represent the function A + B + C by V, the system (4) becomes 


w = A + qC; 
V=l. 


( 5 ) 

( 6 ) 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


204 


Let us for a moment consider this result. Since V is the sum of a series 
of constituents of s, t, &c., it represents the compound event in which the 
simple events involved are those denoted by s, t, &c. Hence (6) shows that 
the events denoted by s, t, &c., and whose probabilities are p, q , &c., have 
such probabilities not as independent events , but as events subject to a certain 
condition V. Equation (5) expresses w as a similarly conditioned combination 
of the same events. 

Now by Principle VI. the mode in which this knowledge of the connexion of 
events has been obtained does not influence the mode in which, when obtained, 
it is to be employed. We must reason upon it as if experience had presented to 
us the events s, t, &c., as simple events, free to enter into every combination, 
but possessing, when actually subject to the condition V, the probabilities p, q , 
&c., respectively. 

Let then p' ,q' , , be the corresponding probabilities of such events, when 
the restriction V is removed. Then by Prop. II. of the present chapter, these 
quantities will be determined by the system of equations, 

= p, = (?) 



and by Prop. I. the probability of the event w under the same condition V will 
be 


Prob. 


_ [A + cC\ 

[v] ; 


( 8 ) 


wherein V s denotes the sum of those constituents in V of which s is a factor, 
and [Vs] what that sum becomes when s,t,. . . , are changed into p', q' , . . . , re- 
spectively. The constant c represents the probability of the indefinite event q\ 
it is, therefore, arbitrary, and admits of any value from 0 to 1. 

Now it will be observed, that the values of,p', q', &c., are determined from 
(7) only in order that they may be substituted in (8), so as to render Prob. w 
a function of known quantities, p, q , &c. It is obvious, therefore, that instead 
of the letters p', q' , &c., we might employ any others as s, t, &c., in the same 
quantitative acceptations. This particular step would simply involve a change 
of meaning of the symbols s, t, &c. — their ceasing to be logical , and becoming 
quantitative. The systems (7) and (8) would then become 


Vs 

V 


= p, 


V 

V 


q, &c.; 


Prob. 


w = 


A + cC 
V 


(9) 

(10) 


In employing these, it is only necessary to determine from (9) s, t, &c., regarded 
as quantitative symbols, in terms of p, g, &c., and substitute the resulting values 
in (10). It is evident, that s, t, & c., inasmuch as they represent probabilities, 
will be positive proper fractions. 

The system (9) may be more symmetrically expressed in the form 


Vs 

P 


Vt 

q 


... = v. 


(ii) 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


205 


Or we may express both (9) and (10) together in the symmetrical system 


V a _ V t _ A + cC 

p q u 


(12) 


wherein u represents Prob. w. 

15. It remains to interpret the constant c assumed to represent the proba- 
bility of the indefinite event q. Now the logical equation 


w = A + qC, 


interpreted in the reverse order, implies that if either the event A take place, 
or the event C in connexion with the event q, the event w will take place, and 
not otherwise. Hence q represents that condition under which, if the event C 
take place, the event w will take place. But the probability of q is c. Hence, 
therefore, c = probability that if the event C take place the event w will take 
place. 

Wherefore by Principle II., 

Probability of concurrence of C and w 
Probability of C 

We may hence determine the nature of that new experience from which the 
actual value of c may be obtained. For if we substitute in C for s, t, &c., their 
original expressions as functions of the simple events x, y, z, &c., we shall form 
the expression of that event whose probability constitutes the denominator of 
the above value of c; and if we multiply that expression by the original expression 
of w, we shall form the expression of that event whose probability constitutes 
the numerator of c, and the ratio of the frequency of this event to that of the 
former one, determined by new observations will give the value of c. Let it be 
remarked here, that the constant c does not necessarily make its appearance in 
the solution of a problem. It is only when the data are insufficient to render 
determinate the probability sought, that this arbitrary element presents itself, 
and in this case it is seen that the final logical equation (2) or (5) informs us 
how it is to be determined. 

If that new experience by which c may be determined cannot be obtained, 
we can still, by assigning to c its limiting values 0 and 1 , determine the limits 
of the probability of w. These are 

Minor limit of Prob. w = y- 
Superior limit = A y C ¦ 

Between these limits, it is certain that the probability sought must lie indepen- 
dently of all new experience which does not absolutely contradict the past. 

If the expression of the event C consists of many constituents, the logical 
value of w being of the form 

w = A + jjci + ^62 + &c., 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


206 


we can, instead of employing their aggregate as above, present the final solution 
in the form 

_ . A + Ci Ci + C 2 C 2 + &c. 

Prob. w = — . 

Here ci = probability that if the event Ci occur, the event w will occur, and 
so on for the others. Convenience must decide which form is to be preferred. 

16. The above is the complete theoretical solution of the problem proposed. 
It may be added, that it is applicable equally to the case in which any of the 
events mentioned in its original statement are conditioned. Thus, if one of the 
data is the probability p, that if the event x occur the event y will occur; the 
probability of the occurrence of x not being given, we must assume Prob. x — c 
(an arbitrary constant), then Prob. xy = cp, and these two conditions must 
be introduced into the data, and employed according to the previous method. 
Again, if it is sought to determine the probability that if an event x occur an 
event y will occur, the solution will assume the form 


Prob. sought 


Prob. xy 
Prob. x ’ 


the numerator and denominator of which must be separately determined by the 
previous general method. 

17. We are enabled by the results of these investigations to establish a 
general rule for the solution of questions in probabilities. 


General Rule. 


Case I. When all the events are unconditioned. 

Form the symbolical expressions of the events whose probabilities are given 
or sought. 

Equate such of those expressions as relate to compound events to a new 
series of symbols, s, t, &c., which symbols regard as representing the events, no 
longer as compound but simple, to whose expressions they have been equated. 

Eliminate from the equations thus formed all the logical symbols, except 
those which express events, s, t, &c., whose respective probabilities p , < 7 , &c. 
are given, or the event w whose probability is sought, and determine w as a 
developed function of s, t, &c. in the form 

w = A + 0B+ ^C+ ^.D. 

Let A + B + C = V, and let V s represent the aggregate of those constituents in 
V which contain s as a factor, V t of those which contain t as a factor, and thus 
for all the symbols whose probabilities are given. 

Then, passing from Logic to Algebra, form the equations 



p q 


Prob. 


A + cC 

w = 


(1) 


V 


(2) 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


207 


from (1) determine s, t, &c. as functions of p, q , &c., and substitute their values 
in (2). The result will express the solution required. 

Or form the symmetrical system of equations 

V a _ V t _ A + cC _ V 

• • • > (AJ 

p q u 1 

where u represents the probability sought. 

If c appear in the solution, its interpretation will be 

Prob. Cw 

c = , 

Prob. c 

and this interpretation indicates the nature of the experience which is necessary 
for its discovery. 

Case II. — When some of the events are conditioned. 

If there be given the probability p that if the event X occur, the event Y 
will occur, and if the probability of the antecedent X be not given, resolve the 
proposition into the two following, viz.: 

Probability of X = c, 

Probability of XY = cp. 

If the quaesitum be the probability that if the event W occur, the event Z will 
occur, determine separately, by the previous case, the terms of the fraction 

Prob. WZ 

Prob. W 

and the fraction itself will express the probability sought. 

It is understood in this case that X, Y, W, Z may be any compound events 
whatsoever. The expressions XY and WZ represent the products of the sym- 
bolical expressions of X and Y and of W and Z , formed according to the rules 
of the Calculus of Logic. 

The determination of the single constant c may in certain cases be resolved 
into, or replaced by, the determination of a series of arbitrary constants ci, C 2 . . . 
according to convenience, as previously explained. 

18. It has been stated (I. 12) that there exist two distinct definitions, or 
modes of conception, upon which the theory of probabilities may be made to 
depend, one of them being connected more immediately with Number, the other 
more directly with Logic. We have now considered the consequences which flow 
from the numerical definition, and have shown how it conducts us to a point 
in which the necessity of a connexion with Logic obviously suggests itself. We 
have seen to some extent what is the nature of that connexion; and further, 
in what manner the peculiar processes of Logic, and the more familiar ones 
of quantitative Algebra, are involved in the same general method of solution, 
each of these so accomplishing its own object that the two processes may be 
regarded as supplementary to each other. It remains to institute the reverse 
order of investigation, and, setting out from a definition of probability in which 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


208 


the logical relation is more immediately involved, to show how the numerical 
definition would thence arise, and how the same general method, equally depen- 
dent upon both elements, would finally, but by a different order of procedure, 
be established. 

That between the symbolical expressions of the logical calculus and those of 
Algebra there exists a close analogy, is a fact to which attention has frequently 
been directed in the course of the present treatise. It might even be said that 
they possess a community of forms, and, to a very considerable degree, a com- 
munity of laws. With a single exception in the latter respect, their difference is 
only one of interpretation. Thus the same expression admits of a logical or of 
a quantitative interpretation, according to the particular meaning which we at- 
tach to the symbols it involves. The expression xy represents, under the former 
condition, a concurrence of the events denoted by x and y. under the latter, 
the product of the numbers or quantities denoted by x and y. And thus every 
expression denoting an event, simple or compound, admits, under another sys- 
tem of interpretation, of a meaning purely quantitative. Here then arises the 
question, whether there exists any principle of transition, in accordance with 
which the logical and the numerical interpretations of the same symbolical ex- 
pression shall have an intelligible connexion. And to this question the following 
considerations afford an answer. 

19. Let it be granted that there exists such a feeling as expectation, a feeling 
of which the object is the occurrence of events, and which admits of differing 
degrees of intensity. Let it also be granted that this feeling of expectation ac- 
companies our knowledge of the circumstances under which events are produced, 
and that it varies with the degree and kind of that knowledge. Then, without 
assuming, or tacitly implying, that the intensity of the feeling of expectation, 
viewed as a mental emotion, admits of precise numerical measurement, it is per- 
fectly legitimate to inquire into the possibility of a mode of numerical estimation 
which shall, at least, satisfy these following conditions, viz., that the numerical 
value which it assigns shall increase when the known circumstances of an event 
are felt to justify a stronger expectation, shall diminish when they demand a 
weaker expectation, and shall remain constant when they obviously require an 
equal degree of expectation. 

Now these conditions at least will be satisfied, if we assume the fundamental 
principle of expectation to be this, viz., that the laws for the expression of 
expectation, viewed as a numerical element, shall be the same as the laws for the 
expression of the expected event viewed as a logical element. Thus if (j>{x, y, z) 
represent any unconditional event compounded in any manner of the events x, 
y, z, let the same expression <j>(x, y , z), according to the above principle, denote 
the expectation of that event; x, y, z representing no longer the simple events 
involved, but the expectations of those events. 

For, in the first place, it is evident that, under this hypothesis, the probability 
of the occurrence of some one of a set of mutually exclusive events will be equal 
to the sum of the separate probabilities of those events. Thus if the alternation 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


209 


in question consist of n mutually exclusive events whose expressions are 

<t>i{x, y, Z )A 2 O, y,z),... 4> n {x, y, z), 

the expression of that alternation will be 

<Pi(x, V, z) + <j) 2 (x, y,z) ... + <j> n (x, y, z) = 1; 

the literal symbols x, y, z being logical, and relating to the simple events of which 
the three alternatives are compounded: and, by hypothesis, the expression of 
the probability that some one of those alternatives will occur is 

0 i(x, y, z) + <f> 2 (x, y,z)... + <j> n (x, y, z ), 

x, y, z here denoting the probabilities of the above simple events. Now this 
expression increases, eceteris paribus, with the increase of the number of the 
alternatives which are involved, and diminishes with the diminution of their 
number; which is agreeable to the condition stated. 

Furthermore, if we set out from the above hypothetical definition of the 
measure of probability, we shall be conducted, either by necessary inference or 
by successive steps of suggestion, which might perhaps be termed necessary, to 
the received numerical definition. We are at once led to recognise unity (1) as 
the proper numerical measure of certainty. For it is certain that any event x or 
its contrary 1 — x will occur. The expression of this proposition is 

x + (1 — x) = 1, 

whence, by hypothesis, x + (1 — x), the measure of the probability of the above 
proposition, becomes the measure of certainty. But the value of that expression 
is 1, whatever the particular value of x may be. Unity, or 1, is therefore, on the 
hypothesis in question, the measure of certainty. 

Let there, in the next place, be n mutually exclusive, but equally possible 
events, which we will represent by t\, t 2 , . . . t n . The proposition which affirms 
that some one of these must occur will be expressed by the equation 

t\ + t 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ + t n — 1; 

and, as when we pass in accordance with the reasoning of the last section to 
numerical probabilities, the same equation remains true in form, and as the 
probabilities ti , t 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ t n are equal, we have 


nt\ = 1, 

whence U = h, and similarly t 2 = t n = U Suppose it then required to 
determine the probability that some one event of the partial series t\,t 2 . . . t rn 
will occur, we have for the expression required 

1 1 

ti + t 2 . . . + t m = — I ... tom terms 

n m 
m 


n 



CHAPTER XVII. GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES 


210 


Hence, therefore, if there are m cases favourable to the occurrence of a particular 
alternation of events out of n possible and equally probable cases, the probability 
of the occurrence of that alternation will be expressed by the fraction — . 

Now the occurrence of any event which may happen in different equally 
possible ways is really equivalent to the occurrence of an alternation, i.e., of some 
one out of a set of alternatives. Hence the probability of the occurrence of any 
event may be expressed by a fraction whose numerator represents the number of 
cases favourable to its occurrence, and denominator the total number of equally 
possible cases. But this is the rigorous numerical definition of the measure of 
probability. That definition is therefore involved in the more peculiarly logical 
definition, the consequences of which we have endeavoured to trace. 

20. From the above investigations it clearly appears, 1st, that whether we 
set out from the ordinary numerical definition of the measure of probability, 
or from the definition which assigns to the numerical measure of probability 
such a law of value as shall establish a formal identity between the logical 
expressions of events and the algebraic expressions of their values, we shall be 
led to the same system of practical results. 2ndly, that either of these definitions 
pursued to its consequences, and considered in connexion with the relations 
which it inseparably involves, conducts us, by inference or suggestion, to the 
other definition. To a scientific view of the theory of probabilities it is essential 
that both principles should be viewed together, in their mutual bearing and 
dependence. 



Chapter XVIII 

ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL 
METHOD IN PROBABILITIES. 


1. It is designed here to illustrate, by elementary examples, the general method 
demonstrated in the last chapter. The examples chosen will be chiefly such as, 
from their simplicity, permit a ready verification of the solutions obtained. But 
some intimations will appear of a higher class of problems, hereafter to be more 
fully considered, the analysis of which would be incomplete without the aid of a 
distinct method determining the necessary conditions among their data, in order 
that they may represent a possible experience, and assigning the corresponding 
limits of the final solutions. The fuller consideration of that method, and of its 
applications, is reserved for the next chapter. 

2. Ex. 1. — The probability that it thunders upon a given day is p, the 
probability that it both thunders and hails is q , but of the connexion of the 
two phaenomena of thunder and hail, nothing further is supposed to be known. 
Required the probability that it hails on the proposed day. 

Let x represent the event — It thunders. 

Let y represent the event — It hails. 

Then xy will represent the event — It thunders and hails; and the data of the 
problem are 

Prob., x = p, Prob., xy = q. 

There being here but one compound event xy involved, assume, according to 
the rule, 

xy = u. (1) 

Our data then become 

Prob.,a: = p, Prob., it = g; (2) 

and it is required to find Prob.,y. Now (1) gives 

y = — = ux H — u( 1 — x) + 0(1 — u)x H — (1 — u)(l — x). 
x 0 0 


211 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


212 


Hence (XVII. 17) we find 

V = ux + (1 — u)x + (1 — u)(l — x), 
V x = ux + (1 — u)x = x, V u = ux ; 


and the equations of the General Rule, viz., 


Vc 

P 


Vu 

q 


= v. 


Prob., y 


A + cC 
V 


become, on substitution, and observing that A = ux, C = (1 — it)(l — x), and 
that V reduces to x + (1 — u)(l — x), 


x ux 
P Q 

Prob., y 


x + (1 — u)(l — a:), 

ux + c( 1 — u)(l — x ) 
X + (1 — u)(l — x) 


( 3 ) 

( 4 ) 


from which we readily deduce, by elimination of x and u, 

Prob., y = q + c(l — p). (5) 

In this result c represents the unknown probability that if the event (1 — u)(l — x) 
happen, the event y will happen. Now ( l — u)(l — x) = (1 — xy)(l — x) = 1 — x, 
on actual multiplication. Hence c is the unknown probability that if it do not 
thunder, it will hail. 

The general solution (5) may therefore be interpreted as follows: — The prob- 
ability that it hails is equal to the probability that it thunders and hails, q, 
together with the probability that it does not thunder, 1 — p, multiplied by the 
probability c, that if it does not thunder it will hail. And common reasoning 
verifies this result. 

If c cannot be numerically determined, we find, on assigning to it the limiting 
values 0 and 1, the following limits of Prob., y, viz.: 

Inferior limit = q. 

Superior limit = q + 1 — p. 

3. Ex. 2. —The probability that one or both of two events happen is p, that 
one or both of them fail is q. What is the probability that only one of these 
happens? 

Let x and y represent the respective events, then the data are — 


Prob. xy + x{l — y) + (1 — x)y = p, 

Prob. x{l — y) + (1 — x)y + (1 — a:)(l — y) = q; 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


213 


and we are to find 

Prob. x(l — y) + y(l — x). 

Here all the events concerned being compound, assume 


xy + x(l - y) + (1 - x)y = s, 
x(l - V) + (! - x)y + (1 - x)(l — y) = t, 
x(l — y) + (1 — x)y = w. 


Then eliminating x and y, and determining w as a developed function of s and 
t, we find 

w = st + Os(l — t) + 0(1 — s)t + ^(1 — s)(l — t). 

Hence A = st, C = 0, V = st+ s(l — t) + (1 — s)t = s + (1 — s)t, V s = s,V t = t\ 
and the equations of the General Rule (XVII. 17) become 

- = - = s+ (1 - s)t, (1) 

P q 


Prob. 


st 

S “h (1 — s)t ’ 


whence we find, on eliminating s and t, 


Prob. w = p + q — 1. 


Hence p + q — 1 is the measure of the probability sought. This result may be 
verified as follows: — Since p is the probability that one or both of the given 
events occur, 1 — p will be the probability that they both fail; and since q is 
the probability that one or both fail, 1 — <7 is the probability that they both 
happen. Hence 1 — p + 1 — q, or 2 — p — q, is the probability that they either 
both happen or both fail. But the only remaining alternative which is possible 
is that one alone of the events happens. Hence the probability of this occurrence 
is 1 — (2 — p — q), or p + q — 1, as above. 4. Ex. 3. — The probability that a 
witness A speaks the truth is p, the probability that another witness B speaks 
the truth is q , and the probability that they disagree in a statement is r. What 
is the probability that if they agree, their statement is true? 

Let x represent the hypothesis that A speaks truth; y that B speaks truth; 
then the hypothesis that A and B disagree in their statement will be represented 
by x(l — y) + y{ 1 — x)\ the hypothesis that they agree in statement by xy + 
(1 — x)(l — y), and the hypothesis that they agree in the truth by xy. Hence 
we have the following data: 

Prob. x = p, Prob. y = g, Prob. x(l — y) + y{ 1 — x) = r, 
from which we are to determine 


Prob. xy 

Prob. xy + (1 — x)(l — y) 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


214 


But as Prob. x(l — y) + y(l — x) = r, it is evident that Prob. xy + (1 — x)(l — y) 
will be 1 — r; we have therefore to seek 

Prob. xy 
1 — r 

Now the compound events concerned being in expression, x(l — y) + y{ 1 — x) 
and xy, let us assume 

x(l - y) + y(l - x) =s 1 

xy = w J ^ 

Our data then are Prob. x = p, Prob. y = q, Prob. s = r, and we are to find 
Prob. w. 

The system (1) gives, on reduction, 


Ml ~y) + 2/(1 - z)}(l - s) + s{xy + (1 - x)(l - y)} 

+ xy(l — w) + w(l — xy) = 0; 


whence 

x(l — ?/)(l — s) + y(l — x)(l — s) + sxy + s(l — x)(l — y) + xy 

w = 

2xy — 1 

= ^xys + a; ?/(l - s) + 0x(l - y)s + *x(l - y)( 1 - s) 

+0(1 - x)ys + ^(1 - x)(l - y)s + * (1 - x)y{l - s) (2) 

+0(1 - x)(l - 2/)(l - s). 


In the expression of this development, the coefficient — has been made to replace 
every equivalent form (X. 6). Here we have 

V = xy(l — s) + x(l — y)s + (1 — x)ys + (1 — x)(l — y)(l — s); 

whence, passing from Logic to Algebra, 

xy(l — s) + x(l — y)s xy(l — s) + (1 — x)ys 
P Q 


x(l — y)s + (1 — x)ys 
r 

= xy(l — s) + x(l — y)s + (1 — x)ys + (1 — x)(l — y)(l — s). 

xy(l - s ) 


Prob. w = 


xy(l — s) + x(l — y)s + (1 — x)ys + (1 — x)(l — 2/)(l — s) ’ 
from which we readily deduce 


Prob. 


p + q — r 

w = 


2 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


215 


whence we have 

Prob. xy p + q — r . . 

1 — r = 2(1 -r) ( ^ 

for the value sought. 

If in the same way we seek the probability that if A and B agree in their 
statement, that statement will be false, we must replace the second equation of 
the system (1) by the following, viz.: 

(! - x)(l - y) = w>. 


the final logical equation will then be 

w = 0 XyS ~ s ) + *-*^(1 — y)s + -x(l — y)( 1 — s) 

+0(1 - x)ys + ^(1 - x)y( 1 - s) + * (1 - x)(l - y)s 
+(l-x)(l-y)(l-s); 

whence, proceeding as before, we finally deduce 


Prob. w = 


2 — p — q — r 


Wherefore we have 

Prob. (1 - x)(l - y) _ 2 - p - g - r 

1 — r ~~ 2(1 -r) 1 j 

for the value here sought. 

These results are mutually consistent. For since it is certain that the joint 
statement of A and B must be either true or false, the second members of (3) 
and (5) ought by addition to make 1. Now we have identically, 

p + q — r 2 — p — q — r 


2(1 - r) 


2(1 - r) 


It is probable, from the simplicity of the results (5) and (6), that they might 
easily be deduced by the application of known principles; but it is to be remarked 
that they do not fall directly within the scope of known methods. The number 
of the data exceeds that of the simple events which they involve. M. Cournot, 
in his very able work, “Exposition cle la Theorie des Chances,” has proposed, 
in such cases as the above, to select from the original premises different sets 
of data, each set equal in number to the simple events which they involve, to 
assume that those simple events are independent, determine separately from the 
respective sets of the data their probabilities, and comparing the different values 
thus found for the same elements, judge how far the assumption of independence 
is justified. This method can only approach to correctness when the said simple 
events prove, according to the above criterion, to be nearly or quite independent; 
and in the questions of testimony and of judgment, in which such an hypothesis 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


216 


is adopted, it seems doubtful whether it is justified by actual experience of the 
ways of men. 

5. Ex. 4. — From observations made during a period of general sickness, there 
was a probability p that any house taken at random in a particular district was 
visited by fever, a probability q that it was visited by cholera, and a probability 
r that it escaped both diseases, and was not in a defective sanitary condition 
as regarded cleanliness and ventilation. What is the probability that any house 
taken at random was in a defective sanitary condition? 

With reference to any house, let us appropriate the symbols x. y, z, as follows, 
viz.: 

The symbol x to the visitation of fever. 

y ” cholera. 

2 defective sanitary condition. 

The events whose probabilities are given are then denoted by x, y, and 
(1 — x)(l — 2 /) (1 — z ), the event whose probability is sought is z. Assume then, 

(1 - x)(l - y){ 1 - z) = w; 

then our data are, 

Prob. x = p, Prob. y = q, Prob. w = r, 
and we are to find Prob. 2 . Now 


(1 - s)(l -y)-w 
(l-a;)(l-j/) 


= xyw + ^xy( 1 - w) + ^a;(l - y) + jjar(l - y)( 1 - w) 

+ j^(! - x)yw + jj(l - x)y{ 1 - w) + 0(1 - x)(l - y)w 

+ (l - x){l - y){l 


w). (1) 


The value of V deduced from the above is 

V = xy( 1 — w) + x{l — y)( 1 — w) + (1 — x)y{ 1 — w) 

+(1 — x)(l — y)w + (1 — x)(l — y)( 1 — w) = 1 — w + w(l — x)(l — y); 

and similarly reducing V x ,V y ,V w , we get 

V x = x(l - w), V v = y(l-w), V w = w(l-x)(l -y); 


= 1 — w + w{l — x)(l — y). (2) 


furnishing the algebraic equations 

x(l — w) y(l — w) w{l — x)(l — y) 
p q r 

As respects those terms of the development characterized by the coefficients g, 
I shall, instead of collecting them into a single term, present them, for the sake 
of variety (xvil. 18), in the form 


0 

0 


x(l 


«0 + 5 (i 


x)y( l 


w); 


(3) 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


217 


the value of Prob. 2 will then be 


Prob. z = 


(1 — x)(l — y)(l — w) + cx( 1 — w) + c'( 1 — x)y(lw) 
1 — w + w( 1 — x)(l — y) 


(4) 


From (2) and (4) we deduce 


xj , (1 -p-r)(l-q-r) ,q(l-p-r) 

Prob. z = 1 - cp + c 


1 — r 


1 — r 


as the expression of the probability required. If in this result we make c = 0, 
and c! = 0, we find for an inferior limit of its value l 1 p yKi-g-O all( ] jf we 
make c = 1, d = 1, we obtain for its superior limit 1 — r. 

6. It appears from inspection of this solution, that the premises chosen 
were exceedingly defective. The constants c and d indicate this, and the cor- 
responding terms (3) of the final logical equation show how the deficiency is to 
be supplied. Thus, since 


x(l — w ) = x{l — (1 — x)(l — 3/) (1 — z)} = x, 

(1 - x)y{ 1 - w) = (1 - x)y{ 1 - (1 - x)(l - y)( 1 - z)} = (1 - x)y. 


we learn that c is the probability that if any house was visited by fever its 
sanitary condition is defective, and that d is the probability that if any house 
was visited by cholera without fever, its sanitary condition was defective. 

If the terms of the logical development affected by the coefficient ^ had been 
collected together as in the direct statement of the general rule, the final solution 
would have assumed the following form: 


Prob. z = 


0 - — P — r){l — q — r) 
1 — r 


+ c [ p + q - 


pq 

1 — r 


c here representing the probability that if a house was visited by either or both 
of the diseases mentioned, its sanitary condition was defective. This result is 
perfectly consistent with the former one, and indeed the necessary equivalence 
of the different forms of solution presented in such cases may be formally estab- 
lished. 

The above solution may be verified in particular cases. Thus, taking the 
second form, if c = 1 we find Prob. z = 1 — r, a correct result. For if the presence 
of either fever or cholera certainly indicated a defective sanitary condition, the 
probability that any house would be in a defective sanitary state would be 
simply equal to the probability that it was not found in that category denoted 
by z, the probability of which would, by the data, be 1 — r, Perhaps the general 
verification of the above solution would be difficult. 

The constants p, q, and r in the above solution are subject to the conditions 


p + r < 1, q + r < 1. 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


218 


7. Ex. 5. — Given the probabilities of the premises of a hypothetical syllogism 
to find the probability of the conclusion. 

Let the syllogism in its naked form be as follows: 

Major premiss: If the proposition Y is true X is true. 

Minor premiss: If the proposition Z is true Y is true. 

Conclusion: If the proposition Z is true X is true. 

Suppose the probability of the major premiss to be p, that of the minor 
premiss q. 

The data then are as follows, representing the proposition X by x, &c., and 
assuming c and d as arbitrary constants: 

Prob. y = c, Prob. xy = cp\ 

Prob. z = d , Prob. yz = dq\ 

from which we are to determine, 

Prob. xz Prob. xz 

or . 

Prob. z d 


Let us assume, 

xy = it, yz = v, xz = w, 

then, proceeding according to the usual method to determine w as a developed 
function of y, z, w, and v, the symbols corresponding to propositions whose 
probabilities are given, we find 

w = uzvy + Oit(l — z){ 1 — v)y + 0(1 — u)zvy 

+ jj(! ^ u)z( 1 - u)(l -y) + 0(1 - u)(l - z){ 1 - v)y 

+ 0(1 — u)(l — z)( 1 — u)(l — y) + terms whose coefficients are 
and passing from Logic to Algebra, 


uzvy + w(l — z)( 1 — v)y uzvy + (1 — u)zvy + (1 — u)z( 1 — u)(l — y ) 


cp 


uzvy + (1 — u)zvy 


c'q 


uzvy + it(l — z){ 1 — v)y + (1 — u)zvy + (1 — it)(l — z){ 1 — v)y 


= V. 


Prob. w = 


uzvy + a(l — u)z(l — v)(l — y) 
V ’ 


wherein 


V = uzvy + u( 1 — z){ 1 — v)y + (1 — u)zvy + (1 — u)z{l — u)(l — y) 
+(1 - u)(l - z)( 1 - v)y+( 1 - u)(l - z)( 1 - u)(l - y), 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


219 


the solution of this system of equations gives 

Prob. w = dpq + ad {1 — q), 


whence 


Prob. xy 


= pq + a(l-q), 


the value required. In this expression the arbitrary constant a is the probability 
that if the proposition Z is true and Y false, X is true. In other words, it is the 
probability, that if the minor premiss is false, the conclusion is true. 

This investigation might have been greatly simplified by assuming the propo- 
sition Z to be true, and then seeking the probability of X. The data would have 
been simply 

Prob. y = q 1 Prob. xy = pq- 


whence we should have found Prob. x = pq + a(l — q). It is evident that under 
the circumstances this mode of procedure would have been allowable, but I have 
preferred to deduce the solution by the direct and unconditioned application of 
the method. The result is one which ordinary reasoning verifies, and which it 
does not indeed require a calculus to obtain. General methods are apt to appear 
most cumbrous when applied to cases in which their aid is the least required. 

Let it be observed, that the above method is equally applicable to the cate- 
gorical syllogism, and not to the syllogism only, but to every form of deductive 
ratiocination. Given the probabilities separately attaching to the premises of 
any train of argument; it is always possible by the above method to determine 
the consequent probability of the truth of a conclusion legitimately drawn from 
such premises. It is not needful to remind the reader, that the truth and the 
correctness of a conclusion are different things. 

8. One remarkable circumstance which presents itself in such applications 
deserves to be specially noticed. It is, that propositions which, when true, are 
equivalent, are not necessarily equivalent when regarded only as probable. This 
principle will be illustrated in the following example. 

Ex. 6. — Given the probability p of the disjunctive proposition “Either the 
proposition Y is true, or both the propositions X and Y are false,” required the 
probability of the conditional proposition, “If the proposition X is true, Y is 
true.” 

Let x and y be appropriated to the propositions X and Y respectively. Then 
we have 

Prob. y + (1 — x)(l — y) = p, 
from which it is required to find the value of P lot y x v _ 


Assumey + (1 — a;)(l — y) = t. 


(1) 


Eliminating y we get 


(1 — x)(l — t) =0. 


whence 


0 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


220 


and proceeding in the usual way, 

Prob. x = 1 — p + cp. (2) 

Where c is the probability that if either Y is true, or X and Y false, X is true. 
Next to find Prob. xy. Assume 


xy = w. 

Eliminating y from (1) and (3) we get 

z( 1 - t) = 0 ; 


(3) 


whence, proceeding as above, 


Prob. z = cp, 

c having the same interpretation as before. Hence 

Prob. xy cp 

Prob. x 1 — p + cp' 

for the probability of the truth of the conditional proposition given. 

Now in the science of pure Logic, which, as such, is conversant only with 
truth and with falsehood, the above disjunctive and conditional propositions are 
equivalent. They are true and they are false together. It is seen, however, from 
the above investigation, that when the disjunctive proposition has a probability 
p, the conditional proposition has a different and partly indefinite probability 
i _p+cp • Nevertheless these expressions are such, that when either of them be- 
comes 1 or 0, the other assumes the same value. The results are, therefore, 
perfectly consistent, and the logical transformation serves to verify the formula 
deduced from the theory of probabilities. 

The reader will easily prove by a similar analysis, that if the probability of 
the conditional proposition were given as p, that of the disjunctive proposition 
would be 1 — c + cp , where c is the arbitrary probability of the truth of the 
proposition X. 

9. Ex. 7. —Required to determine the probability of an event x, having 
given either the first, or the first and second, or the first, second, and third of 
the following data, viz.: 

1st. The probability that the event x occurs, or that it alone of the three 
events x, y, z, fails, is p. 

2nd. The probability that the event y occurs, or that it alone of the three 
events x, y, z, fails, is q. 

3rd. The probability that the event z occurs, or that it alone of the three 
events x, y, z, fails, is r. 


SOLUTION OF THE FIRST CASE. 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


221 


Here we suppose that only the first of the above data is given. We have 
then, 

Prob. {x + (l — x)yz} = p, 

to find Prob. x, 


Letx + (l — x)yz = s, 

then eliminating yz as a single symbol, we get, 

x(l — s) = 0. 

Hence 

!t = nb = 5' +0 ( 1 - < ’>’ 

whence, proceeding according to the rule, we have 

Prob. x = cp, (1) 

where c is the probability that if x occurs, or alone fails, the former of the two 
alternatives is the one that will happen. The limits of the solution are evidently 
0 and p. 

This solution appears to give us no information beyond what unassisted 
good sense would have conveyed. It is, however, all that the single datum here 
assumed really warrants us in inferring. We shall in the next solution see how 
an addition to our data restricts within narrower limits the final solution. 

SOLUTION OF THE SECOND CASE. 

Here we assume as our data the equations 

Prob. {x + (l — x)yz} = p, 

Prob. {y + (l — y)xz} = q. 


Let us write 


x + (l — x)yz = s, 
y + (! - y)xz = q , 

from the first of which we have, by (VIII. 7), 

{x + (l — x)yz}(l — s) + s{l — x — (l — x)yz} = 0, 
or(x + xyz)s + sx(l — yz) = 0; 

provided that for simplicity we write x for 1 — x, y for 1 — y, and so on. Now, 
writing for 1 — yz its value in constituents, we have 

(x + xyz)s + sx(yz + yz + yz) = 0, 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


222 


an equation consisting solely of positive terms. In like manner we have from the 
second equation, 

(y + yxz)i + ty(xz + xz + xz) = 0; 

and from the sum of these two equations we are to eliminate y and z. 

If in that sum we make y = 1, z = 1, we get the result s + t. 

If in the same sum we make y = 1, z = 0, we get the result 

xs + sx + t. 

If in the same sum we make y = 0, z = 1, we get 

xs + sx + xt + tx. 

And if, lastly, in the same sum we make y = 0, z = 0, we find 
xs + sx + tx + tx, or xs + sx + t. 

These four expressions are to be multiplied together. Now the first and third 
may be multiplied in the following manner: 

(s + t) (xs + sx + xt + tx) 

= xs + xt + (s + t) (sx + tx) by (IX. Prop. II.) 

= xs + xt + sxt + sxt. (2) 

Again, the second and fourth give by (IX. Prop. I.) 

(xs + sx + t) (xs + sx + t) 

= xs + sx. (3) 


Lastly, (2) and (3) multiplied together give 

(xs + sx)(xs + sxt + xt + txs) 
= xs + sx(sxt + xt + txs) 

= xs + sxt. 


Whence the final equation is 

(1 — s)x + s(l — f)(l — x) = 0, 

which, solved with reference to x, gives 

- - ~ *) 

' s(l - t) - (1 - a) 

= ^st + s(l — t) + 0(1 - s)t + 0(1 - s)(l - t), 
and, proceeding with this according to the rule, we have, finally, 


Prob. x = p( 1 — q) + cpq. 


(4) 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


223 


where c is the probability that if the event st happen, x will happen. Now if we 
form the developed expression of st by multiplying the expressions for s and t 
together, we find 

c = Prob. that if x; and y happen together, or x and 2 happen together, and 
y fail, or y and 2 happen together, and x fail, the event x will happen. 

The limits of Prob. x are evidently p( 1 — q) and p. 

This solution is more definite than the former one, inasmuch as it contains 
a term unaffected by an arbitrary constant. 

SOLUTION OF THE THIRD CASE. 

Prob. {a; + (1 — x)yz} = p, 

Here the data are — Prob. {y + (1 — y)xz} = q, 

Prob. {2 + (1 — z)xy} = r. 

Let us, as before, write x for 1 — x, &c., and assume 

x + xyz = s, 
y + yxz = f, 

2 + zxy = u. 

On reduction by (VIII. 8) we obtain the equation 
(x + xyz)s + sx(yz + yz + yz) 

+ (y + yxz)t + ty(zx + xz + xz) (5) 

+ (2 + zxy)u + uz(xy + xy + xy) = 0. 

Now instead of directly eliminating y and 2 from the above equation, let us, 
in accordance with (IX. Prop, III.), assume the result of that elimination to be 

Ex+E'( l-x) =0, 

then E will be found by making in the given equation x = 1, and eliminating y 
and 2 from the resulting equation, and E' will be found by making in the given 
equation x = 0, and eliminating y and 2 from the result. First, then, making 
x = 1, we have 


s + (y + yz)t + tyz + (2 + yz)u + uyz = 0, 

and making in the first member of this equation successively y = 1, z = l,y = 
1,2 = 0, &c., and multiplying together the results, we have the expression 

(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u ) , 

which is equivalent to 

(s + t + u) (s + t + u) . 

This is the expression for E. We shall retain it in its present form. It has already 
been shown by example (VIII. 3), that the actual reduction of such expressions 
by multiplication, though convenient, is not necessary. 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


224 


Again in (5), making x = 0, we have 

yzs + s(yz + yz + yz) + yt + ty + zu + uz = 0; 
from which, by the same process of elimination, we find for E' the expression 
(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u) . 

The final result of the elimination of y and z from (5) is therefore 

(s + i+ u)(s + t + u)x + (s + i + u)(s + i + u)(s + 1 + u)(s + t + w)(l — x) = 0. 


Whence we have 


x = 


(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u) 


(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u)(s + t + u) — (s + 1 + u)(s + 1 + u ) ’ 

or, developing the second member, 

0 1 _ 1 
X = Q S t U + Q S ^ U + Q S ^' U S ^' U 

+ -stu + 0 siu + Ostu + 0 stu. 

Hence, passing from Logic to Algebra, 

stu + siu stu + stu stu + siu 
p q r 

= stu + stu + stu + stu + stu. 


( 6 ) 


( 7 ) 


Prob. x = 


stu + cstu 


stu + stu + stu + stu + stu 


(8) 


s t 

To simplify this system of equations, change - into s, = into t, & c., and after 

s t. 

the change let A stand for stu + s + t + 1 . We then have 


Prob. x = 

with the relations 

stu + s stu + t stu + u 


s + cstu 


p q 

From these equations we get 


A 


— stu TsTtTrATl — A. 


(9) 


(10) 


stu + s = A p, (11) 

stu + s = A — t — u — 1, 

Xp = A — u — t — 1. 
u + t = A(1 — p) — 1. 

Similarly, u + s = A(1 — q) — 1, 
ands + t= A(1 — r) — 1. 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


225 


From which equations we find 

A(1 +p — q — r) — 1 

S - 2 ’ 

A(1 + r 
u = 


_ A(1 + q — r - p) - 1 
2 

-p- q) ~ 1 
2 


(12) 


Now, by (10), 


stu = Xp — s. 

Substitute in this equation the values of s, t, and u above determined, and we 
have 


{(1 + p — q — r)A — 1}{(1 + 5 — P — r-)A — 1}{(1 + r — p — q) A - 1} 

= 4{(p + g + r- 1)A + 1}, (13) 

an equation which determines A. The values of s, t, and u , are then given by 
(12), and their substitution in (9) completes the solution of the problem. 

10. Now a difficulty, the bringing of which prominently before the reader has 
been one object of this investigation, here arises. How shall it be determined, 
which root of the above equation ought to taken for the value of A. To this 
difficulty some reference was made in the opening of the present chapter, and it 
was intimated that its fuller consideration was reserved for the next one; from 
which the following results are taken. 

In order that the data of the problem may be derived from a possible expe- 
rience, the quantities p, q, and r must be subject to the following conditions: 

1 + p — q — r > 0, 

l + q- p- r>0, (14) 

1 + r — p — q > 0. 

Moreover, the value of A to be employed in the general solution must satisfy the 
following conditions: 

A > , A > , A > . (15) 

1+p—q—r 1+q—p—r 1+r—p—q 

Now these two sets of conditions suffice for the limitation of the general 
solution. It may be shown, that the central equation (13) furnishes but one 
value of A, which does satisfy these conditions, and that value of A is the one 
required. 

Let 1+p — q — r be the least of the three coefficients of A given above, then 

will be the greatest of those values, above which we are to show 

1 + P — q ~ t 

that there exists but one value of A. Let us write (13) in the form 


{(1 +p — q — r)A — 1}{(1 + <7 — P — r)A — 1}{(1 + r — p — g)A — 1 } 

-4{(p+ q + r - 1)A + 1} = 0; (16) 



CHAPTER XVIII. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS 


226 


and represent the first member by V. 

Assume A = . , then V becomes 


1 + p — q — r 
p + q + r — 1 


—4 


1 + p — q — r 


+ 1 = -4 


2 P 


1 + p — q ~ r 


which is negative. Let A = oo, then V is positive and infinite. 
Again, 


d 2 V 

= (I+p-q~r)(l + q-p-r){(l + r-p-q)X-l} 

+ similar positive terms, 

which expression is positive between the limits A = 1 +p i i q _ r and A = oo. 

If then we construct a curve whose abscissa shall be measured by A, and 
whose ordinates by V, that curve will, between the limits specified, pass from 
below to above the abscissa A, its convexity always being downwards. Hence it 
will but once intersect the abscissa A within those limits; and the equation (16) 
will, therefore, have but one root thereto corresponding. 

The solution is, therefore, expressed by (9), A being that root of (13) which 
satisfies the conditions (15), and s,t, and u being given by (12). The interpre- 
tation of c may be deduced in the usual way. 

It appears from the above, that the problem is, in all cases, more or less 
indeterminate. 



Chapter XIX 


OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


1. By the term statistical conditions, I mean those conditions which must con- 
nect the numerical data of a problem in order that those data may be consistent 
with each other, and therefore such as statistical observations might actually 
have furnished. The determination of such conditions constitutes an important 
problem, the solution of which, to an extent sufficient at least for the require- 
ments of this work, I purpose to undertake in the present chapter, regarding it 
partly as an independent object of speculation, but partly also as a necessary 
supplement to the theory of probabilities already in some degree exemplified. 
The nature of the connexion between the two subjects may be stated as follows: 

2. There are innumerable instances, and one of the kind presented itself 
in the last chapter, Ex. 7, in which the solution of a question in the theory 
of probabilities is finally dependent upon the solution of an algebraic equation 
of an elevated degree. In such cases the selection of the proper root must 
be determined by certain conditions, partly relating to the numerical values 
assigned in the data, partly to the due limitation of the element required. The 
discovery of such conditions may sometimes be effected by unaided reasoning. 
For instance, if there is a probability p of the occurrence of an event A , and a 
probability q of the concurrence of the said event A, and another event B , it is 
evident that we must have 

p> q. 

But for the general determination of such relations, a distinct method is re- 
quired, and this we proceed to establish. 

As derived from actual experience, the probability of any event is the result 
of a process of approximation. It is the limit of the ratio of the number of cases 
in which the event is observed to occur, to the whole number of equally possible 
cases which observation records, -a limit to which we approach the more nearly 
as the number of observations is increased. Now let the symbol n, prefixed to 
the expression of any class, represent the number of individuals contained in 
that class. Thus, x representing men, and y white beings, let us assume 

nx = number of men. 

nxy = number of white men. 

nx(l — y) = number of men who are not white; and so on. 


227 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


228 


In accordance with this notation n(l) will represent the number of individuals 
contained in the universe of discourse, and ^y will represent the probability 
that any individual being, selected out of that universe of being denoted by 
n(l), is a man. If observation has not made us acquainted with the total values 
of n(x) and n(l), then the probability in question is the limit to which 
approaches as the number of individual observations is increased. 

In like manner if, as will generally be supposed in this chapter, x represent 
an event of a particular kind observed, n(x) will represent the number of occur- 
rences of that event, n(l) the number of observed events (equally probable) of 
all kinds, and ((yjy, or its limit, the probability of the occurrence of the event x. 

Hence it is clear that any conclusions which may be deduced respecting the 
ratios of the quantities n(x), n(y), n( 1), & c. may be converted into conclusions 
respecting the probabilities of the events represented by x, y, &c. Thus, if we 
should find such a relation as the following, viz., 

n(x) + n(y) < n(l), 

expressing that the number of times in which the event x occurs and the number 
of times in which the event y occurs, are together less than the number of 
possible occurrences n(l), we might thence deduce the relation, 

n{x) n(y) 
n(l) n(l) ’ 
orProb. x + Prob. y < 1. 

And generally any such statistical relations as the above will be converted into 
relations connecting the probabilities of the events concerned, by changing n(l) 
into 1, and any other symbol n(x) into Prob. x. 

3. First, then, we shall investigate a method of determining the numerical 
relations of classes or events, and more particularly the major and minor limits 
of numerical value. Secondly, we shall apply the method to the limitation of the 
solutions of questions in the theory of probabilities. 

It is evident that the symbol n is distributive in its operation. Thus we have 

n{xy + (1 — a;)(l — y)} = nxy + n( 1 — x)(l — y) 
nx{ 1 — y) = nx — nxy, 

and so on. The number of things contained in any class resolvable into distinct 
groups or portions is equal to the sum of the numbers of things found in those 
separate portions. It is evident, further, that any expression formed of the logical 
symbols x, y, &c. may be developed or expanded in any way consistent with 
the laws of the symbols, and the symbol n applied to each term of the result, 
provided that any constant multiplier which may appear, be placed outside the 
symbol n; without affecting the value of the result. The expression n(l), should 
it appear, will of course represent the number of individuals contained in the 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


229 


universe. Thus, 


n( 1 — x)(l — y) = n( 1 — x — y + xy) 

= n(l) — n{x) — n(y) + n{xy). 

Again, n{xy + (1 — x)(l — y)} = n(l — x — y + 2 xy) 

= n(l) — nx — ny + 2 nxy). 

In the last member the term 2 nxy indicates twice the number of individuals 
contained in the class xy. 

4. We proceed now to investigate the numerical limits of classes whose logical 
expression is given. In this inquiry the following principles are of fundamental 
importance: 

1st. If all the members of a given class possess a certain property x, the 
total number of individuals contained in the class x will be a superior limit of 
the number of individuals contained in the given class. 

2nd. A minor limit of the number of individuals in any class y will be found 
by subtracting a major numerical limit of the contrary class, 1 — y, from the 
number of individuals contained in the universe. 

To exemplify these principles, let us apply them to the following problem: 

Problem. — Given, n(l), n(x), and n(y), required the superior and inferior 
limits of nxy. 

Here our data are the number of individuals contained in the universe of 
discourse, the number contained in the class x, and the number in the class y , 
and it is required to determine the limits of the number contained in the class 
composed of the individuals that are found at once in the class x and in the 
class y. 

By Principle I. this number cannot exceed the number contained in the class 
x, nor can it exceed the number contained in the class y. Its major limit will 
then be the least of the two values n(x) and (y) . 

By Principle II. a minor limit of the class xy will be given by the expression 

n(l) — major limit of {x(l — y) + y(l — x) + (1 — x)(l — y)}, (1) 

since x(l — y) + y{ 1 — x) — (1 — x)(l — y) is the complement of the class xy, i.e. 
what it wants to make up the universe. 

Now x(l — y) + (1 — x)(l — y) = 1 — y. We have therefore for (1), 

n(l) — major limit of {1 — y + yl — x)} 

= n(l) — n(l — y) — major limit of y( 1 — x). 

The major limit of y(l — x) is the least of the two values n(y) and n( 1 — x). Let 
n(y) be the least, then (2) becomes 

n(l) - n(l - y) - n(y ) 

= n(l) — n( 1) + n(y) — n(y) = 0. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


230 


Secondly, let n( 1 — x) be less than n(y), then 

major limit of ny{ 1 — x) = n( 1 — x ); 
therefore (2) becomes 


n(l) — n( 1 — y) — n{ 1 — x) 

= ?r(l) — n(l) + n(y) — n( 1) + ?r(a;) 

= na; + ny — n(l). 

The minor limit of nxy is therefore either 0 or n( x) + n{y) — n( 1), according 
as n(y) is less or greater than n( 1 — a;), or, which is an equivalent condition, 
according as n{x) is greater or less than n{ 1 — y). 

Now as 0 is necessarily a minor limit of the numerical value of any class, it 
is sufficient to take account of the second of the above expressions for the minor 
limit of n{xy). We have, therefore, 

Major limit of n(xy) = least of values n{x) and n(y). 

Minor limit of n(xy) = n{ x) + n(y) — n(l). 1 


Proposition I. 

5. To express the major and minor limits of a class represented by any 
constituent of the symbols x, y, z, &c.. having given the values of n{x), n(y), 
n(z), &c., and n(l) . 

Consider first the constituent xyz. 

It is evident that the major numerical limit will be the least of the values 
n{x), n(y), n(z). 

The minor numerical limit may be deduced as in the previous problem, but 
it may also be deduced from the solution of that problem. Thus: 

Minor limit of n(xyz) = n(xy) + n(z) — n{ 1). (1) 

Now this means that n(xyz ) is at least as great as the expression n(xy) + n(z) — 
n( 1). But n(xy) is at least as great as n(x) + n(y) — n(l). Therefore n(xyz) is 
at least as great as 


n{x) + n{y) — n( 1) + n{z) — n(l), 
or n{x) + n(y) + n{z) — 2n(l). 

1 The above expression for the minor limit of nxy is applied by Professor De Morgan, by 
whom it appears to have been first given, to the syllogistic form: 

Most men in a certain company have coats. 

Most men in the same company have waistcoats. 

Therefore some in the company have coats and waistcoats. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


231 


Hence we have 

Minor limit of n{xyz) = n(x) + n(y) + n{z) — 2n(l). 

By extending this mode of reasoning we shall arrive at the following conclu- 
sions: 

1st. The major numerical limit of the class represented by any constituent 
will be found by prefixing n separately to each factor of the constituent, and 
taking the least of the resulting values. 

2nd. The minor limit will be found by adding all the values above mentioned 
together, and subtracting from the result as many, less one, times the value of 
n(l). 

Thus we should have 

Major limit of nxy(l — z) = least of the values nx, ny, and n{ 1 — z). 

Minor limit of nxy( 1 — z) = n(x) + n(y) + n(l — z) — 2n(l) 

= nx + n(y) — n(z) — n(l). 

In the use of general symbols it is perhaps better to regard all the values 
n{x), n(y), n( 1 — z), as major limits of n{xy( 1 — 2 )}, since, in fact, it cannot 
exceed any of them. I shall in the following investigations adopt this mode of 
expression. 


Proposition II. 

6. To determine the major numerical limit of a class expressed by a series 
of constituents of the symbols x, y, z, &c., the values ofn{x), n(y), n(z), &c., 
and n{ 1), being given. 

Evidently one mode of determining such a limit would be to form the least 
possible sum of the major limits of the several constituents. Thus a major limit 
of the expression 

n{xy+ (1 - x){l - y)} 

would be found by adding the least of the two values nx, ny, furnished by the 
first constituent, to the least of the two values n(l — x), n(l — y), furnished by 
the second constituent. If we do not know which is in each case the least value, 
we must form the four possible sums, and reject any of these which are equal to 
or exceed ?r(l). Thus in the above example we should have 

nx + n(l — x) = n(l). 
n(x) + n( 1 — y) = n(l) + n{x) — n(y). 
n(y ) + n(l — y) = n{l) + n(y) — n{x). 
n(y) + n( 1 - y) = ?r(l). 

Rejecting the first and last of the above values, we have 

?i(l) + n(x) — n(y), and n(l) + n(y) — n(x), 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


232 


for the expressions required, one of which will (unless nx = ny) be less than 
n(l), and the other greater. The least must of course be taken. 

When two or more of the constituents possess a common factor, as x, that 
factor can only, as is obvious from Principle I., furnish a single term n(x) in the 
final expression of the major limit. Thus if n{x) appear as a major limit in two 
or more constituents, we must, in adding those limits together, replace nx + nx 
by nx, and so on. Take, for example, the expression n{xy + a;(l — y)z}. The 
major limits of this expression, immediately furnished by addition, would be — 

1. nx. 4. ny + nx. 

2. nx + n{ 1 — y). 5. ny + n(l — y). 

3 .nx + n(z). 6 .ny + nz. 

Of these the first and sixth only need be retained; the second, third, and fourth 
being greater than the first; and the fifth being equal to n(l). The limits are 
therefore 

n{ x) and n(y) + n(z), 

and of these two values the last, supposing it to be less than n(l), must be 
taken. 

These considerations lead us to the following Rule: 

Rule. — Take one factor from each constituent, and prefix to it the symbol 
n, add the several terms or results thus formed together, rejecting all repetitions 
of the same term; the sum thus obtained will be a major limit of the expression, 
and the least of all such sums will be the major limit to be employed. 

Thus the major limits of the expression 

xyz + x(l - y)( 1 - z) + (1 - x)(l - y)( 1 - z) 


would be 


n{x) + n{ 1 — y), and n(x) + n(l — z), 
or n{x) + ?i(l) — n(y), and n(x) + n(l) — n(z). 

If we began with n(y), selected from the first term, and took n(x) from the 
second, we should have to take n( 1 — y) from the third term, and this would 
give 

n(y) + n{ x) + n(l — y), or n(l) + n(x). 

But as this result exceeds n(l), which is an obvious major limit to every class, 
it need not be taken into account. 

Proposition III. 

7. To find the minor numerical limit of any class expressed by constituents 
of the symbols x, y, z, having given n(x),n(y), n{z) . . . n(l). 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


233 


This object may be effected by the application of the preceding Proposition, 
combined with Principle II., but it is better effected by the following method: 

Let any two constituents, which differ from one another only by a single 
factor, be added, so as to form a single class term as x(l — y) + xy form x, 
and this species of aggregation having been carried on as far as possible, i.e., 
there having been selected out of the given series of constituents as many sums 
of this kind as can be formed, each such sum comprising as many constituents 
as can be collected into a single term, without regarding whether any of the 
said constituents enter into the composition of other terms, let these ultimate 
aggregates, together with those constituents which do not admit of being thus 
added together, be written down as distinct terms. Then the several minor limits 
of those terms, deduced by Prop. I., will be the minor limits of the expression 
given, and one only of those minor limits will at the same time be positive. 

Thus from the expression xy + (1 — x)y + (1 — x)(l — y) we can form the 
aggregates y and 1 — x, by respectively adding the first and second terms to- 
gether, and the second and third. Hence n{y) and n( 1 — x) will be the minor 
limits of the expression given. Again, if the expression given were 

xyz + x{l — y)z + (1 — x)yz + (l — ®)(1 — y)z 

+ xy(l - z) + (1 - x)(l - y)( 1 - z), 

we should obtain by addition of the first four terms the single term 2 , by addition 
of the first and fifth term the single term xy, and by addition of the fourth and 
sixth terms the single term (1 — a:)(l — y); and there is no other way in which 
constituents can be collected into single terms, nor are there are any constituents 
left which have not been thus taken account of. The three resulting terms give, 
as the minor limits of the given expression, the values 

n(z), n(x) + n(y) - n( 1), 

andn(l — x) + n( 1 — y) — n(l), or n(l) — n(x) — n(y). 

8. The proof of the above rule consists in the proper application of the 
following principles: — 1st. The minor limit of any collection of constituents 
which admit of being added into a single term, will obviously be the minor 
limit of that single term. This explains the first part of the rule. 2nd. The 
minor limit of the sum of any two terms which either are distinct constituents, 
or consist of distinct constituents, but do not admit of being added together, 
will be the sum of their respective minor limits, if those minor limits are both 
positive; but if one be positive, and the other negative, it will be equal to the 
positive minor limit alone. For if the negative one were added, the value of the 
limit would be diminished, i. e. it would be less for the sum of two terms than 
for a single term. Now whenever two constituents differ in more than one factor, 
so as not to admit of being added together, the minor limits of the two cannot 
be both positive. Thus let the terms be xyz and (1 — x)(l — y)z, which differ in 
two factors, the minor limit of the first is n(x + y + z — 2), that of the second 
n( 1 — x + 1 — y + z — 2), or, 

1st. n{x + y — 1 — (1 — z)}. 2nd. n{ 1 — x — y — (1 — z)}. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


234 


If n(x + y — 1) is positive, n( 1 — x — y) is negative, and the second must be 
negative. If n(x + y — 1) is negative, the first is negative; and similarly for cases 
in which a larger number of factors are involved. It may in this manner be 
shown that, according to the mode in which the aggregate terms are formed in 
the application of the rule, no two minor limits of distinct terms can be added 
together, for either those terms will involve some common constituent, in which 
case it is clear that we cannot add their minor limits together, — or the minor 
limits of the two will not be both positive, in which case the addition would be 
useless. 

Proposition IV. 

9. Given the respective numbers of individuals comprised in any classes, s, 
t, &c. logically defined, to deduce a system, of numerical limits of any other 
class w, also logically defined. 

As this is the most general problem which it is meant to discuss in the 
present chapter, the previous inquiries being merely introductory to it, and the 
succeeding ones occupied with its application, it is desirable to state clearly its 
nature and design. 

When the classes s, t...w are said to be logically defined, it is meant that 
they are classes so defined as to enable us to write down their symbolical expres- 
sions, whether the classes in question be simple or compound. By the general 
method of this treatise, the symbol w can then be determined directly as a 
developed function of the symbols s, t, &c. in the form 

w = A + OB + — C + — D, (1) 

wherein A, B, C, and D are formed of the constituents of s, t, &c. How from 
such an expression the numerical limits of w may in the most general manner 
be determined, will be considered hereafter. At present we merely purpose 
to show how far this object can be accomplished on the principles developed 
in the previous propositions; such an inquiry being sufficient for the purposes 
of this work. For simplicity, I shall found my argument upon the particular 
development, 

w = st + Os(l — t) + -(1 — s)t + ^(1 — s)(l — t), (2) 

in which all the varieties of coefficients present themselves. 

Of the constituent (1 — s)(l — t), which has for its coefficient jj, it is implied 
that some, none, or all of the class denoted by that constituent are found in 
w. It is evident that n(w) will have its highest numerical value when all the 
members of the class denoted by (1 — s)(l — /) are found in w. Moreover, as 
none of the individuals contained in the classes denoted by s(l — t) and (1 — s)t 
are found in w, the superior numerical limits of w will be identical with those 
of the class st + (1 — s)(l — t). They are, therefore, 


ns + n(l — t) and nt + n(l — s). 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


235 


In like manner a system of superior numerical limits of the development A + 
OB + gC 1 + ^ D , may be found from those of A + C by Prop. 2. 

Again, any minor numerical limit of w will, by Principle II., be given by the 
expression 

n( 1) — major limit of n( 1 — w), 

but the development of w being given by (1), that of 1 — w will obviously be 
1 - w = OA + B + + ^D. 

This may be directly proved by the method of Prop. 2, Chap. X. Hence 

Minor limit of n(w) = n( 1) — major limit ( B + C) 

= minor limit of {A + D), 

by Principle II., since the classes A + D and B + C are supplementary. Thus 
the minor limit of the second member of (2) would be n(t), and, generalizing 
this mode of reasoning, we have the following result: 

A system of minor limits of the development 

A + OB+^C+^D 

will be given by the minor limits of A + D. 

This result may also be directly inferred. For of minor numerical limits we 
are bound to seek the greatest. Now we obtain in general a higher minor limit 
by connecting the class D with A in the expression of w , a combination which, 
as shown in various examples of the Logic we are permitted to make, than we 
otherwise should obtain. 

Finally, as the concluding term of the development of w indicates the equa- 
tion D = 0, it is evident that n(D) = 0. Hence we have 

Minor limit of n(D) < 0, 

and this equation, treated by Prop. 3, gives the requisite conditions among the 
numerical elements n(s), n(t), &c., in order that the problem may be real, and 
may embody in its data the results of a possible experience, 

Thus from the term jj(l — s)t in the second member of (2) we should deduce 

n(l — s) + n{t) — n(l) < 0, 

.'. n{t) < n(s). 

These conclusions may be embodied in the following rule: 

10. Rule. — Determine the expression of the class w as a developed logical 
function of the symbols s, t, &c. in the form 

w = A + 0B + ^C+ ^D. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


236 


Then will 

Maj. lim. w= Maj. lim. A + C. 

Min. lim. w = Min. lim. A + D. 

The necessary numerical conditions among the data being given by the inequality 

Min. lim. D < n( 1). 

To apply the above method to the limitation of the solutions of questions 
in probabilities, it is only necessary to replace in each of the formula n(x) by 
Prob. x, n(y) by Prob. y, &c., and, finally, n(l) by 1. The application being, 
however, of great importance, it may be desirable to exhibit in the form of a 
rule the chief results of transformation. 

11. Given the probabilities of any events s, t, &c., whereof another event w 
is a developed logical function, in the form 

w = A + OB + — C + — Z), 

required the systems of superior and inferior limits of Prob. w, and the condi- 
tions among the data. 

Solution. — The superior limits of Prob. (A + C), and the inferior limits of 
Prob. ( A + D ) will form two such systems as are sought. The conditions among 
the constants in the data will be given by the inequality, 

Inf. lim. Prob. D < 0. 


In the application of these principles we have always 

Inf. lim. Prob. X 1 X 2 ...x n = Prob. x\ + Prob. X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ + Prob. x n — (n — 1). 

Moreover, the inferior limits can only be determined from single terms, ei- 
ther given or formed by aggregation. Superior limits are included in the form 
^2 Prob. x, Prob. x applying only to symbols which are different, and are taken 
from different terms in the expression whose superior limit is sought. Thus the 
superior limits of Prob. xyz + x(l — y)( 1 — z) are 

Prob. x, Prob. y + Prob. (1 — z), and Prob. z+ Prob. (1 — y). 

Let it be observed, that if in the last case we had taken Prob. z from the first 
term, and Prob. (1 — z) from the second, — a connexion not forbidden, — we 
should have had as their sum 1, which as a result would be useless because a 
priori necessary. It is obvious that we may reject any limits which do not fall 
between 0 and 1. 

Let us apply this method to Ex. 7, Case III. of the last chapter. 

The final logical solution is 




CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


237 


the data being 


Prob. s = p, Prob. t = q, Prob. u = r. 

We shall seek both the numerical limits of x, and the conditions connecting 
p, q , and r. The superior limits of x are, according to the rule, given by those 
of stu + stu. They are, therefore, 

p, q + 1 — r, r + 1 — q. 

The inferior limits of x are given by those of 

stu + stu + stu + stu. 

We may collect the first and third of these constituents in the single term 
si, and the second and third in the single term su. The inferior limits of x must 
then be deduced separately from the terms s(l — t), s(l — u), (1 — s)tu , which 
give 


p+l-q-1, 

or 


p+1 — r— 1, l—p+q+r— 2, 

p — q, p — r, and g + r — p— 1. 


Finally, the conditions among the constants p, q, and r, are given by the 
terms 

stu, stu, stu, 

from which, by the rule, we deduce 

p + 1 — q + r — 2 < 0, p + q + 1 — r — 2 < 0, 1 — p + q + r — 2 < 0. 

orl + g — p — r>0, 1 + j — p — q> 0, 1+p— q — r > 0. 


These are the limiting conditions employed in the analysis of the final solution. 
The conditions by which in that solution A is limited, were determined, however, 
simply from the conditions that the quantities s, t, and u should be positive. 
Narrower limits of that quantity might, in all probability, have been deduced 
from the above investigation. 

12. The following application is taken from an important problem, the so- 
lution of which will be given in the next chapter. There are given, 


Prob. x = Ci, Prob. y = C 2 , Prob. s = C\p\, Prob. t = C 2 P 2 , 


together with the logical equation 

z = stxy + stxy + stxy + 0 st 
1 J stxy + stxy + stxy + stxy + stxy 
0 I +stxy + stxy + stxy + stxy\ 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


238 


and it is required to determine the conditions among the constants ci, C2, pi, 
P2, and the major and minor limits of z. 

First let us seek the conditions among the constants. Confining our attention 
to the terms whose coefficients are g, we readily form, by the aggregation of 
constituents, the following terms, viz.: 

S ( 1 — x )i t(l-y), sy(l-t), tx(l-s)i 

nor can we form any other terms which are not included under these. Hence 
the conditions among the constants are, 

n(s) + n( 1 — x) — n( 1 ) < 0 , 
n(t) + n( 1 — y) — n(l) < 0, 
n(s) + n{y) + n( 1 — t) — 2n(l) < 0, 
n(t) + n(x) + n(l — s) — 2n(l) < 0. 

Now replace n(x) by ci, n(y) by C 2 , n(s) by Cipi, n{t) by C2P2, and n( 1) by 
1, and we have, after slight reductions, 

C1P1 < Ci, C2P2 < c 2 , 

C 1 P 1 < 1 - c 2 (l -P 2 ), C2P2 < 1 - Ci (1 - pi). 

Such are, then, the requisite conditions among the constants. 

Again, the major limits of z are identical with those of the expression 

stxy + s(l — t)x( 1 — y) + (1 — s)f(l — x)y; 

which, if we bear in mind the conditions 

n(s) < n(x ), n(t) < n(y), 

above determined, will be found to be 

n(s) + n(t), or, CiPi + C2P2, 

n(s) + n( 1 — x ), or, 1 — ci(l — Pi)n{t) + n( 1 — y), or, 1 — c 2 (l — £>2)- 

Lastly, to ascertain the minor limits of z, we readily form from the con- 
stituents, whose coefficients are 1 or J, the single terms s and t, nor can any 
other terms not included under these be formed by selection or aggregation. 
Hence, for the minor limits of 2 we have the values Cipi and C2P2- 

13. It is to be observed, that the method developed above does not always 
assign the narrowest limits which it is possible to determine. But it in all 
cases, I believe, sufficiently limits the solutions of questions in the theory of 
probabilities. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


239 


The problem of the determination of the narrowest limits of numerical ex- 
tension of a class is, however, always reducible to a purely algebraical form. 2 
Thus, resuming the equations 

w = A + OB + — C + -D, 

let the highest inferior numerical limit of w be represented by the formula an(s)+ 
bn(t) . . . + dn( 1), wherein a,b,c,...d are numerical constants to be determined, 
and s, t, &c., the logical symbols of which A, B , C, D are constituents. Then 

an(s) + bn(t ) . . . + cin(l) = minor limit of A subject 

to the condition D = 0. 


Hence if we develop the function 

as + bt . . . + d 1 

reject from the result all constituents which are found in D , the coefficients of 
those constituents which remain, and are found also in A, ought not individually 
to exceed unity in value, and the coefficients of those constituents which remain, 
and which are not found in A, should individually not exceed 0 in value. Hence 
we shall have a series of inequalities of the form / < 1, and another series of the 
form g < 0, / and g being linear functions of a, 6, c, &c. Then those values of 
a, b ... d, which, while satisfying the above conditions, give to the function 

an(s) + bn(t) . . . + dn( 1), 

its highest value must be determined, and the highest value in question will 
be the highest minor limit of w. To the above we may add the relations sim- 
ilarly formed for the determination of the relations among the given constants 
n(s),n(t) . . . n(l). 

14. The following somewhat complicated example will show how the limita- 
tion of a solution is effected, when the problem involves an arbitrary element, 
constituting it the representative of a system of problems agreeing in their data, 
but unlimited in their quaesita. 

Problem. — Of n events x\ X 2 . . .x n , the following particulars are known: 

1st. The probability that either the event x\ will occur, or all the events 
fail, is pi . 

2nd. The probability that either the event X 2 will occur, or all the events 
fail, is p 2 - And so on for the others. 

It is required to find the probability of any single event, or combination of 
events, represented by the general functional form </>( X\ . . .x n ), or </>. 

2 The author regrets the loss of a manuscript, written about four years ago, in which this 
method, he believes, was developed at considerable length. His recollection of the contents is 
almost entirely confined to the impression that the principle of the method was the same as 
above described, and that its sufficiency was proved. The prior methods of this chapter are, 
it is almost needless to say, easier, though certainly less general. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


240 


Adopting a previous notation, the data of the problem are 

Prob. (xi + X! . . . x n ) = pi . . . Prob. (x n + x\ . . . x n ) = p n . 

And Prob. (j){x \ . . . x n ) is required. 

Assume generally 


x r + X\ . . . x n = s r , ( 1 ) 

(j) = w. ( 2 ) 

We hence obtain the collective logical equation of the problem 

£{ {x r + X\ . . . X n )s r + S r (x r — X\ . . . Xn) } + 4>W + W(j) = 0 . ( 3 ) 

From this equation we must eliminate the symbols Xi, ... x n , and determine w 
as a developed logical function of si . . . s n . 

Let us represent the result of the aforesaid elimination in the form 

Ew + E'( 1 — w) = 0 ; 

then will E be the result of the elimination of the same symbols from the 
equation 


( X r + X\ . . . X n )s r + S r (x r — X\ . . . Xn) } + 1 — (f> = 0. (4) 

Now E will be the product of the coefficients of all the constituents (consid- 
ered with reference to the symbols x\, X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n ) which are found in the devel- 
opment of the first member of the above equation. Moreover, (j), and therefore 
1 — 0, will consist of a series of such constituents, having unity for their respec- 
tive coefficients. In determining the forms of the coefficients in the development 
of the first member of (4), it will be convenient to arrange them in the following 
manner: 

1st. The coefficients of constituents found in 1 — (f>. 

2nd. The coefficient of Si, X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , if found in </>. 

3rd. The coefficients of constituents found in (j > , excluding the constituent 
X\ , X 2 • • • x n . 

The above is manifestly an exhaustive classification. 

First then; the coefficient of any constituent found in 1 — (f>, will, in the 
development of the first member of (4), be of the form 

1 + positive terms derived from . 

Hence, every such coefficient may be replaced by unity, Prop. I. Chap. ix. 

Secondly; the coefficient of x\ . . . x n , if found in 0, in the development of the 
first member of (4) will be 


£ 


or si + s 2 . . . + s n 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


241 


Thirdly; the coefficient of any other constituent, x\ . . . Xi, Xi+\ ¦ . ¦ x n , found 
in 0, in the development of the first member of (4) will be si . . . Sj + s,;+i . . . + s n . 

Now it is seen, that E is the product of all the coefficients above determined; 
but as the coefficients of those constituents which are not found in 0 reduce to 
unity, E may be regarded as the product of the coefficients of those constituents 
which are found in 0. From the mode in which those coefficients are formed, 
we derive the following rule for the determination of E, viz., in each constituent 
found in 0, except the constituent X\ X2 ¦ ¦ -x n , for x± write si, for oti write si, 
and so on, and add the results; but for the constituent X\,X2 ¦ ¦ -x n , if it occur 
in 0, write si + S 2 . . . + s n , the product of all these sums is E. 

To find E' we must in (3) make w = 0, and eliminate xi, X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , from the 
reduced equation. That equation will be 

(x r + X\ ... + x n )s r + s r {x r — X\ . . . x n ) } + 0 = 0. (5) 

Hence E' will be formed from the constituents in 1 — 0, i. e. from the constituents 
not found in 0 in the same way as E is formed from the constituents found in 


Consider next the equation 

Ew + E'( 1 — w) = 0. 


This gives 


w = 


E’ 

E' - E‘ 


( 6 ) 


Now E and E' are functions of the symbols si,S 2 ...s n . The expansion 
of the value of w will, therefore, consist of all the constituents which can be 
formed out of those symbols, with their proper coefficients annexed to them, as 
determined by the rule of development. 

Moreover, E and E' are each formed by the multiplication of factors, and 
neither of them can vanish unless some one of the factors of which it is composed 
vanishes. Again, any factor, as Si . . . + s n can only vanish when all the terms 
by the addition of which it is formed vanish together, since in development we 
attribute to these terms the values 0 and 1, only. It is further evident, that 
no two factors differing from each other can vanish together. Thus the factors 
si + S 2 • • • + s n , and Si + S 2 . . . + s n , cannot simultaneously vanish, for the 
former cannot vanish unless Si = 0, or si = 1; but the latter cannot vanish 
unless Si = 0. 

First, let us determine the coefficient of the constituent SiS 2 ...s n in the 
development of the value of w. 

The simultaneous assumption si = 1, S 2 = 1 . . . s„ = 1, would cause the 
factor Si + S 2 . . . + s n to vanish if this should occur in E or E'; and no other 
factor under the same assumption would vanish; but Si + S 2 . . . + s„ does not 
occur as a factor of either E or E'\ neither of these quantities, therefore, can 
vanish; and, therefore, the expression E ^_ E , is neither 1, 0, nor 2. 

Wherefore the coefficient of s 1 S 2 . . . s n in the expanded value of w, may be 
represented by q. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


242 


Secondly, let us determine the coefficient of the constituent s± S2 ¦ ¦ ¦ s n . The 
assumptions Si = 1, S2 = 1, . . . s n = 1, would cause the factor Si + S2 • • • + s„ to 
vanish. Now this factor is found in E and not in E' whenever <f> contains both 
the constituents aq X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n and aq X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n . Here then E ^_ E becomes -§7 or 
1 . The factor Si + S2 • ¦ ¦ + s n is found in E' and not in E, if contains neither 
of the constituents X\ X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n and aq aq ¦ ¦ ¦ x n . Here then E ^_ E becomes Sg 
or 0 . Lastly, the factor si + S2 ¦ ¦ ¦ + s n is contained in both E and E', if one of 
the constituents aq X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n and aq aq ¦ ¦ ¦ x n is found in <p, and one is not. Here 
then E f_ E becomes 

The coefficient of the constituent Si S2---S n , will therefore be l, 0 , or [j, 
according as contains both the constituents aq X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n and aq aq ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , or 
neither of them, or one of them and not the other. 

Lastly, to determine the coefficient of any other constituent as Si . . . Sj . . . 

The assumptions si = 1 , . . . s,; = 1 , Sj+i = 0 , s n = 0 , would cause the 
factor si . . . + Si + Sj+i . . . + s n to vanish. Now this factor is found in E, if the 
constituent x\ . . . Xi Xi+ 1 . . . x n is found in (f> and in E' , if the said constituent 
is not found in (j> . In the former case we have E ff E = ^7 = 1 ; in the latter case 
we have ^ = 0. 

Hence the coefficient of any other constituent s\ ... Si, s^+i . . . s n is 1 or 0 
according as the similar constituent x\ . . . x^ Xi+\ . . ¦ x n is or is not found in (f>. 

We may, therefore, practically determine the value of w in the following 
manner. Rejecting from the given expression of <f> the constituents Xi X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x c 
and x\ X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , should both or either of them be contained in it, let the symbols 
x±, X2,---X n , in the result be changed into Si, S2, ¦ ¦ ¦ s n respectively. Let 
the coefficients of the constituents Si S2 . . . s n and si S2 ¦ ¦ - s n be determined 
according to the special rules for those cases given above, and let every other 
constituent have for its coefficient 0 . The result will be the value of w as a 
function of Si, S2, . . • s n . 

As a particular case, let 4 > = x\. It is required from the given data to 
determine the probability of the event X\. 

The symbol x\ expanded in terms of the entire series of symbols xi, X2, ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , 
will generate all the constituents of those symbols which have X\ as a factor. 
Among those constituents will be found the constituent x± X2 ¦ • ¦ x n , but not 
the constituent x\ X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n . 

Hence in the expanded value of x\ as a function of the symbols s±, S2, ¦ ¦ ¦ s n , 
the constituent si S2 ¦ ¦ ¦ s n will have the coefficient g, and the constituent 
si S2 . . . s n the coefficient ^ . 

If from x\ we reject the constituent aq X2---x n , the result will be aq — 
aqaq • • ¦ x n , and changing therein aq into si &c., we have si — S1S2 . . . s n for the 
corresponding portion of the expression of aq as a function of si, S2, . . . s n . 

Hence the final expression for aq is 

0 1 _ _ 

%1 Si — S1S2 • • ¦ s n + Q S 1 S 2 • • • Sn + Q SlS2 ' ' ¦ S n 

+ constituents whose coefficients are 0. 


( 7 ) 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


243 


The sum of all the constituents in the above expansion whose coefficients 
are either 1, 0, or g, will be 1 — S 1 S 2 • ¦ • s n . 

We shall, therefore, have the following algebraic system for the determination 
of Prob. X\, viz.: 


Prob. x\ 


Si — S1S2 . . . S n + CS1S2 . . . s n 
1 — S1S2 . ¦ • S n 


(8) 


with the relations 


si _ S2 _ s n 

Pi P 2 Pn ( 9 ) 

= 1 — S 1 S 2 . . . s„ = A. 


It will be seen, that the relations for the determination of Si S2 . . . s n are quite 
independent of the form of the function <j>, and the values of these quantities, 
determined once, will serve for all possible problems in which the data are the 
same, however the qucesita of those problems may vary. The nature of that 
event, or combination of events, whose probability is sought, will affect only the 
form of the function in which the determined values of Si S2 . . . s n are to be 
substituted. We have from (9) 

Sl — Pl A, S2 P 2 X 7 • • • Sn — Pn A. 


Whence 


Or, 


1 - (1 - PlA)(l - P2 A) ... (1 - p n X) = A. 


1 - A = (1 - piA)(l - P 2 A) ... (1 - p n A); 


from which equation the value of A is to be determined. 

Supposing this value determined, the value of Prob. X\ will be 

Pi \ - (1 - c)pip 2 • ¦ -p n A” 


1 - (1 - piA)(l - p 2 A) ... (1 - p n A) ’ 
or, on reduction by (10), 

Prob. xi = pi - (1 - c)pip 2 ¦ ¦ -p n A" -1 . 


(10) 


( 11 ) 


Let us next seek the conditions which must be fulfilled among the constants 
Pi 1 P2 7 ¦ ¦ -Pri7 and the limits of the value of Prob. x\. 

As there is but one term with the coefficient 1, there is but one condition 
among the constants, viz., 


Minor limit, (1 — Si)(l — s 2 ) ¦ • ¦ (1 ~ s„) < 0. 

n(l — si) + n(l — s 2 ) . . . + n(l — s n ) — (n - l)n(l) < 0 . 
n( 1) - n(si) — n(s 2 ) ¦ ¦ ¦ - n(s n ) < 0. 

Pi +P 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ +Pn > 1 , 


Or, 

Or, 

Whence 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


244 


the condition required. 

The major limit of Prob. x\ is the major limit of the sum of those con- 
stituents whose coefficients are 1 or 2. But that sum is si. 

Hence, 

Major limit, Prob. X\ = major limit Si = p\. 

The minor limit of Prob. X\ will be identical with the minor limit of the ex- 
pression 

Si - SiS 2 . . . s n + (1 - si)(l - s 2 ) ... (1 - s n ). 

A little attention will show that the different aggregates, terms which can 
be formed out of the above, each including the greatest possible number of 
constituents, will be the following, viz.: 


si(l-s 2 ), Si(l-S 3 ),...Si(l-S n ), (1 - s 2 )(l - s 3 ) . . . (1 - s n ). 

From these we deduce the following expressions for the minor limit, viz.: 

P 1 -P 2 , Pl-P3---Pl-Pn, 1 ~P2 ~P3 ¦ • ¦ ~Pn- 

The value of Prob. X\ will, therefore, not fall short of any of these values, 
nor exceed the value of p± . 

Instead, however, of employing these conditions, we may directly avail our- 
selves of the principle stated in the demonstration of the general method in 
probabilities. The condition that Si, s 2 , . . . s n must each be less than unity, re- 
quires that A should be less than each of the quantities — A ... JL . And the 
condition that si, s 2 , . . . s n , must each be greater than 0, requires that A should 
also be greater than 0. Now pi p 2 . . ,p n being proper fractions satisfying the 
condition 

Pl +P2 ¦ ¦ ¦ +Pn > 1 , 

it may be shown that but one positive value of A can be deduced from the central 
equation (10) which shall be less than each of the quantities That 

value of A is, therefore, the one required. 

To prove this, let us consider the equation 


(l - piA)(l - p 2 A) ... (1 - p n A) - 1 + A = 0. 


When A = 0 the first member vanishes, and the equation is satisfied. Let 
us examine the variations of the first member between the limits A = 0 and 
A = A-, supposing p\ the greatest of the values p\ p 2 . . . p n ¦ Representing the 
first member of the equation by V, we have 


dV 

~d\ 


-Pl(l - P2A) ... (1 - Pn A) ... - Pn( 1 - PiA) ... (1 - Pn- 1 A) + 1, 


which, when A = 0, assumes the form —p-\ — P 2 ... — p n + 1, and is negative in 
value. 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


245 


Again, we have 


d 2 V 

d)A 


PlP 2 {I ~P3\)(1 -p„A) + &c., 


consisting of a series of terms which, under the given restrictions with reference 
to the value of A, are positive. 

Lastly, when A = — , we have 


V = —1 + 


1 

Pi 


which is positive. 

From all this it appears, that if we construct a curve, the ordinates of which 
shall represent the value of V corresponding to the abscissa A, that curve will 
pass through the origin, and will for small values of A lie beneath the abscissa. 
Its convexity will, between the limits A = 0 and A = — be downwards, and 


at the extreme limit A- the curve will be above the abscissa, its ordinate being 
positive. It follows from this description, that it will intersect the abscissa once, 
and only once, within the limits specified, viz., between the values A = 0, and 

A =£- 


The solution of the problem is, therefore, expressed by (11), the value of A be- 
ing that root of the equation (10) , which lies within the limits 0 and A- J_ _ _ _L 
The constant c is obviously the probability, that if the events aq, x 2 , ¦ ¦ • x n , 
all happen, or all fail, they will all happen. 

This determination of the value of A suffices for all problems in which the data 
are the same as in the one just considered. It is, as from previous discussions we 
are prepared to expect, a determination independent of the form of the function 
4>. Let us, as another example, suppose 


4> = or«) = aq(l - x 2 ) ¦¦¦{!- x n ) ... + x n (l - aq) ... (1 - x n -i). 


This is equivalent to requiring the probability, that of the events aq, aq, . . . x n 
one, and only one, will happen. The value of w will obviously be 

w = si(l - s 2 ) . . . (1 - s n ) . . . + s n ( 1 - Si) ... (1 - s„_i) + ^(1 - si) . . . (1 - s„), 

from which we should have 


Prob. {aq(l - x 2 ) . . . (1 - x n ) . . . + a;„(l - aq) . . . (1 - x„_i)} 
_ si(l - s 2 ) . . . (1 - s n ) . . . + s n (l - Sj) . . . (1 - s ra _i) 

1 - (1 - Si) . . . (1 - s„) 

_ PiA(l - p 2 A) ... (1 - p n A) . . . + P„A(1 - piA) ... (1 - p„_iA) 

A 

Pi(l-A) p 2 ( 1 - A) p„(l-A) 


1 - piX 1 — p 2 A 


1 PnX 



CHAPTER XIX. OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 


246 


This solution serves well to illustrate the remarks made in the introductory 
chapter (I. 16) The essential difficulties of the problem are founded in the nature 
of its data and not in that of its quaesita. The central equation by which A 
is determined, and the peculiar discussions connected therewith, are equally 
pertinent to every form which that problem can be made to assume, by varying 
the interpretation of the arbitrary elements in its original statement. 



Chapter XX 

PROBLEMS RELATING TO THE CONNEXION OF 
CAUSES AND EFFECTS. 


1. So to apprehend in all particular instances the relation of cause and effect, as 
to connect the two extremes in thought according to the order in which they are 
connected in nature (for the modus operandi is, and must ever be, unknown to 
us), is the final object of science. This treatise has shown, that there is special 
reference to such an object in the constitution of the intellectual faculties. There 
is a sphere of thought which comprehends things only as coexistent parts of a 
universe; but there is also a sphere of thought (Chap. XI.) in which they are 
apprehended as links of an unbroken, and, to human appearance, an endless 
chain — as having their place in an order connecting them both with that which 
has gone before, and with that which shall follow after. In the contemplation of 
such a series, it is impossible not to feel the pre-eminence which is due, above 
all other relations, to the relation of cause and effect. 

Here I propose to consider, in their abstract form, some problems in which 
the above relation is involved. There exists among such problems, as might 
be anticipated from the nature of the relation with which they are concerned, 
a wide diversity. From the probabilities of causes assigned a priori, or given 
by experience, and their respective probabilities of association with an effect 
contemplated, it may be required to determine the probability of that effect; 
and this either, 1st, absolutely, or 2ndly, under given conditions. To such an 
object some of the earlier of the following problems relate. On the other hand, 
it may be required to determine the probability of a particular cause, or of some 
particular connexion among a system of causes, from observed effects, and the 
known tendencies of the said causes, singly or in connexion, to the production of 
such effects. This class of questions will be considered in a subsequent portion 
of the chapter, and other forms of the general inquiry will also be noticed. I 
would remark, that although these examples are designed chiefly as illustrations 
of a method, no regard has been paid to the question of ease or convenience in 
the application of that method. On the contrary, they have been devised, with 
whatever success, as types of the class of problems which might be expected to 
arise from the study of the relation of cause and effect in the more complex of 
its actual and visible manifestations. 


247 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


248 


2 . Problem I. -The probabilities of two causes A\ and A 2 are ci and C2 
respectively. The probability that if the cause Ai present itself, an event E 
will accompany it (whether as a consequence of the cause A\ or not) is p \ , and 
the probability that if the cause A 2 present itself, that event E will accompany 
it, whether as a consequence of it or not, is P2- Moreover, the event E cannot 
appear in the absence of both the causes A 1 and A 2 . 1 Required the probability 
of the event E. 

The solution of what this problem becomes in the case in which the causes 
A -[ , A 2 are mutually exclusive, is well known to be 

Prob. E = Cipi + C-2P2', 

and it expresses a particular case of a fundamental and very important principle 
in the received theory of probabilities. Here it is proposed to solve the problem 
free from the restriction above stated. 

Let us represent 

The cause A\ by x. 

The cause A2 by y. 

The effect E by z. 

Then we have the following numerical data: 

Prob. x = Ci, Prob. y = C2, 

Prob. xz = Cipi, Prob. yz = c 2 p2- ( 1 ) 

Again, it is provided that if the causes A\, A 2 are both absent, the effect E does 
not occur; whence we have the logical equation 

(1 - x)(l -y) = v(l - z). 


Or, eliminating v, 


z( 1 -x)(l-y)= 0 . 


Now assume, 


xz = s, yz = t. 


(2) 

( 3 ) 


lr The mode in which such data as the above might be furnished by experience is easily 
conceivable. Opposite the window of the room in which I write is a field, liable to be overflowed 
from two causes, distinct, but capable of being combined, viz., floods from the upper sources 
of the River Lee, and tides from the ocean. Suppose that observations made on N separate 
occasions have yielded the following results: On A occasions the river was swollen by freshets, 
and on P of those occasions it was inundated, whether from this cause or not. On B occasions 
the river was swollen by the tide, and on Q of those occasions it was inundated, whether from 
this cause or not. Supposing, then, that the field cannot be inundated in the absence of 
both the causes above mentioned, let it be required to determine the total probability of its 
inundation. 

Here the elements a, b , p , q of the general problem represent the ratios 

A P B Q 
AT ’ A' N' B' 

or rather the values to which those ratios approach, as the value of N is indefinitely increased. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


249 


Then, reducing these equations (VIII. 7), and connecting the result with (2), 

xz( 1 — s) + s(l — xz) + yz{ 1 — t) + t{ 1 — yz) + z( 1 — a;)(l — y) = 0. (4) 

From this equation, 2 must be determined as a developed logical function of 
x, y, s, and t, and its probability thence deduced by means of the data, 

Prob. x = Ci, Prob. y = C2, Prob. s = cipi, Prob. t = C 2 P 2 - (5) 

Now developing (4) with respect to z, and putting x for 1 — x, y for 1 — y, 
and 2 so on, we have 

(xs + sx + yt + ty + xy)z + (s + t)z = 0, 
s + 1 

z. ~V 3 3 = 3 

s + t — xs — sx — yt — ty — xy 

1 _ 1 1 
= stxy + -stxy + -stxy + -stxy 

1 _ - _ 1 1 
+ -stxy + stxy + - stxy + - stxy 

1 _ 1 __ __ 1 

+ -stxy + - stxy + stxy + - stxy 

+0 stxy + 0 stxy + Ostxy + Osixy. (6) 

From this result we find (XVII. 17), 

V = stxy + stxy + stxy + stxy + stxy 
+stxy + stxy 
= stxy + stxy + stxy + st. 


Whence, passing from Logic to Algebra, we have the following system of equa- 
tions, u standing for the probability sought: 


stxy + stxy + stx stxy + stxy + sty 
ci c 2 

stxy + stxy stxy + stxy 
ClPl C2P2 

stxy + stxy + stxy stxy + stxy + stxy + st 
u 1 

from which we must eliminate s, t, x, y, and V. 

Now if we have any series of equal fractions, as 

a b c 

a' = V = c 7 = ’ 


we know that 


la + mb + nc 
la ' + mb 1 + nc' 


2 The original text was “y for 1 = y” , corrected here by Distributed Proofreaders. 


( 7 ) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


250 


And thus from the above system of equations we may deduce 
U - CiPi U - C2P2 1 — u 

whence we have, on equating the product of the three first members to the cube 
of the last, 

ss 2 t,Pxxyy 


= V . 

(U - CiPi)(ti - C2P2) (1 - u) 

Again, from the system (7) we have 

six sty stxy 


1 — U — Cl + C1P1 1 — U — C 2 + C2P2 C1P1 + C2P2 — u 
whence proceeding as before 


= V, 


ss 2 tt 2 xxyy 


= V. 


(1 - Cl + C\P! - Zt)(l - C 2 + C2P2 - u)(ciPi + C2P2 ~ u) 
Equating the values of V 3 in (8) and (9), we have 

(u - cipx)(u - c 2 p 2 )( 1 - u) 
= {1 - ci (1 - pi) - u)}{! - c 2 (l -p 2 ) - u}(cip 1 + C 2 P 2 - u), 


(8) 


(9) 


which may be more conveniently written in the form 

Q- cipi)Q- C 2 P 2 ) = {1 - Ci (1 -pi) - u}{ 1 - c 2 ( 1 p 2 ) ^ u} , 1Q , 
C\P\ + C 2 P 2 — u 1 — u 

From this equation the value of u may be found. It remains only to determine 
which of the roots must be taken for this purpose. 

3. It has been shown (XIX. 12) that the quantity u, in order that it may 
represent the probability required in the above case, must exceed each of the 
quantities Cipi, c 2 p 2 , and fall short of each of the quantities 1 — ci(l — pi), 
1 — c 2 (l — p 2 ) and C 1 P 1 + c 2 p 2 ; the condition among the constants, moreover, 
being that the three last quantities must individually exceed each of the two 
former ones. Now I shall show that these conditions being satisfied, the final 
equation (10) has but one root which falls within the limits assigned. That root 
will therefore be the required value of u. 

Let us represent the lower limits Cipi, c 2 p 2 , by a, b respectively, and the 
upper limits 1 — ci(l — pi), 1 — c 2 (l— p 2 ) and cipi + c 2 p 2 by a' , b', P respectively. 
Then the general equation may be expressed in the form 

( u — a) (u — b)( 1 — u) — ( a' — u)(b' — u)(c' — u) = 0, (11) 

or(l — a' — b')u 2 — {ab — a'b' + (1 — a' — b')c'}u + ab — a!b' c' = 0. 


Representing the first member of the above equation by V, we have 


d 2 V 

du 2 


2(1 — a' — b'). 


(12) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


251 


Now let us suppose a the highest of the lower limits of u, a' the lowest of its 
higher limits, and trace the progress of the values of V between the limits u = a 
and u = a'. 

When u = a, we see from the form of the first member of (11) that V is 
negative, and when u = a' we see that V is positive. Between those limits V 

• • • • • j2 T T ^ 

varies continuously without becoming infinite, and A-y is always of the same 
sign. 

Hence if u represent the abscissa V the ordinate of a plane curve, it is 
evident that the curve will pass from a point below the axis of u corresponding 
to u = a, to a point above the axis of u corresponding to u = a', the curve 
remaining continuous, and having its concavity or convexity always turned in 
the same direction. A little attention will show that, under these circumstances, 
it must cut the axis of u once, and only once. 

Hence between the limits u = a, u = a 1 , there exists one value of u, and only 
one, which satisfies the equation (11). It will further appear, if in thought the 
curve be traced, that the other value of u will be less than a when the quantity 
1 — a' — b' is positive and greater than any one of the quantities a', c' when 
1 — a' — b' is negative. It hence follows that in the solution of (11) the positive 
sign of the radical must be taken. We thus find 


ab — a'b' + (1 — a' — b')c' + \JQ 

2(1 - a' - b ') 


(13) 


where Q = {ab - a'b 1 + (1 - a' - b')c'} 2 - 4(1 - a' - b')(ab - a'b'c'). 

4. The results of this investigation may to some extent be verified. Thus, 
it is evident that the probability of the event E must in general exceed the 
probability of the concurrence of the event E and the cause A\ or A 2 . Hence 
we must have, as the solution indicates, 


u > C\Pi, u > C2P2 • 

Again, it is clear that the probability of the effect E must in general be less 
than it would be if the causes A l5 A 2 were mutually exclusive. Hence 

u < C1P1 + C2P2 • 

Lastly, since the probability of the failure of the effect E concurring with the 
presence of the cause A\ must, in general, be less than the absolute probability 
of the failure of E, we have 

ci(l - pi) < 1 - u, 

:.u< 1 - c \ (1 -pi). 


Similarly, 

u< 1 - c 2 (l P2) • 

And thus the conditions by which the general solution was limited are con- 
firmed. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


252 


Again, let pi =1, p 2 = 1. This is to suppose that when either of the causes 
Ai, A 2 is present, the event E will occur. We have then a = Ci, b = c 2 , a' = 1, 
b' = 1, d = Ci + C 2 , and substituting in (13) we get 


CiC 2 - Ci - C 2 - 1 + \/{( c l c 2 - Ci - c 2 - l) 2 + 4 (cic 2 - Ci - c 2 )} 

U ~ -2 

= Ci + c 2 — cic 2 on reduction 
= 1 - (1 - ci)(l - c 2 ). 

Now this is the known expression for the probability that one cause at least will 
be present, which, under the circumstances, is evidently the probability of the 
event E. 

Finally, let it be supposed that ci and c 2 are very small, so that their product 
may be neglected; then the expression for u reduces to cipi + c 2 p 2 . Now the 
smaller the probability of each cause, the smaller, in a much higher degree, is 
the probability of a conjunction of causes. Ultimately, therefore, such reduction 
continuing, the probability of the event E becomes the same as if the causes 
were mutually exclusive. 

I have dwelt at greater length upon this solution, because it serves in some 
respect as a model for those which follow, some of which, being of a more 
complex character, might, without such preparation, appear difficult. 

5. Problem II. — In place of the supposition adopted in the previous prob- 
lem, that the event E cannot happen when both the causes A\, A 2 are absent, 
let it be assumed that the causes A±, A 2 cannot both be absent, and let the 
other circumstances remain as before. Required, then, the probability of the 
event E. 

Here, in place of the equation (2) of the previous solution, we have the 
equation 

{l-x)(l-y) = 0. 

The developed logical expression of 2 is found to be 

1 _ 1 1 
z = stxy + -stxy + stxy + - stxy 

1 - - _ 1 1 
+ - stxy + stxy + - stxy + - stxy 

1 _ 1 __ __ 1 

+ - stxy + - stxy + stxy + - stxy 

+ 0 stxy + 0 stxy + Ostxy + -stxy; 

and the final solution is 

Prob. E = it; 

the quantity u being determined by the solution of the equation 

( u — a) (u — b) (a' — u) (b r — u) 
u — a' — b' + 1 ’ 


a + b — u 


(1) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


253 


wherein a = Cipi, b = c 2 p 2 , a' = 1 — ci(l — pi), b' = 1 — c 2 (l — p 2 ). 

The conditions of limitation are the following: — That value of u must be 
chosen which exceeds each of the three quantities 

a, b, and a + b' — 1, 

and which at the same time falls short of each of the three quantities 

a' , b' , and a + b. 

Exactly as in the solution of the previous problem, it may be shown that the 
quadratic equation (1) will have one root, and only one root, satisfying these 
conditions. The conditions themselves were deduced by the same rule as before, 
excepting that the minor limit a 1 + b' — 1 was found by seeking the major limit 
oil — z. 

It may be added that the constants in the data, beside satisfying the condi- 
tions implied above, viz., that the quantities a' , b ' , and a + b, must individually 
exceed a, b, and a 1 + b' — 1, must also satisfy the condition c\ + c 2 > 1. This 
also appears from the application of the rule. 

6. Problem III. — The probabilities of two events A and B are a and b 
respectively, the probability that if the event A take place an event E will 
accompany it is p , and the probability that if the event B take place, the same 
event E will accompany it is q. Required the probability that if the event A 
take place the event B will take place, or vice versa, the probability that if B 
take place, A will take place. 

Let us represent the event A by x, the event B by y, and the event E by z. 
Then the data are — 


Prob. x = a, 

Prob. xz = ap, 

Whence it is required to find 

Prob . xy 


Prob. y = b. 
Prob. yz = bq. 


or 


Prob. xy 


Prob. x Prob. y 


Let 


xy = s, yz = t, xy = w. 

Eliminating z, we have, on reduction, 

sx + ty + syi + xts + xyw + (1 — xy)w = 0, 

1 1 _ 1 __ 

= xyst + -xyst + -xyst + -xyst 

1 - _ - 1 _ - 1 __ - 
sx + ty + syt + xts + xy + -zxyst + 0 xyst + -xyst + -xyst 
¦ iv — U U (J 

2a:y - 1 1 1 _ 1 _ 

+ -xyst + -xyst + 0 xyst + -xyst 
+ xyst + 0 xyst + Oxyst + Oxysi. 


(1) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


254 


Hence, passing from Logic to Algebra, 


Prob. xy 


xyst + xyst 
V 


x, y, s, and t being determined by the system of equations 

xyst + xyst + xyst + xyst xyst + xyst + xyst + xyst 
a 6 

xyst + xyst xyst + xyst 
ap bq 

= xyst + xyst + xyst. + xyst + xyst + xyst + xyst = V. 


To reduce the above system to a more convenient form, let every member be 
divided by xyst, and in the result let 


yt , 

= m , 

yt 


X 

- = n, 
x 


y / 

- = n . 

y 


We then find 


mm' + m + nn! + n mm' + m! + nn' + n' 
a b 

mm' + m mm' + m' 
ap bq 

= mm' + to + m' + nn' + n + n' + 1. 


Also, 


Prob. xy = 


mm' + to + to' + nn' + n + n' + 1 
These equations may be reduced to the form 


mm' + to mm' + m! nn! + n nn' + n! 
ap bq a(l — p) 6(1 — q) 

= (m + 1 )(to' + 1) + (n + l)(n / + 1) — 1. 

mm' + nn' 

' X ^ ( m + 1) (to' + 1) + (n + 1) {n! + 1) — 1 ’ 


Now assume 

(m + l)(m' + l)= / (n + l)(n / + 1) = — — - -• (2) 

v + p — 1 ^ + /i — 1 

. , m(m’ + l)(m + 1) mpi 

1 hen since mm + m = = — , and so on for 

to + 1 (to + l)(z/ + /Li-l) 

the other numerators of the system, we find, on substituting and multiplying 
each member of the system by v + p, — 1, the following results: 

mp m! p nn n'v 

(to + 1 )ap (m! + l)bq (n + l)a(l — p) ( n ' + 1)6(1 — q) 

Prob. xy = {mm' + nn'){v + p — 1). 


(3) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


From the above system we have 

to ap ap 

= — , whence m = 


to + 1 p 


p — ap 


Similarly 


Hence 


, _ bq a(l-p) , 6(1 -g) 

m p-bq ’ U v — a(l — p) ’ n u-b(l-q)' 


m+1 -p^ap' n + 1 ~ v-a(l-p), &c. 


Substitute these values in (2) reduced to the form 


v + p — 1 = 


(to + 1)(to / + 1) (n + l)(n / + 1) ’ 


and we have 


v + p — 1 = 


(p — ap) (p — bq) {v — a(l — p)} {v-b(l-q)} 


Substitute also for to, in' , &c. their values in (3), and we have 


Prob. xy 

abpq ab(l-p)(l - q) 

(l P ~ ap)(p - bq) {v - a(l - p)}{is - 6(1 - q)} 
= + a& ( 1 ~p)( 1 -g) by ^ 


(v + p — 1) 


Now the first equation of the system (4) gives 


v + p — 1 = p — ap — bq + 


= v — 1 + ap + bq. 


Similarly, 


a6(l -p)(l - q) 


= p — 1 + a( 1 — p) + 6(1 - q). 


Adding these equations together, and observing that the first member of the 
result becomes identical with the expression just found for Prob. xy, we have 

Prob. xy=is + p + a + b— 2. 

Let us represent Prob. xy by u, and let a + 6 — 2 = to, then 


p + V = U — TO. 


( 6 ) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


256 


Again, from (5) we have 

/ w = abpq — (op + bq — l)p. (7) 

Similarly from the first and third members of (4) equated we have 

pv = ab{ 1 — p)(l — q) — {a(l — p) + 5(1 — q) — l}v. 

Let us represent ap+bq—1 by h, and o(l — p) + 5(1 — q) — 1 by h! . We find on 
equating the above values of /iiq 

hp — h'v = ab{pq + (1 — p)(l — q)} 

= ab(p + q — 1). 

Let ab(p + q — 1) = l, then 

hp — h'v = l. (8) 

Now from (6) and (8) we get 

h'(u — m) + l h(u — m) — l 

/i , V . 

m m 

Substitute these values in (7) reduced to the form 

p(v + h) = abpq, 


and we have 

(hu — l){h' (u — to) + 1} = abpqm 2 , (9) 

a quadratic equation, the solution of which determines u, the value of Prob. xy 
sought. 

The solution may readily be put in the form 

Ih! + h(h'm — l) i y/[{lh! — h(h'm — l)} 2 + Ahh' abpqm 2 ] 

= 2 hh 1 ' 

But if we further observe that 

lb! — h(h!m — l) = l(h + h') — hh'm = (l — hh')m, 


since 

whence 

we find 


h = ap + bq — 1, h! = a(l — p) + 5(1 — q) — 1, 
h + h' = a + b — 2 = m, 


Prob. xy = 


lb! + h(h'm — l) ± — hh') 2 + Ahh'abpq} 

2 hh' 


(10) 


It remains to determine which sign must be given to the radical. We might 
ascertain this by the general method exemplified in the last problem, but it is 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


257 


far easier, and it fully suffices in the present instance, to determine the sign 
by a comparison of the above formula with the result proper to some known 
case. For instance, if it were certain that the event A is always, and the event 
B never, associated with the event E, then it is certain that the events A and 
B are never conjoined. Hence if p = 1, q = 0, we ought to have u = 0. Now the 
assumptions p = 1, q = 0, give 

h = a — 1, h' = b— 1, 1 = 0, ?n = a+b — 2. 


Substituting in (10) we have 


Prob. xy 


(a — 1 )(b — l)(a + b — 2) ± (a + b — 2 )(a — 1 ){b — 1) 

2(a — 1)(6— 1) 


and 3 this expression vanishes when the lower sign is taken. Hence the final 
solution of the general problem will be expressed in the form 


Prob. xy Ih 1 + h(h'm — l) — — hh') 2 + Ahh' abpq} 

Prob. x 2ahh ' 


wherein h = ap + bq — 1, h! = a(l — p) + 5(1 — q) — 1, 


l = ab(p + q — 1), m = a + b — 2. 

As the terms in the final logical solution affected by the coefficient ^ are the 
same as in the first problem of this chapter, the conditions among the constants 
will be the same, viz., 


ap < 1 — 6(1 — q), bq<l — a(l—p). 


7. It is a confirmation of the correctness of the above solution that the expression 
obtained is symmetrical with respect to the two sets of quantities p, q, and 1 —p, 
1 — q, i.e. that on changing p into 1 — p, and q into 1 — q, the expression is 
unaltered This is apparent from the equation 


Prob. xy = ab 


pq 

h 


(l-p)(l-g) j 


employed in deducing the final result. Now if there exist probabilities p, q of the 
event E, as consequent upon a knowledge of the occurrences of A and B, there 
exist probabilities 1— p, 1 — q of the contrary event, that is, of the non-occurrence 
of E under the same circumstances. As then the data are unchanged in form, 
whether we take account in them of the occurrence or of the non-occurrence of 
E, it is evident that the solution ought to be, as it is, a symmetrical function of 
p, q and 1 — p, 1 — q. 

'The numerator was originally “(a — 1)6 — l)(a + 6 — 2) . . . ”, and was fixed in 2004 by 
Distributed Proofreaders. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


258 


Let us examine the particular case in which p = 1, q = 1. We find 
h = a + b — l, h! = — 1, l = ab, m = a + b— 2, 
and substituting 

Prob. xy — ab + (a + b — 1)(2 — a — 5 — a5) — (a + b — 2)(a5 — a — b + 1) 
Prob. a; — 2a(a + b — 1) 

—2 ab(a + 5 — 1) 

—2 a(a + 5 — 1) 

It would appear, then, that in this case the events A and B are virtually in- 
dependent of each other. The supposition of their invariable association with 
some other event E, of the frequency of whose occurrence, except as it may be 
inferred from this particular connexion, absolutely nothing is known, does not 
establish any dependence between the events A and B themselves. I apprehend 
that this conclusion is agreeable to reason, though particular examples may ap- 
pear at first sight to indicate a different result. For instance, if the probabilities 
of the casting up, 1st, of a particular species of weed, 2ndly, of a certain de- 
scription of zoophytes upon the sea-shore, had been separately determined, and 
if it had also been ascertained that neither of these events could happen except 
during the agitation of the waves caused by a tempest, it would, I think, justly 
be concluded that the events in question were not independent. The picking up 
of a piece of seaweed of the kind supposed would, it is presumed, render more 
probable the discovery of the zoophytes than it would otherwise have been. But 
I apprehend that this fact is due to our knowledge of another circumstance not 
implied in the actual conditions of the problem, viz., that the occurrence of 
a tempest is but an occasional phenomenon. Let the range of observation be 
confined to a sea always vexed with storm. It would then, I suppose, be seen 
that the casting up of the weeds and of the zoophytes ought to be regarded as 
independent events. Now, to speak more generally, there are conditions com- 
mon to all phaenomena, — conditions which, it is felt, do not affect their mutual 
independence. I apprehend therefore that the solution indicates, that when a 
particular condition has prevailed through the whole of our recorded experience, 
it assumes the above character with reference to the class of phaenomena over 
which that experience has extended. 

8. Problem IV. — To illustrate in some degree the above observations, let 
there be given, in addition to the data of the last problem, the absolute proba- 
bility of the event E, the completed system of data being 

Prob. x = a, Prob. y = 5, Prob. z = c, 

Prob. xz = ap, Prob. yz = bq, 

and let it be required to find Prob. xy. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


259 


Assuming, as before, xz = s, yz = t, xy = w, the final logical equation is 

w — xystz + xystz + 0 (xystz + xystz + xyzst + xyzst 

+xyzst + xyzst) 


+ terms whose coefficients are 


1 

O' 


The algebraic system having been formed, the subsequent eliminations may be 
simplified by the transformations adopted in the previous problem. The final 
result is 


Prob. xy = ab 


pq 

c 




(2) 


The conditions among the constants are 


c>ap , c>bq , c<l — a(l — p), c<l — 5(1 — q). 


Now if p = 1, q = 1, we find 

ab 

Prob. xy = — , 
c 

c not admitting of any value less than a or b. It follows hence that if the event 
E is known to be an occasional one, its invariable attendance on the events x 
and y increases the probability of their conjunction in the inverse ratio of its 
own frequency. The formula (2) may be verified in a large number of cases. As 
a particular instance, let q = c, we find 


Prob. xy = ab. (3) 

Now the assumption q = c involves, by Definition (Chap. XVI.) the indepen- 
dence of the events B and E. If then B and E are independent, no relation 
which may exist between A and E can establish a relation between A and B\ 
wherefore A and B are also independent, as the above equation (3) implies. 

It may readily be shown from (2) that the value of Prob. z, which renders 
Prob. xy a minimum, is 

Prob 2 = 

' y/{pq) + y/{l -p)(l-«r 

If p = g, this gives 

Prob. z = p] 

a result, the correctness of which may be shown by the same considerations 
which have been applied to (3). 

Problem V. — Given the probabilities of any three events, and the proba- 
bility of their conjunction; required the probability of the conjunction of any 
two of them. 

Suppose the data to be 


Prob. x = p, Prob. y = q, Prob. z = r, Prob. xyz = m, 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


260 


and the qusesitum to be Prob. xy. 

Assuming xyz = s, xy = i, we find as the final logical equation, 

t = xyzs + xyzs + 0 (xys + xs ) + - (sum of all other constituents); 

whence, finally, 

_ , H — W(H 2 — Apqf 2 — Apqrm) 

Prob. xy = — , 


wherein 

p = 1 — p, &c. H = pq + (p + q)r. 

This admits of verification when p = 1, when q = 1, when r = 0, and therefore 
to = 0, &c. 

Had the condition, Prob. z = r, been omitted, the solution would still have 
been definite. We should have had 


Prob. xy 


pq{ 1 — to) + (1 — p)(l — q)m 

1 — TO 


and it may be added, as a final confirmation of their correctness, that the above 
results become identical when to = pqr. 

9. The following problem is a generalization of Problem I., and its solution, 
though necessarily more complex, is obtained by a similar analysis. 

Problem VI. — If an event can only happen as a consequence of one or more 
of certain causes Ai, A 2 ,. . ¦ A n , and if generally Cj represent the probability of 
the cause A, and p, the probability that if the cause A, exist, the event E will 
occur, then the series of values of Cj and pi being given, required the probability 
of the event EA 

Let the causes A\, A 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ A n be represented by x±,X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , and the event 
E by z. 

Then we have generally, 


Prob. Xi = Cj, Prob. x& = CiPi . 

4 It may be proper to remark, that the above problem was proposed to the notice of math- 
ematicians by the author in the Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal, Nov. 1851, 
accompanied by the subjoined observations: 

“The motives which have led me, after much consideration, to adopt, with reference to this 
question, a course unusual in the present day, and not upon slight grounds to be revived, are 
the following: — First, I propose the question as a test of the sufficiency of received methods. 
Secondly, 1 anticipate that its discussion will in some measure add to our knowledge of an 
important branch of pure analysis. However, it is upon the former of these grounds alone that 
1 desire to rest my apology. 

“While hoping that some may be found who, without departing from the line of their 
previous studies, may deem this question worthy of their attention, 1 wholly disclaim the 
notion of its being offered as a trial of personal skill or knowledge, but desire that it may be 
viewed solely with reference to those public and scientific ends for the sake of which alone it 
is proposed.” 

The author thinks it right to add, that the publication of the above problem led to some 
interesting private correspondence, but did not elicit a solution. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


261 


Further, the condition that E can only happen in connexion with some one or 
more of the causes A \ , A 2 , . . . A n establishes the logical condition, 

z(l - xi)(l - x 2 ) ¦ ¦ ¦ (1 - x n ) = 0. (1) 

Now let us assume generally 


XiZ — t i , 


which is reducible to the form 


Xiz(l - U) + ti( 1 - Xiz) = 0, 

forming the type of a system of n equations which, together with (1), express 
the logical conditions of the problem. Adding all these equations together, as 
after the previous reduction we are permitted to do, we have 

'^2{x i z( 1 - L) + ti( 1 - Xiz)} + z( 1 - aq)(l - x 2 ) . . . (1 - x n ) = 0, (2) 

(the summation implied by ^ extending from i = 1 to i = n), and this single 
and sufficient logical equation, together with the 2 n data, represented by the 
general equations 

Prob. Xi = Ci, Prob. L = CiPi, (3) 

constitute the elements from which we are to determine Prob. 2 . 

Let (2) be developed with respect to z. We have 

[YMl - U) + ti( 1 - Xi)} + (1 - xi){l - x 2 ) ... (1 - x n )j 2 

+ ^ U( 1 — z ) — 0, 

whence 

. (4) 

Yjti- - ti ) + ti( 1 - Xi)} - (1 - ari)(l - x 2 ) ... (1 - x n ) 

Now any constituent in the expansion of the second member of the above equa- 
tion will consist of 2 n factors, of which n are taken out of the set X\, x 2 , . . . x n , 1 — 
Xi, 1 — x 2 , ... 1 — x n , and n out of the set t\, t 2 , . . . t n , 1 — t\, 1 — t 2 . . . 1 — t n , 
no such combination as aq(l — a?i) , ti (1 — 1 1 ), being admissible. Let us consider 
first those constituents of which (1 — ti), (1 — t 2 ) . . . (1 — t n ) forms the t-factor, 
that is the factor derived from the set t \, . . . 1 — t\. 

The coefficient of any such constituent will be found by changing t\, t 2 , . . . t n 
respectively into 0 in the second member of (4), and then assigning to X\, x 2 , . . . x n 
their values as dependent upon the nature of the a;-factor of the constituent. 
Now simply substituting for t\,t 2 ,...t n the value 0, the second member be- 
comes 

0 

(1 - ®i)(l - X 2 ) . . . (1 - X n ) ’ 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


262 


and this vanishes whatever values, 0, 1, we subsequently assign to X\,X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n . 
For if those values are not all equal to 0, the term x-i does not vanish, and 
if they are all equal to 0, the term —(1 — x ±) ... (1 — x n ) becomes —1, so that 
in either case the denominator does not vanish, and therefore the fraction does. 
Hence the coefficients of all constituents of which (1 — t\) . . . (1 — t n ) is a factor 
will be 0, and as the sum of all possible ^-constituents is unity, there will be an 
aggregate term 0(1 — ti) ... (1 — t n ) in the development of z. 

Consider, in the next place, any constituent of which the f-factor is t\ t 2 • • • t r { 1 
t r + 1 ) ... (1 — t„), r being equal to or greater than unity. Making in the second 
member of (4), t\ = 1, . . . t r = 1, t r+ i = 0, . . . t n = 0, we get the expression 

r 

X\ . . . + X r — X r+ 1 . . . - x n - (1 - Xi)(l - X 2 ) ¦ • • (1 - Xn) 

Now the only admissible values of the symbols being 0 and 1, it is evident 
that the above expression will be equal to 1 when xi = 1 . . . x r = l,2V+i = 
0, . . . x n = 0, and that for all other combinations of value that expression will 
assume a value greater than unity. Hence the coefficient 1 will be applied to all 
constituents of the final development which are of the form 

x \ . . . x r (l - x r+1 ) . . . (1 - x n ) ti . . . t r ( 1 - t r+ i ) . . . (1 - t n ), 

the x-factor being similar to the t-factor, while other constituents included under 
the present case will have the virtual coefficient ^ . Also, it is manifest that this 
reasoning is independent of the particular arrangement and succession of the 
individual symbols. 

Hence the complete expansion of z will be of the form 


* = 5Z(A~r) + 0(1 - H)(1 - 1 2 ) . . . (1 - t n ) 


+ constituents whose coefficients are 


1 

0’ 


( 5 ) 


where T represents any t-constituent except (1 — t\) . . . (1 — t n ), and X the 
corresponding or similar constituent of X\ . . . x n . For instance, if n = 2, we shall 
have 

y^(Ar) = xix 2 tit 2 + XiX 2 tit 2 + x\x 2 tit 2 , 

Sii, x 2 , &c. standing for 1 — X\, 1 — x 2 , &c.; whence 


2 — X\X 2 tit 2 + XiX 2 tit 2 + X\X 2 tit 2 

+0(xix 2 tii 2 + x\x 2 tit 2 + xix 2 tit 2 + x\x 2 iii 2 ) 


+ constituents whose coefficients are 


1 

O' 


( 6 ) 


This result agrees, difference of notation being allowed for, with the developed 
form of 3 in Problem I. of this chapter, as it evidently ought to do. 

10. To avoid complexity, I purpose to deduce from the above equation (6) 
the necessary conditions for the determination of Prob. 2 for the particular case 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


263 


in which n = 2, in such a form as may enable us, by pursuing in thought the 
same line of investigation, to assign the corresponding conditions for the more 
general case in which n possesses any integral value whatever. 

Supposing then n = 2, we have 

V = xix 2 tit 2 + xix 2 tii 2 + x\x 2 iit 2 + x\x 2 iii 2 + xix 2 iit 2 

+xix 2 i\i 2 + xix 2 tit 2 . 


Prob. 2 = 


XiX 2 t\t 2 + X\X 2 t\t 2 + XiX 2 t\t 2 


the conditions for the determination of aq, t \ , &c., being 

xix 2 ht 2 + xix 2 tii 2 + xix 2 iit 2 + xix 2 iit 2 

Cl 

_ xix 2 tit 2 + xix 2 tit 2 + xix 2 iit 2 + xix 2 tii 2 
c 2 

xix 2 tit 2 + xix 2 tit 2 __ xix 2 tit 2 + xix 2 iit 2 _ y 

ClPl C 2 p 2 

Divide the members of this system of equations by xix 2 iii 2 , and the nu- 
merator and denominator of Prob. 2 by the same quantity, and in the results 


we find 


X\ x 2 

— =m, — = n 2 ; 

X\ x 2 


, toito 2 + mi + m 2 

Prob. 2 = , 

mim 2 + mi + m 2 + n\n 2 + n\ + n 2 + 1 

mim 2 + mi + nin 2 + n 1 mim 2 + m 2 + nin 2 + n 2 


TO 1 TO 2 + m 1 mim 2 + m 2 


= mim 2 + mi + m 2 + nin 2 + ni + n 2 + 1, (8) 


whence, if we assume, 


(toi + 1) (m 2 + 1) = M, (ni + l)(ri 2 + 1) = N, 


we have, after a slight reduction, 


Prob. 2 = 


M - 1 


M + N — 1 ’ 

ni(n 2 + 1) _ n 2 (ni + 1) _ mi(m 2 + 1) _ m 2 (mi + 1) 

Ci(l-pi) C 2 (l-p 2 ) C1P1 C2P2 


= M + N - 1; 


miM m 2 M m N 

(mi + l)cipi (m 2 + l)c 2 p 2 (ni + l)ci(l - pi) 
r i 2 N . 


(n 2 + l)c 2 (l -p 2 ) 


= M + N- 1. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


264 


Now let a similar series of transformations and reductions be performed in 
thought upon the final logical equation (5). We shall obtain for the determina- 
tion of Prob. z the following expression: 


Prob. z 


M- 1 
M + N-l 


(10) 


wherein 


M = (mi + 1 )(m 2 + 1) . . . ( m n + 1), 
N = (n i + l)(n 2 + 1) . . . (n„ + 1), 


m i, . . . , m n , tii, ¦ ¦ ¦ , tin, being given by the system of equations, 

m\M m 2 M m n M 


(mi + l)cipi (m 2 + l)c 2 p 2 
n\N n n N 

(ni + l)ci(l — pi) (n n + l)c„(l — p n ) 


(m n + T)c n p n 
= M + N-l. 


( 11 ) 


Still further to simplify the results, assume 


whence 

We find 


M+N - 1 _ 1 M+N-l _1 
M “ /? N “ v' 


M = 


P 


p + v — 1 


N = 


p + v — 1 


mi to 2 m„ 1 

(mi + l)cipi (m 2 + l)c 2 p 2 ' ' ' (m„ + l)c„p„ p ’ 

ni n -2 Tin 

(ni + l)ci(l -pi) (n 2 + l)c 2 (l — P 2 ) (n n + l)c„(l -p n ) 


1 

? 

V 


whence 


and finally, 


m 1 = 


ClPl 
p - C 1 P 1 


, • • • m n = 


C-nPn 
P CnPn 






mi + 1 = , . . . m n + 1 = 

p - cipi p - c n p n 

ni + 1 = 7- 7-77 77 , . . . n n + 1 = 


1/ - Ci(l -Pi) 1/ - C„(l -p n ) ' 

Substitute these values with those of M and N in (9), and we have 

P^ = P 

(p - cipi)(p - C 2 P 2 ) ¦¦¦(p- CnPn ) p + v - 1 ’ 

v n v 


{v - Ci(l ~Pi)}{v - c 2 (l -p 2 )} ...{v- c n (l-p n )} p + v- 1’ 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


265 


which may be reduced to the symmetrical form 

(/x - cipi) . . . (p - c n p n ) 


p + v — 1 = 


P 


n— 1 


{v - Ci(l - Pi)} ...{v- c n ( 1 - p n )j 


Finally, 


,n— 1 


„ , M- 1 

Prob. 2 = — — r = 1 — v. 


M + N - 1 
Let us then assume 1 — v = xx, we have then 

(p - cipi) ... (/x - c n p n ) 


H — u = 




n— 1 


{1 - Cj(l - Pi)} ... {1 - C ra (l - Pn) ~ xx} 
(1 — xx) n— 1 


(12) 


(13) 


If we make for simplicity 


Cipi = or, c„p„ = o„, 1 - ci(l - pi) = bi, &c., 


the above equations may be written as follows: 


fJL — u = 


{p - Oi) . . . (/X 


,n— 1 



(14) 


wherein 


p = u + 


(&i - u) . . . (b ra - xx) 
(1 — xx) ra_1 


(15) 


This value of p substituted in (14) will give an equation involving only u, the 
solution of which will determine Prob. z, since by (13) Prob. z = u. It remains 
to assign the limits of u. 

11. Now the very same analysis by which the limits were determined in the 
particular case in which n = 2, (XIX. 12) conducts us in the present case to 
the following result. The quantity xx, in order that it may represent the value 
of Prob. z, must must have for its inferior limits the quantities Oi,a 2 ,...a n , 
and for its superior limits the quantities bi, b 2 , . . . b n , aq + a .2 . . . + a n . We may 
hence infer, a priori, that there will always exist one root, and only one root, of 
the equation (14) satisfying these conditions. I deem it sufficient, for practical 
verification, to show that there will exist one, and only one, root of the equation 
(14), between the limits ai,a 2 , ¦ . . a n , and bi, b 2 , . ¦ . b n . 

First, let us consider the nature of the changes to which p is subject in (15), 
as xx varies from ai, which we will suppose the greatest of its minor limits, to b \ , 
which we will suppose the least of its major limits. When xx = ai it is evident 
that p is positive and greater than a\. When u = Ip, we have p = b\, which 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


266 


is also positive. Between the limits u = a±, u = b 3 it may be shown that p 
increases with u. Thus we have 


dp _ ! _ (b 2 -u)... (b n - u) _ (bi - u)(b 3 - u) . . .(b n - u) 
du (1 — u ) n ~ 1 (1 — u) n ~ 1 

,, 1 .(b 1 -u)(b 2 -u)...(b n -u) 

+ ( n ~ 7l 

(1 — u) n 


(16) 


Now let 


bi — u b n — u 

= X! ... = 

1 — u 1 — u 


Evidently xi,x 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , will be proper fractions, and we have 


— = 1- x 2 x 3 ...x n - X]_x 3 ...x n 
du 


— x 3 x 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n -i + (n - l)x 3 x 2 . . . x n 


= 1 - (1 - X\)x 2 X 3 ...X n -X\(l- x 2 )x 3 ...X n 


X\X 2 . . - x n ) - X\X 2 ...x n . 


Now the negative terms in the second member are (if we may borrow the 
language of the logical developments) constituents formed from the fractional 

quantities x\, x 2 , . . . x n . Their sum cannot therefore exceed unity; whence — 

du 

is positive, and /i increases with u between the limits specified. 

Now let (14) be written in the form 


(M - cq) • • • (m - a n ) 




n— 1 


- (M - u ) = 


and assume u = a 3 . The first member becomes 


(M-a i) 


(/.i -a 2 )...(fj,- a„) 




n— 


1 



(17) 


(18) 


and this expression is negative in value. For, making the same assumption in 
(15), we find 


(6i - u) ... (b n - u) 

u — a i = 7- — = a positive quantity. 

(1 — u) n ~ L 


At the same time we have 

(H ~ 02) ¦ • ¦ (ft - a n ) _ M - «2 H ~ a n 

H n ~ l ij fi ' 

and since the factors of the second member are positive fractions, that member 
is less than unity, whence (18) is negative. Wherefore the assumption u = a 3 
makes the first member of (17) negative. 

Secondly, let u = b 1, then by (15) /z = u = 61, and the first member of (17) 
becomes positive. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


267 


Lastly, between the limits u = a-[ and u = b\ the first member of (17) 
continuously increases. For the first term of that expression written under the 
form 

,/x-a i p-a n 

(M - a i) . . . 

P P 

increases, since p increases, and, with it, every factor contained. Again, the 
negative term /j — u diminishes with the increase of u, as appears from its value 
deduced from (15), viz., 

(bi -u) ... ( b n - u ) 

(1 -u) n ~ l 

Hence then, between the limits u = a±, u = b\, the first member of (17) con- 
tinuously increases, changing in so doing from a negative to a positive value. 
Wherefore, between the limits assigned, there exists one value of u, and only 
one, by which the said equation is satisfied. 

12. Collecting these results together, we arrive at the following solution of 
the general problem. 

The probability of the event E will be that value of u deduced from the 
equation 

(/x - cipi) . . . {n - c n p n ) 

P~u = » ( 19 ) 


wherein 


{l-ci(l-pi) -«}... {1 - c n (l -p n ) -u} 

a = u-\ r — , , 

(1 — u) n 1 


which (value) lies between the two sets of quantities, 

CiPi,c 2 p 2 , • • • ,c n p„ and 1 - ci(l -pi),l - c 2 (l -p 2 ) . . . 1 - c n (l ~p n ), 


the former set being its inferior, the latter its superior, limits. 

And it may further be inferred in the general case, as it has been proved in 
the particular case of n = 2, that the value of u, determined as above, will not 
exceed the quantity 

CiPi + c 2 p -2 ¦¦¦ + c n p n . 

13. Particular verifications are subjoined. 

1st. Let pi = 1 ,p 2 = 1, . . .p n = 1. This is to suppose it certain, that if any 
one of the events Ai,A 2 .. . A n happen, the event E will happen. In this case, 
then, the probability of the occurrence of E will simply be the probability that 
the events or causes Ai,A 2 ... A n do not all fail of occurring, and its expression 
will therefore be 1 — (1 — Ci)(l — c 2 ) . . . (1 — c n ). 

Now the general solution (19) gives 


wherein 




CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


268 


Hence, 


1 - u = (1 - Ci) ... (1 - c„), 
u = 1 - (1 - Cl) . . . (1 - c„), 

equivalent to the a priori determination above. 

2nd. Let p± = 0, P 2 = 0, p n = 0, then (19) gives 

p — u = p, 

.'. u = 0, 


as it evidently ought to be. 

3rd. Let C\ , ¦ ¦ ¦ c n be small quantities, so that their squares and products 

may be neglected. Then developing the second members of the equation (19), 


p n - (cipi + c 2 p 2 ¦¦¦ + c n p n )p n 1 

P~u = — 

p n 1 

= p~ (Cipi + C2P2 ¦¦¦ + C n p n ), 


.'. U = C1P1 + C2P2 ¦¦¦ + c n p„. 


Now this is what the solution would be were the causes A \ , A2 . . . A n mu- 
tually exclusive. But the smaller the probabilities of those causes, the more do 
they approach the condition of being mutually exclusive, since the smaller is the 
probability of any concurrence among them. Hence the result above obtained 
will undoubtedly be the limiting form of the expression for the probability of E. 

4th. In the particular case of n = 2, we may readily eliminate p from the 
general solution. The result is 

(m - cipi)(u - C2P2) _ {1 - Ci (1 - pi) - zt}{! - c 2 (l -P2) - u] 

C1P1 + C2P2 —u 1 — u 

which agrees with the particular solution before obtained for this case, Problem 

I. 

Though by the system (19), the solution is in general made to depend upon 
the solution of an equation of a high order, its practical difficulty will not be 
great. For the conditions relating to the limits enable us to select at once a near 
value of it, and the forms of the system (19) are suitable for the processes of 
successive approximation. 

14. Problem 7. -The data being the same as in the last problem, re- 
quired the probability, that if any definite and given combination of the causes 
Ai, A2 , . . . A n , present itself, the event E will be realized. 

The cases Ai, A2, . . . A n , being represented as before by x\, X2, ¦ ¦ ¦ x n respec- 
tively, let the definite combination of them, referred to in the statement of the 
problem, be represented by the cj>(x 1 , £2 • • • x n ) so that the actual occurrence of 
that combination will be expressed by the logical equation, 


4 >(x 1 ,x 2 , ...x n ) = l. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


269 


The data are 


Prob. X\ = Ci, . . . Prob. x n = c n , 
Prob. X\Z = Cipi, Prob. x n z = c n p n ; 


and the object of investigation is 

Prob. (f>{x i, £2 ¦ • ¦ x n )z 
Prob. <p(xi, X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n ) 


We shall first seek the value of the numerator. 
Let us assume, 


(1) 

(2) 


Xiz = ti . . .x n z = t n , (3) 

<j)(x 1 ,x 2 ...x n )z = w. (4) 

Or, if for simplicity, we represent <p(xi,X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n ) by <fi, the last equation will be 

4>z = w, (5) 

to which must be added the equation 

XiX 2 ¦ ¦ - x n z = 0. (6) 

Now any equation x r z = t r of the system (3) may be reduced to the form 

x r zt r + t r { 1 — x r z) = 0. 

Similarly reducing (5), and adding the different results together, we obtain the 
logical equation 

Yi{x r zt r + t r (l — x r z)} + X\ . . . x n z + 4>zw + w(l — cf>z ) = 0, (7) 

from which 2 being eliminated, w must be determined as a developed logical 
function of x ±, . . . x n , 

Now making successively z = 1, z = 0 in the above equation, and multiplying 
the results together, we have 

{Yi{x r t r + x r t r ) + x\ . . . x n + (f>ui + w<p} x (S t r + w) = 0. 

Developing this equation with reference to w, and replacing in the result ^ t r + l 
by 1, in accordance with Prop. 1 . Chap, ix., we have 

Ew + E\ 1 — w) = 0; 

E = Yi(x r t r + t r x r ) + x\ . . . x n + (j>, 

E' = Yit r {Yi(x r i r + t r x r ) + Xi . . . x n + (f>}. 


wherein 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


270 


And hence 


w = 


E' 

E'-E‘ 


( 8 ) 


The second member of this equation we must now develop with respect to 
the double series of symbols X\, X2, ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , t\, t 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ t n . In effecting this object, it 
will be most convenient to arrange the constituents of the resulting development 
in three distinct classes, and to determine the coefficients proper to those classes 
separately. 

First, let us consider those constituents of which f -\ . . . t n is a factor. Making 
t\ = 0 . . . t n = 0, we find 

E' = 0, E = YiX r + Xi . . . x n + <j>. 


It is evident, that whatever values (0, 1) are given to the x-symbols, E does not 
vanish. Hence the coefficients of all constituents involving t\ . . .t n are 0. 

Consider secondly, those constituents which do not involve the factor i-\ . . . t n , 
and which are symmetrical with reference to the two sets of symbols X\ . . . x n 
and t\ . . .t n . By symmetrical constituents is here meant those which would re- 
main unchanged if X\ were converted into ti, aq into t 2 , &c., and vice versa. 
The constituents x\ . . .x n ti ...t n , x\. . .x n t\ . . . t n , &c., are in this sense sym- 
metrical. For all symmetrical constituents it is evident that 

(^Xy.ty — I" t^Xf^ 


vanishes. For those which do not involve t\ . . .t n , it is further evident that 
x\ . . . x n also vanishes, whence 


E = (j> 
w = 


E' = T,t r ((f>), 
Etr(^) _ 

E A(^) - E 


For those constituents of which the x-factor is found in (j> the second member 
of the above equation becomes 1; for those of which the x-factor is found in </> 
it becomes 0. Hence the coefficients of symmetrical constituents not involving 
t\ . . .t n , of which the x-factor is found in (f) will he 1; of those of which the 
x-factor is not found in (f> it will be 0. 

Consider lastly, those constituents which are unsymmetrical with reference 
to the two sets of symbols, and which at the same time do not involve t\ . . . t n . 

Here it is evident, that neither E nor E' can vanish, whence the numerator 
of the fractional value of w in (8) must exceed the denominator. That value 
cannot therefore be represented by 1, 0, or 2. It must then, in the logical 
development, be represented by J . Such then will be the coefficient of this class 
of constituents. 

15. Hence the final logical equation by which w is expressed as a developed 
logical function of Xi, . . . x n , ti, . . . t n , will be of the form 

W = ^ i (XT) + °{^ 2 (AT) + ti . . . t n } + ^ (sum of other con- (9) 

stituents), 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


271 


wherein ^(JT) represents the sum of all symmetrical constituents of which the 
factor X is found in </>, and ^T 2 (AT), the sum of all symmetrical constituents of 
which the factor X is not found in </>, — the constituent x\ . . . x n t\ . . . t n , should 
it appear, being in either case rejected. 

Passing from Logic to Algebra, it may be observed, that here and in all 
similar instances, the function V, by the aid of which the algebraic system of 
equations for the determination of the values of xi, . . . x n , t\ . . . t n is formed, is 
independent of the nature of any function < f> involved, not in the expression of 
the data , but in that of the qucesitum of the problem proposed. Thus we have 
in the present example, 


wherein 


Prob. 


w = 


El (XT) 
V 


P = ^ i (IT) + ^ 2 (XT)+t 1 ...t, 
= y^(A~r) + ti . . . t n . 


(10) 


Here {XT) represents the sum of all symmetrical constituents of the x and t 
symbols, except the constituent X\ . . . x n , t\ . . . i n . This value of V is the same 
as that virtually employed in the solution of the preceding problem, and hence 
we may avail ourselves of the results there obtained. 

If then, as in the solution referred to, we assume 

Xiti %rAn *^1 n 

ry = Wi, =m n , — =n 1 , &c., 

X\t\ Xfitji X\ 


we shall obtain a result which may be thus written: 


Prob. 


Mi 

M + N - 1 ’ 


( 11 ) 


M\ being formed by rejecting from the function (f> the constituent Xi . . .x n , if 
it is there found, dividing the result by the same constituent Xi . . . x n and then 
changing U into mi, || into m 2 , and so on. The values of M and N are the 
same as in the preceding problem. Reverting to these and to the corresponding 
values of m\, m 2 , &c., we find 


Prob. w = Mi(fi + v — 1), 
the general values of m r , n r being 


m r 


C'p'Py 

fJi Cf'Pf 


Cr( 1 - Pr ) 

[1 - C r (1 - p r ) ’ 


and /i and v being given by the solution of the system of equations, 

, , {P - C1P1) . . . (H - C n p n ) _ {v C X (1 Pi)} • • • {T C n (l Pn')} 

L-l+V 1— 1 — y, 1 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


272 


The above value of Prob. w will be the numerator of the fraction (2). It now 
remains to determine its denominator. 

For this purpose assume 


<t> (Xl,X 2 ...x n )=v, 


or 


<t> = v\ 


whence 


(f>v + vcf> = 0 . 

Substituting the first member of this equation in (7) in place of the corre- 
sponding form <f>zw + w(l — <j>z) we obtain as the primary logical equation, 

Eli x r zt r + t r ( 1 — x r z )} + X\ . . . x n z + (f>V + V(j> = 0 , 

whence eliminating z, and reducing by Prop. II. Chap. IX., 

(j>v + v<j> + x r t r + t r x r ) + x\ . . . x n } = 0 . 


Hence 


v = 


0 + E tr{J2( X rtr + t r X r ) + X\ , . . X n } 

20 — 1 


and developing as before, 

U = Ei( XT ) + *1 • • • in T,S X) + °{E 2 (* T ) + *1 • • ¦ in E 2 ™ 

+ -(sum of other constituents). 


(12) 


Here EiPO indicates the sum of all constituents found in </>, ]C 9 (X) the 
sum of all constituents not found in <f> . The expressions are indeed used in place 
of <f> and 1 — <j> to preserve symmetry. 

It follows hence that Ei(^) + = 1) and that, as before, X] 1 (XT) + 

5^ 2 (XT) = J2(XT). Hence V will have the same value as before, and we shall 
have 

(XT) +*!...*„£ i(X) 


Prob. v = 


V 


Or transforming, as in the previous case, 

Mi + IVi 


Prob. v = 


M + N - 1 ’ 


(13) 


wherein iVi is formed by dividing <f> by x\ ... x n , and changing in the result 
|j into m, || into n 2 , &c. 

Now the final solution of the problem proposed will be given by assigning 
their determined values to the terms of the fraction 

Prob. d)(xi, . . . x n )z Prob. w 

or . 

Prob. </>(xi, . . . x n ) ’ Prob. v 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


273 


Hence, therefore, by (11) and (13) we have 


Prob. sought 


Mi 

Mi + Ni 


A very slight attention to the mode of formation of the functions Mi and JVi 
will show that the process may be greatly simplified. We may, indeed, exhibit 
the solution of the general problem in the form of a rule, as follows: 

Reject from the function (j>{xi, X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n ) the constituent xi...x„ if it is 
therein contained, suppress in all the remaining constituents the factors x\, X 2 , 
&c., and change generally in the result x r into ^ ¦ Call this result Mi. 

Again, replace in the function (j>{x i,X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n ) the constituent xi . . . x n if is 
therein found, by unity; suppress in all the remaining constituents the factors 
Xi, X 2 , &c., and change generally in the result x r into , ° r i 1 n t ¦ 

v C r ^l p r ) 

Then the solution required will be expressed by the formida 


Mi 

Mi + Ni ’ 


(14) 


p and v being determined by the solution of the system of equations 


, n _ (M - CiPi) ¦ ¦ ¦ {P ~ c n p„) 
t l i U 1 — 

n n 1 

= {v - Cr(l - Pi)} ¦ ¦ ¦ {/i - C„( 1 - p n )} 

v n-l ' 1 > 

It may be added, that the limits of p and v are the same as in the previous 
problem. This might be inferred from the general principle of continuity; but 
conditions of limitation, which are probably sufficient, may also be established 
by other considerations. 

Thus from the demonstration of the general method in probabilities, Chap. 
XVII. Prop, IV., it appears that the quantities x\, . . . x n , ti, . . . t n in the primary 
system of algebraic equations, must be positive proper fractions. Now 

x r c r { 1 — p r ) 

1 — x r r v — c r (l — p r ) 

Hence generally n r must be a positive quantity, and therefore we must have 


v > c r (l — p r ). 


In like manner since we have 


Xqctf' 

(1 - av)(l - tr) 


= m r 


c r p r 

fJi C'p'Pf 


we must have generally 


p > C r Pr ¦ 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


274 


16. It is probable that the two classes of conditions thus represented are 
together sufficient to determine generally which of the roots of the equations 
determining p and is are to be taken. Let us take in particular the case in which 
n = 2. Here we have 


(M-CiPi)(/X-C 2 p 2 ) , . x . C1P1C2P2 

p + is - 1 = y = p ~ (dpi + C2P2 ) + 


P 


P 


1 , dPl C2P2 -. {p - C 1 pi)c 2 p 2 

.'. V = 1 - C 1 P 1 - c 2 p 2 H = 1 - dPi . 

P p 


Whence, since p > dPi we have generally 


IS < 1 — C\P\. 


In like manner we have 

V<1-C2P2, P< 1 — Cl (1 — pi), p < 1 — c 2 (l — p 2 )- 

Now it has already been shown that there will exist but one value of p 
satisfying the whole of the above conditions relative to that quantity, viz. 


p > c r p r , p < 1 — c r (l —p r ), 


whence the solution for this case, at least, is determinate. And I apprehend that 
the same method is generally applicable and sufficient. But this is a question 
upon which a further degree of light is desirable. 

To verify the above results, suppose <f>(xi , . . . x n ) = 1, which is virtually the 
case considered in the previous problem. Now the development of 1 gives all 
possible constituents of the symbols x\,...x n . Proceeding then according to 
the Rule, we find 


Mi 

N\ 


P 


- 1 = 


p + v — 1 


{p - dpx) ...{p- c n p n ) 

{V - Ci (1 - Pi)} ...{lS- C„( 1 - p n )} 


-1 by (15). 


- 1 = 


p + is — 1 


- 1. 


Substituting in (14) we find 


Prob. z = 1 — is, 


which agrees with the previous solution. 

Again, let </>(xi , . . . x n ) = aq, which, after development and suppression of 
the factors x 2) • ¦ . x n , gives xi(x 2 + 1) . . . ( x n + 1), whence we find 


Mi = 

m = 


CiPiP n 1 = dpi ^ 

(p - dpi) . . . (p - C n p n ) p + lS- 1 

ci(l -pi)^- 1 Ci(l -pi) 

{is - d(l - Pi)} ...{lS - Cn( 1 - p n )} p + lS - 1 ' 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


275 


Substituting, we have 

Probability that if the event Ai, occur, E will occur = p\. 

And this result is verified by the data. Similar verifications might easily be 
added. 

Let us examine the case in which 

4 >(X i, . . . X n ) = XiX 2 ¦¦¦X n + X2X1X3 ...x n ... + X n Xi . . . X n -i. 


Here we find 


Ab = 


Mi = ° lPl 

p - C1P1 

ci(l -Pi) 


v - Cl (1 - pi ) 
whence we have the following result — 


CnPn 
P' C-riPn 
c n (l-p„) 
v - c n ( 1 -p„y 


Probability that if some one 
alone of the causes A 1: A 2 ... A n 
present itself, the event E will 
follow. 


E 


c r p r 
H c r p r 


E 


C r p r 

fJj CfPf' 


E 


Cr(l ~Pr) 

' - C r (l - p r ) 


Let it be observed that this case is quite different from the well-known one 
in which the mutually exclusive character of the causes A \ , . . . A. n is one of the 
elements of the data, expressing a condition under which the very observations 
by which the probabilities of Ai, A 2 , &c. are supposed to have been determined, 
were made. 

Consider, lastly, the case in which <j>(x 1, . . . x n ) = X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n . Here 


Ni 


Mi = 


C1P1 • • • C n p n 


(/i - C1P1) . . . {p - C n p n ) 
Ci(l-pi)...C n (l-p n ) 

{V - Ci(l - pi)} ...{v- C n (1 - p n )} 


C1P1 • • • C n p n 

n n ~ i (p + v — \y 

_ Cl(l - pi) ¦ ¦ .c„,( 1 - Pn) 

iy n ~ 1 (p + v — T) 


Hence the following result — 

Probability that if all the causes 
Ai, . . . A n conspire, the event E 
will follow. 


Pi---P n v n 1 

Pl . . .PnV ™- 1 + (1 -Pl) . . . (1 - Pn )p n ~ 1 ' 


This expression assumes, as it ought to do, the value 1 when any one of the 
quantities pi, . . .p n is equal to 1. 

17. Problem VIII. — Certain causes A 1; A 2 , . . . A n being so restricted that 
they cannot all fail, but still can only occur in certain definite combinations 
denoted by the equation 


(f>(Ai,A2 . . . A n ) — 1, 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


276 


and there being given the separate probabilities C\ , . . . c„ of the said causes, and 
the corresponding probabilities p \ , . . . p n that an event E will follow if those 
respective causes are realized, required the probability of the event E. 

This problem differs from the one last considered in several particulars, but 
chiefly in this, that the restriction denoted by the equation 4>(Ai, . . . A n ) = 1, 
forms one of the data, and is supposed to be furnished by or to be accordant 
with the very experience from which the knowledge of the numerical elements 
of the problem is derived. 

Representing the events A\,. . . A n by xi, . . . x„ respectively, and the event 
E by z, we have — 

Prob. x r — c r , Prob. x r z = c r p r . (1) 

Let us assume, generally, 

XfZ — t'f , 

then combining the system of equations thus indicated with the equations 
x 1 ...x n =0, (j>{x i,...x n ) = 1, or </> = 1, 

furnished in the data, we ultimately find, as the developed expression of z, 

z = E(IT) + Oii i - 2 ...t„E(I), (2) 


where X represents in succession each constituent found in (f) , and T a similar se- 
ries of constituents of the symbols fi, . . . t n : ^(XT) including only symmetrical 
constituents with reference to the two sets of symbols. 

The method of reduction to be employed in the present case is so similar to 
the one already exemplified in former problems, that I shall merely exhibit the 
results to which it leads. We find 


Prob. z 


M 

M + N 


( 3 ) 


with the relations 

Mi 
ClPl ' 


M n = N x 

CnPn Ci(l-pi) 


N n 

C n ( 1 - Pn ) 


M + N. 


( 4 ) 


Wherein M is formed by suppressing in cf>{x 2, . . . x n ) all the factors xi, . . . x n , 
and changing in the result X\ into m\, x n into m n , while N is formed by 
substituting in M, ?ri for mi, &c.; moreover Mi consists of that portion of M 
of which mi is a factor, IVi of that portion of N of which ni is a factor; and so 
on. 

Let us take, in illustration, the particular case in which the causes Ai . . . A n 
are mutually exclusive. Here we have 


4 >(xi, . . . x n ) = X1X2 ...x n ... + X n Xi . . . X n -i- 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


277 


Whence 


M = mi + m 2 . . . + m n , 
N = n\ + n 2 . . . + n n , 
Mi = mi, Ni = m, &c. 


Substituting, we have 


mi 

ClPl 


m„ 


CnPn 


n i _ n n 

Cl(l-Pl) c„(l-p„) 


M + TV. 


Hence we find 


or 


Hence, by (3), 


mi + m 2 . . . + m„ 

CiPi + c 2 p 2 • ¦ ¦ + c n p„ 


M + N, 


M 


C1P1 ... + C n p n 


= M + N. 


Prob. 2 = C1P1 . . . + C n p n , 


a known result. 

There are other particular cases in which the system (4) admits of ready 
solution. It is, however, obvious that in most instances it would lead to results 
of great complexity. Nor does it seem probable that the existence of a functional 
relation among causes, such as is assumed in the data of the general problem, 
will often be presented in actual experience; if we except only the particular 
cases above discussed. 

Had the general problem been modified by the restriction that the event E 
cannot occur, all the causes Ai . . . A n being absent, instead of the restriction 
that the said causes cannot all fail, the remaining condition denoted by the 
equation <p(Ai, . . . A n ) = 1 being retained, we should have found for the final 
logical equation 

2 = ^(*t) + o£po, 

1 

*}2(X) being, as before, equal to <p{ x\, . . . x n ), but ^i(XT) formed by rejecting 
from (f> the particular constituent Xi . . . x n if therein contained, and then multi- 
plying each x-constituent of the result by the corresponding i-constituent. It is 
obvious that in the particular case in which the causes are mutually exclusive 
the value of Prob. z hence deduced will be the same as before. 

18. Problem IX. — Assuming the data of any of the previous problems, let 
it be required to determine the probability that if the event E present itself, it 
will be associated with the particular cause A r ; in other words, to determine the 
a posteriori probability of the cause A r when the event E has been observed to 
occur. 

In this case we must seek the value of the fraction 


Prob. x r z 


CtPy' 

Prob. z ’ 


Prob. z 


by the data. 


(1) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


278 


As in the previous problems, the value of Prob. z has been assigned upon dif- 
ferent hypotheses relative to the connexion or want of connexion of the causes, 
it is evident that in all those cases the present problem is susceptible of a de- 
terminate solution by simply substituting in (1) the value of that element thus 
determined. 

If the a priori probabilities of the causes are equal, we have Ci = C 2 . . . = c r . 
Hence for the different causes the value (1) will vary directly as the quantity 
p r . Wherefore whatever the nature of the connexion among the causes , the a 
posteriori probability of each cause will be proportional to the probability of 
the observed event E when that cause is known to exist. The particular case 
of this theorem, which presents itself when the causes are mutually exclusive, is 
well known. We have then 

Prob. X r Z C r p r p r 

Prob. Z J2 C rPr Pi + P 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ + Pn ’ 

the values of ci, . . . c n being equal. 

Although, for the demonstration of these and similar theorems in the par- 
ticular case in which the causes are mutually exclusive, it is not necessary to 
introduce the functional symbol <j>, which is, indeed, to claim for ourselves the 
choice of all possible and conceivable hypotheses of the connexion of the causes, 
yet, under every form, the solution by the method of this work of problems, 
in which the number of the data is indefinitely great, must always partake of 
a somewhat complex character. Whether the systematic evolution which it 
presents, first, of the logical, secondly, of the numerical relations of a prob- 
lem, furnishes any compensation for the length and occasional tediousness of its 
processes, I do not presume to inquire. Its chief value undoubtedly consists in its 
power, — in the mastery which it gives us over questions which would apparently 
baffle the unassisted strength of human reason. For this cause it has not been 
deemed superfluous to exhibit in this chapter its application to problems, some 
of which may possibly be regarded as repulsive, from their difficulty, without 
being recommended by any prospect of immediate utility. Of the ulterior value 
of such speculations it is, I conceive, impossible for us, at present, to form any 
decided judgment. 

19. The following problem is of a much easier description than the previous 
ones. 

Problem X. — The probability of the occurrence of a certain natural phenom- 
enon under given circumstances is p. Observation has also recorded a probability 
a of the existence of a permanent cause of that phenomenon, i.e. of a cause 
which would always produce the event under the circumstances supposed. What 
is the probability that if the phenomenon is observed to occur n times in succes- 
sion under the given circumstances, it will occur the n + 1 th time? What also is 
the probability, after such observation, of the existence of the permanent cause 
referred to? 

First Case. — Let t represent the existence of a permanent cause, and 
Xi,X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n +\ the successive occurrences of the natural phaenomenon. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


279 


If the permanent cause exist, the events xi,x% . . .x n +i are necessary conse- 
quences. Hence 

t = vx i, t = vx 2 , &c., 
and eliminating the indefinite symbols, 

t(l — Xi) = 0, t( l-x 2 ) = 0, f(l - x n+ {) = 0. 

Now we are to seek the probability that if the combination x\X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n happen, 
the event x n+ i will happen, i.e. we are to seek the value of the fraction 

Prob. xix 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n+ \ 

Prob. . . . x n 

We will first seek the value of Prob. £ 12:2 • • • x n . Represent the combination 
X\ X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n by w, then we have the following logical equations: 

t(l — 2 q) = 0, t( 1 — 2: 2 ) = 0, . . . t(l — x n ) = 0, 

X\ x 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n = w. 

Reducing the last to the form 

( 2:1 2:2 • • • 2:„)(1 — w ) + u>(l — xix 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n ) = 0, 

and adding it to the former ones, we have 

t{ 1 — Xi) + X\ X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n (l - w) + tu(l — XI X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n ) = 0, (1) 

wherein extends to all values of i from 1 to n, for the one logical equation of 
the data. With this we must connect the numerical conditions, 

Prob. xi = Prob. X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ = Prob. x n = p, Prob. t = a; 

and our object is to find Prob, w. 

From (1) we have 

£*(1 - Xi) + X 1 X 2 ¦ ¦ - x n 

u> = 

22:1 X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n — 1 

_J2(l-Xi) + X 1 X2...X n ^ i X\ X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ X n n ^ /r)N 

— o -t ^ n 1 (d '')¦> (*) 

2 X\ X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n — 1 2x\ X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n — 1 

on developing with respect to t. This result must further be developed with 
respect to x±, 2 : 2 , • • • x n . 

Now if we make 2 q = 1, X 2 = 1, • • • x n = 1, the coefficients both of t and of 
1 — t become 1. If we give to the same symbols any other set of values formed 
by the interchange of 0 and 1, it is evident that the coefficient of t will become 
negative, while that of 1 — t will become 0. Hence the full development (2) will 
be 


w = x\x 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n t + X 1 X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ 2 ; n (l — t) + 0(1 — 2 : 12:2 • • • 2;„)(1 — t) 


+ constituents whose coefficients are 


1 . , 1 
-, or equivalent to-. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


280 


Here we have 


V = x\x 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n t + X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n (l — t) + (1 — X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n )(l - t) 

= X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n t + 1 — i; 


whence, passing from Logic to Algebra, 


X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ X n t + X\(l — t) __ X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n t + £2(1 — t) 

P P 

X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n t + X n (l — t) X\X2 ...Xnt 


P 

Prob. w = 


= X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n t + 1 — t. 


X\X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n 


X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n t + 1 — t 


From the forms of the above equations it is evident that we have x\ = 
X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ = x n . Replace then each of these quantities by x, and the system becomes 

p a 

r n 

Prob. w 


' + 1 — t' 


from which we readily deduce 

Prob. w = Prob. X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n = a + (p — a) 


p — a 
1 — a 


If in this result we change n into n + 1, we get 


Prob. . . . x n +i = a 


(P 


a) 


( p ~ a 

\1 -a 


n 


Hence we find 


Prob. X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n+1 
Prob. X1X2 . . . x n 


a+(p-a)( jg) 

a+(p-a) (fEf) 


(3) 


as the expression of the probability that if the phaenomenon be n times repeated, 
it will also present itself the n + 1 th time. By the method of Chapter XIX. it is 
found that a cannot exceed p in value. 

The following verifications are obvious: — 

1st. If a = 0, the expression reduces to p, as it ought to do. For when 
it is certain that no permanent cause exists, the successive occurrences of the 
phaenomenon are independent. 

2nd. If p = 1, the expression becomes 1, as it ought to do. 

3rd. If p = a, the expression becomes 1, unless a = 0. If the probability 
of a phaenomenon is equal to the probability that there exists a cause which 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


281 


under given circumstances would always produce it, then the fact that that 
phaenomenon has ever been noticed under those circumstances, renders certain 
its re-appearance under the same. 5 6 

4th. As n increases, the expression approaches in value to unity. This 
indicates that the probability of the recurrence of the event increases with the 
frequency of its successive appearances, — a result agreeable to the natural laws 
of expectation. 

Second Case. — We are now to seek the probability a posteriori of the 
existence of a permanent cause of the phaenomenon. This requires that we 
ascertain the value of the fraction 

Prob. tx 1X2 . . . x n 
Prob. X1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n 

the denominator of which has already been determined. 

To determine the numerator assume 

tX 1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n = w, 

then proceeding as before, we obtain for the logical development, 


w = tx 1X2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n + 0(1 — t). 


Whence, passing from Logic to Algebra, we have at once 


Prob. w = a, 

a result which might have been anticipated. Substituting then for the numerator 
and denominator of the above fraction their values, we have for the a posteriori 
probability of a permanent cause, the expression 

“ +(f, - o) (yT) 

It is obvious that the value of this expression increases with the value of n. 

I am indebted to a learned correspondent, whose original contributions 
to the theory of probabilities have already been referred to, for the following 
verification of the first of the above results (3) . 

5 As we can neither re-enter nor recall the state of infancy, we are unable to say how far 
such results as the above serve to explain the confidence with which young children connect 
events whose association they have once perceived. But we may conjecture, generally, that 
the strength of their expectations is due to the necessity of inferring (as a part of their rational 
nature), and the narrow but impressive experience upon which the faculty is exercised. Hence 
the reference of every kind of sequence to that of cause and effect. A little friend of the 
author’s, on being put to bed, was heard to ask his brother the pertinent question, — ’’Why 
does going to sleep at night make it light in the morning?” The brother, who was a year older, 
was able to reply, that it would be light in the morning even if little boys did not go to sleep 
at night. 

6 Professor Donkin. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


282 


“The whole a priori probability of the event (under the circumstances) being 
p , and the probability of some cause C which would necessarily produce it, a, 
let x be the probability that it will happen if no such cause as C exist. Then 
we have the equation 

p = a + (1 — a)x, 

whence 

p — a 


Now the phaenomenon observed is the occurrence of the event n times. The a 
priori probability of this would be — 


1 supposing C to exist, 
x n supposing C not to exist; 


whence the a posteriori probability that C exists is 

a 

a + (1 — a)x n ’ 


that C does not exist is 

(1 - a)x n 
a + (1 — a)x n ' 

Consequently the probability of another occurrence is 

a (1 — a)x n 

X \ -|- ^ 

a+(l — a)x n a+(l — a)x n 


a + (1 — a)x n+1 
a + (l — a)x n ’ 


which, on replacing n by its value 


p — a 
1 — a 


will be found to agree with (3).” 


Similar verifications might, it is probable, also be found for the following 
results, obtained by the direct application of the general method. 

The probability, under the same circumstances, that if, out of n occasions, 
the event happen r times, and fail n — r times, it will happen on the n + 1 th 
time is 


a + m(p 


a) 


f p — la 
V, 1 — a 


r 


a + m(p — la) 


f p — la 
V, 1 — a 


r— 1 


n(n — 1) . . . n — r + 1 r 

wherein m = and l = — . 

1.2 . . . r n 

The probability of a permanent cause (r being less than n) is 0. This is 
easily verified. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


283 


If p be the probability of an event, and c the probability that if it occur it 
will be due to a permanent cause; the probability after n successive observed 
occurrences that it will recur on the n + 1 th similar occasion is 

c — ( 1 — c)x n 
c + (1 — c)x 1l ~ 1 ’ 


x • P(! - c) 

wherein x = . 

1 — cp 

20. It is remarkable that the solutions of the previous problems are void of 
any arbitrary element. We should scarcely, from the appearance of the data, 
have anticipated such a circumstance. It is, however, to be observed, that 
in all those problems the probabilities of the causes involved are supposed to 
be known a priori. In the absence of this assumed element of knowledge, it 
seems probable that arbitrary constants would necessarily appear in the final 
solution. Some confirmation of this remark is afforded by a class of problems to 
which considerable attention has been directed, and which, in conclusion, I shall 
briefly consider. It has been observed that there exists in the heavens a large 
number of double stars of extreme closeness. Either these apparent instances 
of connexion have some physical ground or they have not. If they have not, 
we may regard the phenomenon of a double star as the accidental result of 
a “random distribution” of stars over the celestial vault, i.e. of a distribution 
which would render it just as probable that either member of the binary system 
should appear in one spot as in another. If this hypothesis be assumed, and if 
the number of stars of a requisite brightness be known, we can determine what 
is the probability that two of them should be found within such limits of mutual 
distance as to constitute the observed phenomenon. Thus Mitchell,' estimating 
that there are 230 stars in the heavens equal in brightness to (3 Capricorni, 
determines that it is 80 to 1 against such a combination being presented were 
those stars distributed at random. The probability, when such a combination 
has been observed, that there exists between its members a physical ground of 
connexion, is then required. 

Again, the sum of the inclinations of the orbits of the ten known planets 
to the plane of the ecliptic in the year 1801 was 91°-4187, according to the 
French measures. Were all inclinations equally probable, Laplace 8 determines, 
that there would be only the excessively small probability .00000011235 that 
the mean of the inclinations should fall within the limit thus assigned. And he 
hence concludes, that there is a very high probability in favour of a disposing 
cause, by which the inclinations of the planetary orbits have been confined 
within such narrow bounds. Professor De Morgan, 9 taking the sum of the 
inclinations at 92°, gives to the above probability the value .00000012, and infers 
that “it is 1 : .00000012, that there was a necessary cause in the formation of the 
solar system for the inclinations being what they are.” An equally determinate 

7 Phil. Transactions, An. 1767. 

8 Theorie Analytique des Probabilites, p. 276. 

9 Encyclopedia Metropolitana. Art. Probabilities. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


284 


conclusion has been drawn from observed coincidences between the direction 
of circular polarization in rock-crystal, and that of certain oblique faces in its 
crystalline structure. 10 

These problems are all of a similar character. A certain hypothesis is 
framed, of the various possible consequences of which we are able to assign 
the probabilities with perfect rigour. Now some actual result of observation 
being found among those consequences, and its hypothetical probability being 
therefore known, it is required thence to determine the probability of the hy- 
pothesis assumed, or its contrary. In Mitchell’s problem, the hypothesis is that 
of a “random distribution of the stars,” — the possible and observed consequence, 
the appearance of a close double star. The very small probability of such a re- 
sult is held to imply that the probability of the hypothesis is equally small, or, 
at least, of the same order of smallness. And hence the high and, and as some 
think, determinate probability of a disposing cause in the stellar arrangements 
is inferred. Similar remarks apply to the other examples adduced. 

21. The general problem, in whatsoever form it may be presented, admits 
only of an indefinite solution. Let x represent the proposed hypothesis, y a 
phaenomenon which might occur as one of its possible consequences, and whose 
calculated probability, on the assumption of the truth of the hypothesis, is p, 
and let it be required to determine the probability that if the phaenomenon y 
is observed, the hypothesis x is true. The very data of this problem cannot be 
expressed without the introduction of an arbitrary element. We can only write 

Prob. x — a, Prob. xy = ap\ (1) 


a being perfectly arbitrary, except that it must fall within the limits 0 and 1 
inclusive. If then P represent the conditional probability sought, we have 

„ Prob. xy ap 

P= - = — . (2) 

Prob. y Prob. y 

It remains then to determine Prob. y. Let xy = t, then 

y = - = tx + -t( 1 — x) + 0(1 — t)x + ^(1 — t)(l — x). (3) 

£ 0 0 


Hence observing that Prob. x = a, Prob. t = ap, and passing from Logic to 
Algebra, we have 


Prob. y 


tx + c( 1 — t)x 
tx+l — t 


with the relations 


tx + (1 — t) x tx 

= — = tx + 1 — t. 

a ap 


Hence we readily find 


Prob. y = ap + c(l — a). (4) 

10 Edinburgh Review, No. 185, p. 32. This article, though not entirely free from error, is 
well worthy of attention. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


285 


Now recurring to (3), we find that c is the probability, that if the event 
(1 — t)(l — x) occur, the event y will occur. But 

(1 — t)(l — x) = (1 — xy)( 1 — x) = 1 — x. 

Hence c is the probability that if the event x do not occur, the event y will 
occur. 

Substituting the value of Prob. y in (2), we have the following theorem: 

The calculated probability of any phenomenon y, upon an assumed physical 
hypothesis x, being p, the a posteriori probability P of the physical hypothesis, 
when the phenomenon has been observed, is expressed by the equation 

P = ap 151 

ap + c(l — a) ’ 1 j 

where a and c are arbitrary constants, the former representing the a, priori proba- 
bility of the hypothesis, the latter the probability that if the hypothesis were false, 
the event y would present itself. 

The principal conclusion deducible from the above theorem is that, other 
things being the same, the value of P increases and diminishes simultaneously 
with that of p. Hence the greater or less the probability of the phaenomenon 
when the hypothesis is assumed, the greater or less is the probability of the hy- 
pothesis when the phenomenon has been observed. When p is very small, then 
generally P also is small, unless either a is large or c small. Hence, secondly, 
if the probability of the phaenomenon is very small when the hypothesis is as- 
sumed, the probability of the hypothesis is very small when the phaenomenon 
is observed, unless either the a priori probability a of the hypothesis is large, 
or the probability of the phaenomenon upon any other hypothesis small. 

The formula (5) admits of exact verification in various cases, as when c = 0, 
or a = 1, or a = 0. But it is evident that it does not, unless there be means 
for determining the values of a and c, yield a definite value of P. Any solu- 
tions which profess to accomplish this object, either are erroneous in principle, 
or involve a tacit assumption respecting the above arbitrary elements. Mr. 
De Morgan’s solution of Laplace’s problem concerning the existence of a deter- 
mining cause of the narrow limits within which the inclinations of the planetary 
orbits to the plane of the ecliptic are confined, appears to me to be of the lat- 
ter description. Having found a probability p = .00000012, that the sum of 
the inclinations would be less than 92° were all degrees of inclination equally 
probable in each orbit, this able writer remarks: “If there be a reason for the 
inclinations being as described, the probability of the event is 1. Consequently, 
it is 1: .00000012 (i.e. 1: p), that there was a necessary cause in the formation 
of the solar system for the inclinations being what they are.” Now this result is 
what the equation (5) would really give, if, assigning to p the above value, we 
should assume c = 1, a = \. For we should thus find, 

r= = P 

\p+\ 1 +P 

.-. 1 -P: P: : 1: p. 


( 6 ) 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


286 


But P representing the probability, a posteriori, that all inclinations are 
equally probable, 1 — P is the probability, a posteriori, that such is not the case, 
or, adopting Mr. De Morgan’s alternative, that a determining cause exists. The 
equation (6), therefore, agrees with Mr. De Morgan’s result. 

22. Are we, however, justified in assigning to a and c particular values? I am 
strongly disposed to think that we are not. The question is of less importance 
in the special instance than in its ulterior bearings. In the received applications 
of the theory of probabilities, arbitrary constants do not explicitly appear; but 
in the above, and in many other instances sanctioned by the highest authorities, 
some virtual determination of them has been attempted. And this circumstance 
has given to the results of the theory, especially in reference to questions of 
causation, a character of definite precision, which, while on the one hand it 
has seemed to exalt the dominion and extend the province of numbers, even 
beyond the measure of their ancient claim to rule the world; 11 on the other 
hand has called forth vigorous protests against their intrusion into realms in 
which conjecture is the only basis of inference. The very fact of the appearance 
of arbitrary constants in the solutions of problems like the above, treated by the 
method of this work, seems to imply, that definite solution is impossible, and 
to mark the point where inquiry ought to stop. We possess indeed the means 
of interpreting those constants, but the experience which is thus indicated is as 
much beyond our reach as the experience which would preclude the necessity of 
any attempt at solution whatever. 

Another difficulty attendant upon these questions, and inherent, perhaps, 
in the very constitution of our faculties, is that of precisely defining what is 
meant by Order. The manifestations of that principle, except in very complex 
instances, we have no difficulty in detecting, nor do we hesitate to impute to it 
an almost necessary foundation in causes operating under Law. But to assign 
to it a standard of numerical value would be a vain, not to say a presumptuous, 
endeavour. Yet must the attempt be made, before we can aspire to weigh with 
accuracy the probabilities 12 13 of different constitutions of the universe, so as 
to determine the elements upon which alone a definite solution of the problems 
in question can be established. 

23. The most usual mode of endeavouring to evade the necessary arbitrari- 
ness of the solution of problems in the theory of probabilities which rest upon 
insufficient data, is to assign to some element whose real probability is unknown 
all possible degrees of probability; to suppose that these degrees of probability 
are themselves equally probable; and, regarding them as so many distinct causes 
of the phenomenon observed, to apply the theorems which represent the case of 
an effect due to some one of a number of equally probable but mutually exclusive 
causes (Problem 9). For instance, the rising of the sun after a certain interval 

11 Mundum regunt numeri. 

12 Original text was “probabibilities” and was fixed ill 2004 by Distributed Proofreaders. 

13 The following footnote was in the original text but was not referenced in the text, so it is 
referenced here 14 in 2004 by Distributed Proofreaders. 

14 See an interesting paper by Prof. Forbes in the Philosophical Magazine, Dec. 1850; also 
Mill’s Logic, chap, xviii. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


287 


of darkness having been observed to times in succession, the probability of its 
again rising under the same circumstances is determined, on received principles, 
in the following manner. Let p be any unknown probability between 0 and 1, 
and c (infinitesimal and constant) the probability, that the probability of the 
sun’s rising after an interval of darkness lies between the limits p and p + dp. 
Then the probability that the sun will rise m times in succession is 

c f 1 p m dp ; 

Jo 

and the probability that he will do this, and will rise again, or, which is the 
same thing, that he will rise m + 1 times in succession, is 

c [ p m+1 dp, 

Jo 

Hence the probability that if he rise to times in succession, he will rise the 
to + 1 th time, is 

c fgP m+1 dp _ m + 1 
c fg p m dp to + 2 

the known and generally received solution. 

The above solution is usually founded upon a supposed analogy of the prob- 
lem with that of the drawing of balls from an urn containing a mixture of black 
and white balls, between which all possible numerical ratios are assumed to be 
equally probable. And it is remarkable, that there are two or three distinct 
hypotheses which lead to the same final result. For instance, if the balls are 
finite in number, and those which arc drawn are not replaced, or if they are 
infinite in number, whether those drawn are replaced or not, then, supposing 
that to successive drawings have yielded only white balls, the probability of the 
issue of a white ball at the m + 1 th drawing is 


to + 2 

It has been said, that the principle involved in the above and in similar ap- 
plications is that of the equal distribution of our knowledge, or rather of our 
ignorance — the assigning to different states of things of which we know nothing, 
and upon the very ground that we know nothing, equal degrees of probability. 
I apprehend, however, that this is an arbitrary method of procedure. Instances 
may occur, and one such has been adduced, in which different hypotheses lead 
to the same final conclusion. But those instances are exceptional. With refer- 
ence to the particular problem in question, it is shown in the memoir cited, that 
there is one hypothesis, viz., when the balls are finite in number and not re- 
placed, which leads to a different conclusion, and it is easy to see that there are 
other hypotheses, as strictly involving the principle of the “equal distribution 
of knowledge or ignorance,” which would also conduct to conflicting results. 

15 See a memoir by Bishop Terrot, Edinburgh Phil. Trans, vol. xx. Part iv. 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


288 


24. For instance, let the case of sunrise be represented by the drawing of a 
white ball from a bag containing an infinite number of balls, which are all either 
black or white, and let the assumed principle be, that all possible constitutions 
of the system of balls are equally probable. By a constitution of the system, I 
mean an arrangement which assigns to every ball in the system a determinate 
colour, either black or white. Let us thence seek the probability, that if m 
white balls are drawn in m drawings, a white ball will be drawn in the m + 1 th 
drawing. 

First, suppose the number of the balls to be /./, and let the symbols x\, . . . x^ 

be appropriated to them in the following manner. Let x t denote that event which 
consists in the i th ball of the system being white, the proposition declaratory of 
such a state of things being Xi = 1. In like manner the compound symbol 1 — Xi 
will represent the circumstance of the i th ball being black. It is evident that 
the several constituents formed of the entire set of symbols xi, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x^ will 
represent in like manner the several possible constitutions of the system of balls 
with respect to blackness and whiteness, and the number of such constitutions 

being 2^, the probability of each will, in accordance with the hypothesis, be — . 

2^ 

This is the value which we should find if we substituted in the expression of any 
constituent for 

each of the symbols X\,X 2 , ¦ ¦ -x^, the value -. Hence, then, the probability 
of any event which can be expressed as a series of constituents of the above 
description, will be found by substituting in such expression the value — for 
each of the above symbols. 

Now the larger p is, the less probable it is that any ball which has been drawn 
and replaced will be drawn again. As p. approaches to infinity, this probability 
approaches to 0. And this being the case, the state of the balls actually drawn 
can be expressed as a logical function of m of the symbols X\,X 2 , ¦ ¦ -x^, and 
therefore, by development, as a series of constituents of the said m symbols. 
Hence, therefore, its probability will be found by substituting for each of the 

symbols, whether in the undeveloped or the developed form, the value — . But 
this is the very substitution which it would be necessary, and which it would 
suffice, to make, if the probability of a white ball at each drawing were known, 

a priori, to be -. 

It follows, therefore, that if the number of balls be infinite, and all constitu- 
tions of the system equally probable, the probability of drawing in white balls 

in succession will be — , and the probability of drawing m + 1 white balls in 
1 

succession - — 

2 ^ 71+1 ’ 

whence the probability that after m white balls have been drawn, the next 
drawing will furnish a white one, will be — . In other words, past experience 

does not in this case affect future expectation. 

25. It may be satisfactory to verify this result by ordinary methods. To 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


289 


accomplish this, we shall seek 

First: The probability of drawing r white balls, and p — r black balls, in p 
trials, out of a bag containing p balls, every ball being replaced after drawing, 
and all constitutions of the systems being equally probable, a priori. 

Secondly: The value which this probability assumes when p becomes infinite. 

Thirdly: The probability hence derived, that if m white balls are drawn in 
succession, the m + 1 th ball drawn will be white also. 

The probability that r white balls and p — r black ones will be drawn in p 
trials out of an urn containing p balls, each ball being replaced after trial, and 
all constitutions of the system as above defined being equally probable, is equal 
to the sum of the probabilities of the same result upon the separate hypotheses 
of there being no white balls, 1 white ball, — lastly p white balls in the urn. 
Therefore, it is the sum of the probabilities of this result on the hypothesis of 
there being n white balls, n varying from 0 to p. 

Now supposing that there are n white balls, the probability of drawing a 
white ball in a single drawing is ”, and the probability of drawing r white balls 
and p — r black ones in a particular order in p drawings, is 



But there being as many such orders as there are combinations of r things in p 
things, the total probability of drawing r white balls in p drawings out of the 
system of p balls of which n are white, is 


(1) 

Again, the number of constitutions of the system of p balls, which admit of 
exactly n balls being white, is 

p(p - 1) . . . (p - n + 1) 

1 . 2 . . . n 

and the number of possible constitutions of the system is 2^. Hence the proba- 
bility that exactly n balls are white is 

P(P ~ 1) ¦ ¦ ¦ (M ~ n + 1) 

1 . 2 ... n2» 


Multiplying (1) by this expression, and taking the sum of the products from 
n = 0 to n = p, we have 


p(p-l) ...p-r+1 p(p -l)...(p-n+l) 
1.2 . . . r ^ 1 . 2 . . . n2^ 

n—0 



(2) 


for the expression of the total probability, that out of a system of p balls of which 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


290 


all constitutions are equally probable, r white balls will issue in p drawings. Now 


^ 1 . 2 . . . n . 2^ 


_ — 1) ¦ ¦ ¦ (/i — n + 1) 

~~ ^ 1.2... n2^ 


-s(?) ('“) £ 


2 M 


p— r n— 


1 - - e nH ...(9 = 0) 
PJ 


p{p - 1) . . . (p - n + 1) 
1 . 2 . . . n 


i /r> 


1‘w) (1+£T ' 


D standing for the symbol so that (f>{D)e n g = cf)(n)£ n8 . But by a known 
theorem, 

A 2 0 m A 3 0 m 

t m = l + A0 m t + - 1) + Y^t(t - l)(i - 2). 

A 2pm 

.-. D m { 1 + e®)** = {1 + A0 m D + ~yy d {D - 1) + &c.}(l + e e y. 

In the second member let e 8 = x, then 

d A 2 0 m d 2 

D m { 1 + e e Y = (1 + A0 m a;— + — ^x 2 — + &c.)(l + x)*, 

ax 1.2 ax z 


D(D-l)...(D-i+l) =x l J . 

In the second member of the above equation, performing the differentiations 
and making x = 1 (since 0 = 0), we get 

D m ( 1 + £ e y = /r(A0 m )2^ _1 + ^ ~ 1) (A 2 0 m )2^~ 2 + &c. 

The last term of the second member of this equation will be 


H(H - 1) . . . (n - to + l)A m 0" 
1 . 2 . . . m 


2»~ m = n(/j, - 1) ... (/z - m + l)2 M_m ; 


since A m 0 m = 1.2 . . . m. When p is a large quantity this term exceeds all the 
others in value, and as p approaches to infinity tends to become infinitely great 
in comparison with them. And as moreover it assumes the form (i m 2^~ m , we 
have, on passing to the limit, 


‘(1 + £ <>y = n^- m = (|) ™ 2". 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


291 


Hence if represent any function of the symbol D , which is capable of being 
expanded in a series of ascending powers of D, we have 

<KD){1 + S e y = (4) 

if 9 = 0 and p = oo. Strictly speaking, this implies that the ratio of the two 
members of the above equation approaches a state of equality, as /i increases 
towards infinity, 6 being equal to 0. 

By means of this theorem, the last member of (3) reduces to the form 



Hence (2) gives 


P(P ~ 1) ¦ ¦ • (p - r + 1) 
1.2 . . . r 



as the expression for the probability that from an urn containing an infinite 
number of black and white balls, all constitutions of the system being equally 
probable, r white balls will issue in p drawings. 

Hence, making p = m, r = m, the probability that in m drawings all the 
balls will be white is (4) , and the probability that this will be the case, and 


that moreover the rn + 1 th drawing will yield a white ball is 



m+1 


whence 


the probability, that if the first m drawings yield white balls only, the m + 1 th 
drawing will also yield a white ball, is 


m+1 



l 

2 ’ 


and generally, any proposed result will have the same probability as if it were 
an even chance whether each particular drawing yielded a white or a black ball. 
This agrees with the conclusion before obtained. 

26. These results only illustrate the fact, that when the defect of data is 
supplied by hypothesis, the solutions will, in general, vary with the nature of 
the hypotheses assumed; so that the question still remains, only more definite 
in form, whether the principles of the theory of probabilities serve to guide 
us in the election of such hypotheses. I have already expressed my conviction 
that they do not — a conviction strengthened by other reasons than those above 
stated. Thus, a definite solution of a problem having been found by the method 
of this work, an equally definite solution is sometimes attainable by the same 
method when one of the data, suppose Prob. x = p\ is omitted. But I have not 
been able to discover any mode of deducing the second solution from the first 
by integration , with respect to p supposed variable within limits determined by 
Chap. XIX. This deduction would, however, I conceive, be possible, were the 
principle adverted to in Art. 23 valid. Still it is with diffidence that I express 
my dissent on these points from mathematicians generally, and more especially 



CHAPTER XX. PROBLEMS ON CAUSES 


292 


from one who, of English writers, has most fully entered into the spirit and the 
methods of Laplace; and I venture to hope, that a question, second to none other 
in the Theory of Probabilities in importance, will receive the careful attention 
which it deserves. 



Chapter XXI 

PARTICULAR APPLICATION OF THE PREVIOUS 
GENERAL METHOD TO THE QUESTION OF THE 
PROBABILITY OF JUDGMENTS. 


1. On the presumption that the general method of this treatise for the solution 
of questions in the theory of probabilities, has been sufficiently elucidated in 
the previous chapters, it is proposed here to enter upon one of its practical 
applications selected out of the wide field of social statistics, viz., the estimation 
of the probability of judgments. Perhaps this application, if weighed by its 
immediate results, is not the best that could have been chosen. One of the first 
conclusions to which it leads is that of the necessary insufficiency of any data 
that experience alone can furnish, for the accomplishment of the most important 
object of the inquiry. But in setting clearly before us the necessity of hypotheses 
as supplementary to the data of experience, and in enabling us to deduce with 
rigour the consequences of any hypothesis which may be assumed, the method 
accomplishes all that properly lies within its scope. And it may be remarked, 
that in questions which relate to the conduct of our own species, hypotheses are 
more justifiable than in questions such as those referred to in the concluding 
sections of the previous chapter. Our general experience of human nature comes 
in aid of the scantiness and imperfection of statistical records. 

2. The elements involved in problems relating to criminal assize are the 
following: — 

1st. The probability that a particular member of the jury will form a correct 
opinion upon the case. 

2nd. The probability that the accused party is guilty. 

3rd. The probability that he will be condemned, or that he will be acquitted. 

4th. The probability that his condemnation or acquittal will be just. 

5th. The constitution of the jury. 

6th. The data furnished by experience, such as the relative numbers of cases 
in which unanimous decisions have been arrived at, or particular majorities 
obtained; the number of cases in which decisions have been reversed by superior 
courts, &c. 

Again, the class of questions under consideration may be regarded as either 
direct or inverse. The direct questions of probability are those in which the 


293 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


294 


probability of correct decision for each member of the tribunal, or of guilt for the 
accused party, are supposed to be known a priori , and in which the probability 
of a decision of a particular kind, or with a definite majority, is sought. Inverse 
problems are those in which, from the data furnished by experience, it is required 
to determine some element which, though it stand to those data in the relation of 
cause to effect, cannot directly be made the subject of observation; as when from 
the records of the decisions of courts it is required to determine the probability 
that a member of a court will judge correctly. To this species of problems, the 
most difficult and the most important of the whole series, attention will chiefly 
be directed here. 

3. There is no difficulty in solving the direct problems referred to in the 
above enumeration. Suppose there is but one juryman. Let k be the probability 
that the accused person is guilty; x the probability that the juryman will form a 
correct opinion; X the probability that the accused person will be condemned: 
then — 


kx = probability that the accused party is guilty, and that the 
juryman judges him to be guilty. 

(I — k)(l — x) = probability that the accused person is inno- 
cent, and that the juryman pronounces him guilty. 

Now these being the only cases in which a verdict of condemnation can be 
given, and being moreover mutually exclusive, we have 

X = kx + (1 — fc)(l — x). (1) 

In like manner, if there be n jurymen whose separate probabilities of correct 
judgment are xi,x%, . . . x n , the probability of an unanimous verdict of condem- 
nation will be 


X = kx ix 2 ...x n + (l- k)( 1 - aq)(l - x 2 ) ¦ ¦ ¦ (1 - x n ). 

Whence, if the several probabilities # 1 , 2:2 . . .x n are equal, and are each repre- 
sented by x, we have 

X = kx n + (l-k)(l-x) n . (2) 

The probability in the latter case, that the accused person is guilty, will be 

kx n 

kx n + (1 — fc)(l — x) n 

All these results assume, that the events whose probabilities are denoted by k, 
Xi, # 2 ) &c., are independent, an assumption which, however, so far as we are 
concerned, is involved in the fact that those events are the only ones of which 
the probabilities are given. 

The probability of condemnation by a given number of voices may be found 
on the same principles. If a jury is composed of three persons, whose several 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


295 


probabilities of correct decision are x, x' , x", the probability X 2 that the accused 
person will be declared guilty by two of them will be 

X 2 = k{xx'{ 1 — x") + xx"(l — x') + x'x"(\ — x)} 

+(1 - jfe){(l - x)(l - x')x" + (1 - x){l - x")x' + (1 - x'){l - x")x}, 

which if x = x' = x" reduces to 

3fcx 2 (l — x) + 3(1 — k)x( 1 — x) 2 . 

And by the same mode of reasoning, it will appear that if X i represent the 
probability that the accused person will be declared guilty by i voices out of a 
jury consisting of n persons, whose separate probabilities of correct judgment 
are equal, and represented by x, then 

Xi = ~ ^ ~ t + 1 ) {kx\ 1 - x) 11 - 1 + (1 - k)x n -\l - a;) 1 }. (3) 

If the probability of condemnation by a determinate majority a is required, we 
have simply 

i — a = n — i, 

whence 

n + a 


which must be substituted in the above formula. Of course a admits only of 
such values as make i an integer. If n is even, those values are 0, 2, 4, &c.; if 
odd, 1, 3, 5, &c., as is otherwise obvious. 

The probability of a condemnation by a majority of at least a given number 
of voices m, will be found by adding together the following several probabilities 
determined as above, viz.: 

1st. The probability of a condemnation by an exact majority 
m; 


2nd. The probability of condemnation by the next greater ma- 
jority m + 2; 

and so on; the last element of the series being the probability of unanimous 
condemnation. Thus the probability of condemnation by a majority of 4 at 
least out of 12 jurors, would be 


A ^8 + Xg . . . + X12, 

the values of the above terms being given by (3) after making therein n = 12. 

4. When, instead of a jury, we are considering the case of a simple deliber- 
ative assembly consisting of n persons, whose separate probabilities of correct 
judgment are denoted by x, the above formulae are replaced by others, made 
somewhat more simple by the omission of the quantity k. 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


296 


The probability of unanimous decision is 

X = x n + (I- x) n . 


The probability of an agreement of i voices out of the whole number is 
n(n — 1) . . . (n — * + 1) 


Xi = 


1-2 ...i 


-{x\i - x) n ~ % + x n ~ i {i - x yy. 


( 4 ) 


Of this class of investigations it is unnecessary to give any further account. 
They have been pursued to a considerable extent by Condorcet, Laplace, Pois- 
son, and other writers, who have investigated in particular the modes of cal- 
culation and reduction which are necessary to be employed when n and i are 
large numbers. It is apparent that the whole inquiry is of a very speculative 
character. The values of x and k cannot be determined by direct observation. 

We can only presume that they must both in general exceed the value — ; that 
the former, x, must increase with the progress of public intelligence; while the 
latter, k, must depend much upon those preliminary steps in the administration 
of the law by which persons suspected of crime are brought before the tribunal 
of their country. It has been remarked by Poisson, that in periods of revolution, 
as during the Reign of Terror in France, the value of k may fall, if account be 

taken of political offences, far below the limit - . The history of Europe in days 
nearer to our own would probably confirm this observation, and would show 
that it is not from the wild license of democracy alone, that the accusation of 
innocence is to be apprehended. 

Laplace makes the assumption, that all values of x from 


x = to x = 1, 

2 

are equally probable. He thus excludes the supposition that a juryman is more 
likely to be deceived than not, but assumes that within the limits to which the 
probabilities of individual correctness of judgment are confined, we have no rea- 
son to give preference to one value of x over another. This hypothesis is entirely 
arbitrary, and it would be unavailing here to examine into its consequences. 

Poisson seems first to have endeavoured to deduce the values of x and k, 
inferentially, from experience. In the six years from 1825 to 1830 inclusively, 
the number of individuals accused of crimes against the person before the tri- 
bunals of France was 11016, and the number of persons condemned was 5286. 
The juries consisted each of 12 persons, and the decision was pronounced by a 
simple majority. Assuming the above numbers to be sufficiently large for the 
estimation of probabilities, there would therefore be a probability measured by 

the fraction or .4782 that an accused person would be condemned by a 

11016 

simple majority. We should have the equation 


X 7 + X 8 ¦ ¦ ¦ + X 12 = .4782, 


( 5 ) 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


297 


the general expression for Xi being given by (3) after making therein n = 12. 
In the year 1831 the law, having received alteration, required a majority of at 
least four persons for condemnation, and the number of persons tried for crimes 
against the person during that year being 2046, and the number condemned 743, 
the probability of the condemnation of an individual by the above majority was 
2 , or .3631. Hence we should have 

X 8 + X 9 . . . + X 12 = .3631 . (6) 

Assuming that the values of k and x were the same for the year 1831 as for 
the previous six years, the two equations (5) and (6) enable us to determine 
approximately their values. Poisson thus found, 

k = .5354, x = .6786 . 

For crimes against property during the same periods, he found by a similar 
analysis, 

k = .6744, x = .7771 . 

The solution of the system (5) (6) conducts in each case to two values of 
k, and to two values of x, the one value in each pair being greater, and the 

other less, than -. It was assumed, that in each case the larger value should 
be preferred, it being conceived more probable that a party accused should be 
guilty than innocent, and more probable that a juryman should form a correct 
than an erroneous opinion upon the evidence. 

5. The data employed by Poisson, especially those which were furnished 
by the year 1831, are evidently too imperfect to permit us to attach much 
confidence to the above determinations of x and k; and it is chiefly for the sake 
of the method that they are here introduced. It would have been possible to 
record during the six years, 1825-30, or during any similar period, the number 
of condemnations pronounced with each possible majority of voices. The values 
of the several elements A 8 , Xg, . . . X \2 were there no reasons of policy to forbid, 
might have been accurately ascertained. Here then the conception of the general 
problem, of which Poisson’s is a particular case, arises. How shall we, from this 
apparently supernumerary system of data, determine the values of x and kl 
If the hypothesis, adopted by Poisson and all other writers on the subject, of 
the absolute independence of the events whose probabilities are denoted by x 
and k be retained, we should be led to form a system of five equations of the 
type (3), and either select from these that particular pair of equations which 
might appear to be most advantageous, or combine together the equations of the 
system by the method of least squares. There might exist a doubt as to whether 
the latter method would be strictly applicable in such cases, especially if the 
values of x and k afforded by different selected pairs of the given equations were 
very different from each other. M. Cournot has considered a somewhat similar 
problem, in which, from the records of individual votes in a court consisting of 
four judges, it is proposed to investigate the separate probabilities of a correct 
verdict from each judge. For the determination of the elements x, x' , x" , x"' , he 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


298 


obtains eight equations, which he divides into two sets of four equations, and he 
remarks, that should any considerable discrepancy exist between the values of 
x, x' , x" , x'" , determined from those sets, it might be regarded as an indication 
that the hypothesis of the independence of the opinions of the judges was, in 
the particular case, untenable. The principle of this mode of investigation has 
been adverted to in (XVIII. 4 ). 

6 . I proceed to apply to the class of problems above indicated, the method of 
this treatise, and shall inquire, first, whether the records of courts and delibera- 
tive assemblies, alone, can furnish any information respecting the probabilities 
of correct judgment for their individual members, and, it appearing that they 
cannot, secondly, what kind and amount of necessary hypothesis will best com- 
port with the actual data. 

Proposition I. 

From the mere records of the decisions of a court or deliberative assembly , 
it is not possible to deduce any definite conclusion respecting the correctness of 
the individual judgments of its members. 

Though this Proposition may appear to express but the conviction of unas- 
sisted good sense, it will not be without interest to show that it admits of rigor- 
ous demonstration. Let us suppose the case of a deliberative assembly consisting 
of n members, no hypothesis whatever being made respecting the dependence 
or independence of their judgments. Let the logical symbols X\, #2, • • • x n be 
employed according to the following definition, viz.: Let the generic symbol Xi 
denote that event which consists in the uttering of a correct opinion by the 
i th member, A. t of the court. We shall consider the values of Prob. xi, Prob. 
X2, ¦ ¦ .Prob. x n , as the qiuEsita of a problem, the expression of whose possible 
data we must in the next place investigate. 

Now those data are the probabilities of events capable of being expressed 
by definite logical functions of the symbols X\,X2, ¦ ¦ ¦ x n . Let X\, X2, ¦ . ¦ X m 
represent the functions in question, and let the actual system of data be 

Prob. X\ = a\, Prob. X2 = 02, Prob. X m = a m . 

Then from the very nature of the case it may be shown that Xi, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ X m , 
are functions which remain unchanged if x\, X2, ¦ ¦ ¦ x n are therein changed into 
1 — #i, 1 — X2, ¦ ¦ ¦ 1 — x n respectively. Thus, if it were recorded that in a certain 
proportion of instances the votes given were unanimous, the event whose prob- 
ability, supposing the instances sufficiently numerous, is thence determined, is 
expressed by the logical function 

XxX2 . . . X n + (1 - £i)(l - X 2 ) ¦ ¦ ¦ (1 - x n ), 

a function which satisfies the above condition. Again, let it be recorded, that in 
a certain proportion of instances, the vote of an individual, suppose A\, differs 
from that of all the other members of the court. The event, whose probability 
is thus given, will be expressed by the function 


xi{l - x 2 ) ¦¦¦{!- x n ) + (1 - £1)2:2 . . . x n ; 



CHAPTER XXL PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


299 


also satisfying the above conditions. Thus, as agreement in opinion may be an 
agreement in either truth or error; and as, when opinions are divided, either 
party may be right or wrong; it is manifest that the expression of any particular 
state, whether of agreement or difference of sentiment in the assembly, will 
depend upon a logical function of the symbols X\,X2, ¦ ¦ - x n , which similarly 
involves the privative symbols 1 — x±, 1 — X 2 , ... 1 — x n . But in the records of 
assemblies, it is not presumed to declare which set of opinions is right or wrong. 
Hence the functions X\,X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ X m must be solely of the kind above described. 

7. Now in proceeding, according to the general method, to determine the 
value of Prob. X\ , we should first equate the functions Xi, . . . X m to a new set 
of symbols From the equations 

Xi — 1 1 , X 2 — 1 2 , • • ¦ X m — t m , 


thus formed, we should eliminate the symbols X2, £ 3 , • . . x n , and then determine 
Xi as a developed logical function of the symbols ti,t 2 , ¦ ¦ - t m , expressive of 
events whose probabilities are given. Let the result of the above elimination be 

Ex! + E'{ 1 - ®i) = 0; (1) 


E and E' being function of ti, f 2 , . . . t m . Then 


x\ 


E' 

E'-E' 


(2) 


Now the functions X\, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ X m are symmetrical with reference to the sym- 
bols Xi , . . . x n and l — xi,...l — x n . It is evident, therefore, that in the equation 
E' must be identical with E. Hence (2) gives 


x = 


E 

0 "’ 


and it is evident, that the only coefficients which can appear in the development 
of the second member of the above equation are ^ and J . The former will present 
itself whenever the values assigned to fi, . . . t m in determining the coefficient of 
a constituent, are such as to make E = 0, the latter, or an equivalent result, in 
every other case. Hence we may represent the development under the form 


*‘ = 5 C + 5 C 


(3) 


C and D being constituents, or aggregates of constituents, of the symbols 
ti, t 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ t m . Passing then from Logic to Algebra, we have 

Prob. x\ = -^ = c, 


the function V of the general Rule (XVII. 17) reducing in the present case to C. 
The value of Prob. x\ is therefore wholly arbitrary, if we except the condition 
that it must not transcend the limits 0 and 1. The individual values of Prob. 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


300 


X 2 , ...Prob. x n , are in like manner arbitrary. It does not hence follow, that 
these arbitrary values are not connected with each other by necessary conditions 
dependent upon the data. The investigation of such conditions would, however, 
properly fall under the methods of Chap. XIX. 

If, reverting to the final logical equation, we seek the interpretation of c, we 
obtain but a restatement of the original problem. For since C and D together 
include all possible constituents of t\, t^, ¦ ¦ ¦ t m , we have 

C + D= 1; 

and since D is affected by the coefficient g, it is evident that on substituting 
therein for t\, t^, ¦ ¦ ¦ t m , their expressions in terms of x\, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , we should 
have D = 0. Hence the same substitution would give (7 = 1. Now by the 
rule, c is the probability that if the event denoted by C take place, the event 
X\ will take place. Hence C being equal to 1, and, therefore, embracing all 
possible contingencies, c must be interpreted as the absolute probability of the 
occurrence of the event x\. 

It may be interesting to determine in a particular case the actual form of 
the final logical equation. Suppose, then, that the elements from which the 
data are derived are the records of events distinct and mutually exclusive. For 
instance, let the numerical data ai, < 12 , ¦ ¦ ¦ a m , be the respective probabilities of 
distinct and definite majorities. Then the logical functions Xi, X 2 , . . . X m being 
mutually exclusive, must satisfy the conditions 

M 2 = 0, . . . Mm = 0, Mm = 0, &C. 


Whence we have, 

tit 2 = 0, tit m = 0, &c. 

Under these circumstances it may easily be shown, that the developed logical 
value of X\ will be 


X\ — q (tlfg • • • tm T tlt'2 • • ¦ tm • • • T t m ti . 


+ constituents whose coefficients are 


• ¦ tm— l) 
1 

O' 


In the above equation t\ stands for 1 — ti, &c. 

These investigations are equally applicable to the case in which the proba- 
bilities of the verdicts of a jury, so far as agreement and disagreement of opinion 
are concerned, form the data of a problem. Let the logical symbol w denote 
that event or state of things which consists in the guilt of the accused person. 
Then the functions Xi, X 2 . . . X m of the present problem are such, that no 
change would therein ensue from simultaneously converting w,x 1 , X 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ x n into 
w, #i, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n respectively. Hence the final logical value of w, as well as those 
of X\, X2, — x n will be exhibited under the same form (3), and a like general 
conclusion thence deduced. 

It is therefore established, that from mere statistical documents nothing can 
be inferred respecting either the individual correctness of opinion of a judge or 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


301 


counsellor, the guilt of an individual, or the merits of a disputed question. If the 
determination of such elements as the above can be reduced within the province 
of science at all, it must be by virtue either of some assumed criterion of truth 
furnishing us with new data, or of some hypothesis relative to the connexion or 
the independence of individual judgments, which may warrant a new form of 
the investigation. In the examination of the results of different hypotheses, the 
following general Proposition will be of importance. 

Proposition II. 

8. Given the probabilities of the n simple events X\,X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n , viz.: — 

Prob. x\ — c\, Prob. X 2 = C2 , . . . Prob. x n = c n ; (1) 

also the probabilities of the m — 1 compound events X 3 , X 2 , . ¦ ¦ X m _\, viz .: — 

Prob. X\=a\, Prob. X 2 = 0 , 2 , ¦¦¦ Prob. X m _\ = a m _i; (2) 

the latter events X 3 . . . X m _i being distinct and mutually exclusive; required the 
probability of any other compound event X. 

In this proposition it is supposed, that Xi,X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ X rn _i, as well as X, are 
functions of the symbols X\, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n alone. Moreover, the events X±, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ X m _i 
being mutually exclusive, we have 

X 3 X 2 = 0, . . . = 0, X 2 X 3 = 0, &c.; (3) 

the product of any two members of the system vanishing. Now assume 

X 1 = t l , X m -i=t m -i, X = t. (4) 

Then t must be determined as a logical function of xi, . . . x n , 1 1 , . . . f m -i. 

Now by (3), 


t\t 2 = 0, titm-i = 0, t 2 t 3 = 0, &c.; (5) 

all binary products of fi,...t TO _i, vanishing. The developed expression for t 
can, therefore, only involve in the list of constituents which have 1, 0, or — for 
their coefficients, such as contain some one of the following factors, viz.: — 

t\t 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ t m— 1 5 ^1^2 • • • tm— 1 ) • • • 1 1 ... t rn —2^m—l i (6) 

t-[ standing for 1 — t\, &c. It remains to assign that portion of each constituent 
which involves the symbols x\...x n \ together with the corresponding coeffi- 
cients. 

Since Xi = t\ (i being any integer between 1 and m — 1 inclusive), it is 
evident that 

Xit 1 . . . 0, 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


302 


from the very constitution of the functions. Any constituent included in the 
first member of the above equation would, therefore, have — for its coefficient. 
Now let 


X m — 1 Xi . . . X m _i] 


( 7 ) 


and it is evident that such constituents as involve t-\ . . . t m -i , as a factor, and 
yet have coefficients of the form 1, 0, or — , must be included in the expression 


X-rntli ¦ ¦ ¦ tm— 1 ¦ 


Now X rn may be resolved into two portions, viz., X X m and (1 — X)X m , the 
former being the sum of those constituents of X m which are found in X, the 
latter of those which are not found in X. It is evident that in the developed 
expression of t, which is equivalent to X, the coefficients of the constituents in 
the former portion X X rn will be 1, while those of the latter portion (1 — X) X m 
will be 0. Hence the elements we have now considered will contribute to the 
development of t the terms 

XX m ti . . . t m - 1 + 0(1 — X)X m t\ ¦ ¦ ¦ tm-i- 

Again, since X\ = t 1 , while X 2 ti = t 2 t\ = 0, &c., it is evident that the only 
constituents involving t\t 2 . . .t m -i, as a factor which have coefficients of the 
form 1, 0, or will be included in the expression 

X it ±t 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ t m - 1 ; 


and reasoning as before, we see that this will contribute to the development of 
t the terms 

XXitit 2 . . . t m - 1 + 0(1 — X)Xihh ¦ ¦ ¦ t m - 1- 

Proceeding thus with the remaining terms of (6), we deduce for the final 
expression of t, 


t — XXmti ¦ ¦ ¦ tm - 1 + XXitlt 2 . . . t m - 1 • ¦ • + XX m -ltl ¦ 
+ 0(1 — X)X m tl ¦ ¦ ¦ tm- 1 + 0(1 — X)X\tlt 2 . . . tm- 1 


• • tm—2tm—l 

+ &c. 


+terms whose coefficients are 


1 

O' 


(8) 


In this expression it is to be noted that X X m denotes the sum of those 
constituents which are common to X and X m , that sum being actually given 
by multiply ing X and X m together, according to the rules of the calculus of 
Logic. 

In passing from Logic to Algebra, we shall represent by (X X rn ) what the 
above product becomes, when, after effecting the multiplication, or selecting the 
common constituents, we give to the symbols aq, . . . x n , a quantitative meaning. 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


303 


With this understanding we shall have, by the general Rule (XVII. 17), 

Prob. t 

_ (XX m )t 1 . . ¦ t m - 1 + (XXi )tlt2 ¦ ¦ ¦ tm- 1 + (XX m _i)tl . . . 

~ V 

V = X m h . . . tm— 1 + X\tit 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ tm— 1 • • • + x 

m— \t\ • • • t rn —2t rn —l 


(9) 

(10) 


whence the relations determining x\, . . . x n , t\, . . . t m _i will be of the following 
type ( i varying from 1 to n), 

(XiXm^t i . . . t m — i + [XiX\)t\t2 • ¦ • tm— 1 “t - (XiX m —i )ti . . . tm— 2tm— 1 


Ci 

_ X ±t 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ tm— 1 X-m, — 1 1 1 ¦ • ¦ tm— 2tm— 1 ^ 

ai a m -i 

From the above system we shall next eliminate the symbols t\, . 
We have 


( 11 ) 
tm— 1 • 


t\t2 ¦ ¦ ¦ t m - 1 — 


a{V 

~Xi’ 


1 1 • • • t m — 2tm— 1 — 


^m-lb 

Xm— 1 


(12) 


Substituting these values in (10), we find 


V — X m ti . . . t m — 1 + a 1 V • • • + 8 m- iV. 


Hence, 

t T (1 - ai . . . - Om-i)H 

tl • • ¦ t m - 1 — v • 

-s'-m 

Now let 

CLm = 1 CLl . . . flm-1) (1^) 

then we have 

tl...tm-l = ^. (14) 

-X-m 

Now reducing, by means of (12) and (14), the equation (9), and the equation 
formed by equating the first line of (11) to the symbol V ; writing also Prob. X 
for Prob. t, we have 


Prob. X = 

ai(xiXi 


aiiXXJ , a 2 (XX 2 ) 


Ctm {XX m ) 


Xi 


X 1 

a 2 (xiX 2 ) 

X 2 


X 2 ' ' ' X„ 


v n 


= C,: 


(15) 

(16) 


wherein X m and a m are given by (7) and (13). These equations involve the 
direct solution of the problem under consideration. In (16) we have the type 
of n equations (formed by giving to i the values 1,2, ...n successively), from 
which the values of x\, x 2 , . . . x n , will be found, and those values substituted in 
(15) give the value of Prob. X as a function of the constants a±, c\ , &c. 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


304 


One conclusion deserving of notice, which is deducible from the above solu- 
tion, is, that if the probabilities of the compound events X\, . . . X m _\, are the 
same as they would be were the events X\, . . . x n entirely independent, and with 
given probabilities Ci, ... c n , then the probability of the event X will be the same 
as if calculated upon the same hypothesis of the absolute independence of the 
events x\,...x n . For upon the hypothesis supposed, the assumption x\ = ci, 
x n = c„, in the quantitative system would give X\ = a\, X m = a mi whence 
(15) and (16) would give 

Prob. X = (XX!) + (XX 2 ) • • ¦ + (XX m ), (17) 

(xiX i) + (xiX 2 ) ¦ ¦ ¦ + ( Xi.X m ) = Ci. ( 18 ) 

But since X± + X 2 . . . + X m = 1, it is evident that the second member of 
(17) will be formed by taking all the constituents that are contained in X, and 
giving them an algebraic significance. And a similar remark applies to (18). 
Whence those equations respectively give 

Prob. X (logical) = X (algebraic), 

X-i — Ci . 

Wherefore, if X — <f>(x i,x 2 , . . . x n ), we have 

Prob. X = (f>(a,c 2 ,...c n ), 
which is the result in question. 

Hence too it would follow, that if the quantities ci , . . . c n were indeterminate, 
and no hypothesis were made as to the possession of a mean common value, the 
system (15) (16) would be satisfied by giving to those quantities any such values, 
Xi, x 2 , . . . x n , as would satisfy the equations 

X 1 — CL\ . . . Xm— 1 — dm— 1 5 -X — U, 

supposing the value of the element a, like the values of ai, . . . a m _i, to be given 
by experience. 9. Before applying the general solution (15) (16), to the question 
of the probability of judgments, it will be convenient to make the following 
transformation. Let the data be 


X\ — C\ . . . x n — c n , 

Prob. X\ = a\ . . . Prob. X m _ 2 = a m _ 2 ; 

and let it be required to determine Prob. X rn _ -j , the unknown value of which we 
will represent by a m - 1 - Then in (15) and (16) we must change 

X into X m _i, Prob.X into a TO _ i, 

X m —i into X m _ 2 , Q m —i into o m _ 2 , 

Xm into X m —i T X m , dm into Ctm—l A dm] 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


305 


with these transformations, and observing that ( X m _iX r ) = 0, except when 
r = m — 1, and that it is then equal to X m _i , the equations (15) (16) give 


Q"m— 1 — 


(cim— 1 H - ^m)X m— 1 

X m _ i + X m 


(19) 


a^aqXi) 

X-, 

Now from (19) we find 


2 (^2-^171— 2 ) (ftm— 1 A ®m)(^i-^m-l T 

X m _2 X m— 1 T X m 


( 20 ) 


X m _! _ X m _ Xm— 1 H - X n 

@"m— 1 Qm— 1 H"~ 


by virtue of which the last term of (20) may be reduced to the form 
^m—lip^iXm—l) Q j m(%iXm) 


Xm— 1 




With these reductions the system (17) and (18) may be replaced by the following 
symmetrical one, viz.: 


Xm— 1 Xm 

^m— 1 Q"m 


(21) 


ai(ffjXi) 122 ( 3 ^X 2 ) ®m(-^iX m ) 

X-, x 2 "¦ x^ 


(22) 


These equations, in connexion with (7) and (13), enable us to determine a m _i, as 
a function of Ci . . . c„, a\ . . . a m _ 2 , the numerical data supposed to be furnished 
by experience. We now proceed to their application. 


Proposition III. 


10. Given any system of probabilities drawn from recorded instances of una- 
nimity, or of assigned numerical majority in the decisions of a deliberative as- 
sembly; required, upon a certain determinate hypothesis, the mean probability of 
correct judgment for a member of the assembly. 

In what way the probabilities of unanimous decision and of specific numerical 
majorities may be determined from experience, has been intimated in a former 
part of this chapter. Adopting the notation of Prop. I. we shall represent 
the events whose probabilities are given by the functions Xi,X 2 , . . .X m _i. It 
has appeared from the very nature of the case that these events are mutually 
exclusive, and that the functions by which they are represented are symmetrical 
with reference to the symbols aq, x%, . . . x n . Those symbols we continue to use in 
the same sense as in Prop. I., viz., by aq we understand that event which consists 
in the formation of a correct opinion by the i th member of the assembly. 

Now the immediate data of experience are — 

Prob. Xi = ai, Prob. X 2 = a 2 . . .Prob. X m _ 2 = a m _ 2 , (1) 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


306 


Prob. X m ~i — dm— i* (2) 

X\ . . . X m -i being functions of the logical symbols aq,. . . x n to the probabilities 
of the events denoted by which, we shall assign the indeterminate value c. Thus 
we shall have 

Prob. aq = Prob. x 2 ¦ ¦ ¦ = Prob. x n = c. (3) 

Now it has been seen, Prop. I., that the immediate data (1) (2), unassisted 
by any hypothesis, merely conduct us to a restatement of the problem. On the 
other hand, it is manifest that if, adopting the methods of Laplace and Poisson, 
we employ the system (3) alone as the data for the application of the method of 
this work, finally comparing the results obtained with the experimental system 
(1) (2), we are relying wholly upon a doubtful hypothesis, — the independence 
of individual judgments. But though we ought not wholly to rely upon this hy- 
pothesis, we cannot wholly dispense with it, or with some equivalent substitute. 
Let us then examine the consequences of a limited independence of the individ- 
ual judgments; the conditions of limitation being furnished by the apparently 
superfluous data. From the system (1) (3) let us, by the method of this work, 
determine Prob. X m -i, and, comparing the result with (2), determine c. Even 
here an arbitrary power of selection is claimed. But it is manifest from Prop. 
I. that something of this kind is unavoidable, if we would obtain a definite so- 
lution at all. As to the principle of selection, I apprehend that the equation (2) 
reserved for final comparison should be that which, from the magnitude of its 
numerical element a m - 1 , is esteemed the most important of the primary series 
furnished by experience. 

Now, from the mutually exclusive character of the events denoted by the 
functions X lt X 2 , ¦ . . X m _i, the concluding equations of the previous proposition 
become applicable. On account of the symmetry of the same functions, and the 
reduction of the system of values denoted by d, to a single value c, the equations 
represented by (22) become identical, the values of aq,aq, ¦ • • x n become equal, 
and may be replaced by a single value x , and we have simply, 


ai(xXi) 


Xjn—1 X r! 


@">71—1 @m 

a 2 (xX 2 ) 

@m (^xXna) 

x 2 ' ¦ ¦ x m 


( 4 ) 

( 5 ) 


The following is the nature of the solution thus indicated: 

The functions Xi, . . . X m _i, and the values aq, . . . a m _i, being given in the 
data, we have first, 


X m — 1 Xi . . . A m _i, 

dm = 1 CLi . . . U m _i- 


From each of the functions X\, X 2 , . . . X m thus given or determined, we 
must select those constituents which contain a particular symbol, as aq for a 
factor. This will determine the functions (xXi), (xX 2 ), &c., and then in all 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


307 


the functions we must change x\, x 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n individually to x. Or we may regard 
any algebraic function X l in the system (4) (5) as expressing the probability of 
the event denoted by the logical function X,, on the supposition that the logical 
symbols x\, X 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n denote independent events whose common probability is x. 
On the same supposition (xX{) would denote the probability of the concurrence 
of any particular event of the series x\, X 2 , ¦¦ ¦ ¦ x n with X*. The forms of Xi, 
( xXi ), &c. being determined, the equation (4) gives the value of x, and this, 
substituted in (5), determines the value of the element c required. Of the two 
values which its solution will offer, one being greater, and the other less, than 

the greater one must be chosen, whensoever, upon general considerations, it 
is thought more probable that a member of the assembly will judge correctly, 
than that he will judge incorrectly. 

Here then, upon the assumed principle that the largest of the values a m _ 1 
shall be reserved for final comparison in the equation (2), we possess a definite 
solution of the problem proposed. And the same form of solution remains ap- 
plicable should any other equation of the system, upon any other ground, as 
that of superior accuracy, be similarly reserved in the place of (2). 

11. Let us examine to what extent the above reservation has influenced the 
final solution. It is evident that the equation (5) is quite independent of the 
choice in question. So is likewise the second member of (4). Had we reserved the 
function X-| , instead of X m _i, the equation for the determination of x would 
have been 


_ Xm 

5 


(6) 


but the value of x thence determined would still have to be substituted in the 
same final equation (5). We know that were the events xi, x 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n really 
independent, the equations (4), (6), and all others of which they are types, 
would prove equivalent, and that the value of x furnished by any one of them 
would be the true value of c. This affords a means of verifying (5). For if that 
equation be correct, it ought, under the above circumstances, to be satisfied by 
the assumption c = x. In other words, the equation 


«1 (xX 1 j d 2 {xX 2 Jj &m(.xX rrl ') /— \ 

V + V ¦ • • + V = X ( 7 ) 

Ai A 2 A m 

ought, on solution, to give the same value of x as the equation (4) or (6). Now 
this will be the case. For since, by hypothesis, 

Xi X2 = Xrn 

... , 

CL\ CL 2 dm 

we have, by a known theorem, 

Xi _ x 2 _ x m _ Xi + x 2 . . . + x m _ 1 

ci 1 a 2 a m a\ + ci 2 . . . + a m 


Hence (7) becomes on substituting a\ for Xi, &c. 


(xXi) + (xX 2 ) . . . (xX m ) = x 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


308 


a mere identity. 

Whenever, therefore, the events # 1 , 2 : 2 , ¦ ¦ -x n are really independent, the 
system (4) (5) is a correct one, and is independent of the arbitrariness of the 
first step of the process by which it was obtained. When the said events are not 
independent, the final system of equations will possess, leaving in abeyance the 
principle of selection above stated, an arbitrary element. But from the persistent 
form of the equation (5) it may be inferred that the solution is arbitrary in a less 
degree than the solutions to which the hypothesis of the absolute independence 
of the individual judgments would conduct us. The discussion of the limits of 
the value of c, as dependent upon the limits of the value of x, would determine 
such points. 

These considerations suggest to us the question whether the equation (7), 
which is symmetrical with reference to the functions Xi,X 2 , . . . X m , free from 
any arbitrary elements, and rigorously exact when the events aq, x< 2 .% ¦ ¦ ¦ x n are 
really independent, might not be accepted as a mean general solution of the 
problem. The proper mode of determining this point would, I conceive, be to 
ascertain whether the value of x which it would afford would, in general, fall 
within the limits of the value of c, as determined by the systems of equations 
of which the system (4), (5), presents the type. It seems probable that under 
ordinary circumstances this would be the case. Independently of such consider- 
ations, however, we may regard (7) as itself the expression of a certain principle 
of solution, viz., that regarding Xi,X 2 , . ¦ . X m as exclusive causes of the event 
whose probability is x, we accept the probabilities of those causes ai, a 2 , . . . a m 
from experience, but form the conditional probabilities of the event as dependent 
upon such causes, 


(a:Xi) 

X\ 


jxX 2 ) 

X 2 


, &c. (XVII. Prop I.) 


on the hypothesis of the independence of individual judgments, and so deduce 
the equation (7). I conceive this, however, to be a less rigorous, though possibly, 
in practice a more convenient mode of procedure than that adopted in the 
general solution. 

12. It now only remains to assign the particular forms which the algebraic 
functions X,, ( xXi ), &c. in the above equations assume when the logical func- 
tion Xi represents that event which consists in r members of the assembly 
voting one way, and n — r members the other way. It is evident that in this 
case the algebraic function X, expresses what the probability of the supposed 
event would be were the events Xi, x 2 , ¦ ¦ ¦ x n independent, and their common 
probability measured by x. Hence we should have, by Art. 3, 


X,; = 


n(n 


1) . . . (n - r + 1) 
1 . 2 . . . r 


K + (1 


x) n ~ r }. 


Under the same circumstances (xXi) would represent the probability of the 
compound event, which consists in a particular member of the assembly forming 
a correct judgment, conjointly with the general state of voting recorded above. 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


309 


It would, therefore, be the probability that a particular member votes correctly, 
while of the remaining n — 1 members, r — 1 vote correctly; or that the same 
member votes correctly, while of the remaining n — 1 members r vote incorrectly. 
Hence 


(n — l)(n — 2) . . . (n — r + 1) 
[ l) ~ 1 . 2 . . . r — 1 


(n— l)(n — 2)... (n-r) ~ n _ r 

1.2 ...r 


Proposition IV. 


13. Given any system of probabilities drawn from recorded instances of una- 
nimity, or of assigned numerical majority in the decisions of a criminal court 
of justice, required upon hypotheses similar to those of the last proposition, the 
mean probability c of correct judgment for a member of the court, and the gen- 
eral probability k of guilt in an accused person. 

The solution of this problem differs in but a slight degree from that of the 
last, and may be referred to the same general formulae, (4) and (5), or (7). It is 
to be observed, that as there are two elements, c and k, to be determined, it is 
necessary to reserve two of the functions X\, X 2 , . . . X TO _i, let us suppose X\, 
and X m _i, for final comparison, employing either the remaining m — 3 functions 
in the expression of the data, or the two respective sets X 2 ,X 3 , . . . X m _i, and 
Xi, X 2 , . . . X m _ 2 . In either case it is supposed that there must be at least two 
original independent data. If the equation (7) be alone employed, it would in 
the present instance furnish two equations, which may thus be written: 

ai(xXi) a 2 (xX 2 ) a m ( xX m ) 
ai(fcXi) a 2 {kX 2 ) a m (kX m ) _ 

Xi x 2 X m ~ '¦ 

These equations are to be employed in the following manner: — Let x\, x 2 , . . . x n 
represent those events which consist in the formation of a correct opinion by 
the members of the court respectively. Let also w represent that event which 
consists in the guilt of the accused member. By the aid of these symbols we can 
logically express the functions X\, X 2 , . . . X TO _i, whose probabilities are given, 
as also the function X m . Then from the function X\ select those constituents 
which contain, as a factor, any particular symbol of the set x\, x 2 , . . . x n , and 
also those constituents which contain as a factor w. In both results change 
Xi,x 2 , . . .x n severally into x, and w into k. The above results will give (xXi) 
and (kXi). Effecting the same transformations throughout, the system (1), (2) 
will, upon the particular hypothesis involved, determine x and k. 

14. We may collect from the above investigations the following facts and 
conclusions: 

1st. That from the mere records of agreement and disagreement in the 
opinions of any body of men, no definite numerical conclusions can be drawn 
respecting either the probability of correct judgment in an individual member 
of the body, or the merit of the questions submitted to its consideration. 


(1) 

(2) 



CHAPTER XXI. PROBABILITY OF JUDGEMENTS 


310 


2nd. That such conclusions may be drawn upon various distinct hypotheses, 
as — 1st, Upon the usual hypothesis of the absolute independence of individual 
judgments; 2ndly, upon certain definite modifications of that hypothesis war- 
ranted by the actual data; 3rdly, upon a distinct principle of solution suggested 
by the appearance of a common form in the solutions obtained by the modifi- 
cations above adverted to. 

Lastly. That whatever of doubt may attach to the final results, rests not 
upon the imperfection of the method, which adapts itself equally to all hypothe- 
ses, but upon the uncertainty of the hypotheses themselves. 

It seems, however, probable that with even the widest limits of hypothesis, 
consistent with the taking into account of all the data of experience, the devi- 
ation of the results obtained would be but slight, and that their mean values 
might be determined with great confidence by the methods of Prop. III. Of 
those methods I should be disposed to give the preference to the first. Such a 
principle of mean solution having been agreed upon, other considerations seem 
to indicate that the values of c and k for tribunals and assemblies possessing a 
definite constitution, and governed in their deliberations by fixed rules, would 
remain nearly constant, subject, however, to a small secular variation, depen- 
dent upon the progress of knowledge and of justice among mankind. There exist 
at present few, if any, data proper for their determination. 



Chapter XXII 

ON THE NATURE OF SCIENCE, AND THE 
CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT. 


1. What I mean by the constitution of a system is the aggregate of those 
causes and tendencies which produce its observed character, when operating, 
without interference, under those conditions to which the system is conceived 
to be adapted. Our judgment of such adaptation must be founded upon a study 
of the circumstances in which the system attains its freest action, produces its 
most harmonious results, or fulfils in some other way the apparent design of its 
construction. There are cases in which we know distinctly the causes upon which 
the operation of a system depends, as well as its conditions and its end. This is 
the most perfect kind of knowledge relatively to the subject under consideration. 
There are also cases in which we know only imperfectly or partially the causes 
which are at work, but are able, nevertheless, to determine to some extent the 
laws of their action, and, beyond this, to discover general tendencies, and to 
infer ulterior purpose. It has thus, I think rightly, been concluded that there 
is a moral faculty in our nature, not because we can understand the special 
instruments by which it works, as we connect the organ with the faculty of 
sight, nor upon the ground that men agree in the adoption of universal rules 
of conduct; but because while, in some form or other, the sentiment of moral 
approbation or disapprobation manifests itself in all, it tends, wherever human 
progress is observable, wherever society is not either stationary or hastening to 
decay, to attach itself to certain classes of actions, consentaneously, and after a 
manner indicative both of permanency and of law. Always and everywhere the 
manifestation of Order affords a presumption, not measurable indeed, but real 
(XX. 22), of the fulfilment of an end or purpose, and the existence of a ground 
of orderly causation. 

2. The particular question of the constitution of the intellect has, it is 
almost needless to say, attracted the efforts of speculative ingenuity in every 
age. For it not only addresses itself to that desire of knowledge which the 
greatest masters of ancient thought believed to be innate in our species, but 
it adds to the ordinary strength of this motive the inducement of a human 
and personal interest. A genuine devotion to truth is, indeed, seldom partial 
in its aims, but while it prompts to expatiate over the fair fields of outward 


311 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


312 


observation, forbids to neglect the study of our own faculties. Even in ages the 
most devoted to material interests, some portion of the current of thought has 
been reflected inwards, and the desire to comprehend that by which all else is 
comprehended has only been baffled in order to be renewed. 

It is probable that this pertinacity of effort would not have been maintained 
among sincere inquirers after truth, had the conviction been general that such 
speculations are hopelessly barren. We may conceive that it has been felt that 
if something of error and uncertainty, always incidental to a state of partial 
information, must ever be attached to the results of such inquiries, a residue of 
positive knowledge may yet remain; that the contradictions which are met with 
are more often verbal than real; above all, that even probable conclusions derive 
here an interest and a value from their subject, which render them not unworthy 
to claim regard beside the more definite and more splendid results of physical 
science. Such considerations seem to be perfectly legitimate. Insoluble as many 
of the problems connected with the inquiry into the nature and constitution of 
the mind must be presumed to be, there are not wanting others upon which 
a limited but not doubtful knowledge, others upon which the conclusions of a 
highly probable analogy, are attainable. As the realms of day and night are not 
strictly conterminous, but are separated by a crepuscular zone, through which 
the light of the one fades gradually off into the darkness of the other, so it may 
be said that every region of positive knowledge lies surrounded by a debateable 
and speculative territory, over which it in some degree extends its influence 
and its light. Thus there may be questions relating to the constitution of the 
intellect which, though they do not admit, in the present state of knowledge, of 
an absolute decision, may receive so much of reflected information as to render 
their probable solution not difficult; and there may also be questions relating 
to the nature of science, and even to particular truths and doctrines of science, 
upon which they who accept the general principles of this work cannot but be 
led to entertain positive opinions, differing, it may be, from those which are 
usually received in the present day. 1 In what follows I shall recapitulate some 
of the more definite conclusions established in the former parts of this treatise, 
and shall then indicate one or two trains of thought, connected with the general 
objects above adverted to, which they seem to me calculated to suggest. 

3. Among those conclusions, relating to the intellectual constitution, which 
may be considered as belonging to the realm of positive knowledge, we may 
reckon the scientific laws of thought and reasoning, which have formed the basis 
of the general methods of this treatise, together with the principles, Chap, V., by 
which their application has been determined. The resolution of the domain of 
thought into two spheres, distinct but coexistent (IV. XI.); the subjection of the 

1 The following illustration may suffice:— 

It is maintained by some of the highest modern authorities in grammar that conjunctions 
connect propositions only. Now, without inquiring directly whether this opinion is sound or 
not, it is obvious that it cannot consistently be held by any who admit the scientific principles 
of this treatise; for to such it would seem to involve a denial, either, 1st, of the possibility of 
performing, or 2ndly, of the possibility of expressing, a mental operation, the laws of which, 
viewed in both these relations, have been investigated and applied in the present work — 
(Latham on the English Language; Sir John Stoddart’s Universal Grammar, &c.) 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


313 


intellectual operations within those spheres to a common system of laws (XI.); 
the general mathematical character of those laws, and their actual expression 
(II. III.); the extent of their affinity with the laws of thought in the domain of 
number, and the point of their divergence therefrom; the dominant character 
of the two limiting conceptions of universe and eternity among all the subjects 
of thought with which Logic is concerned; the relation of those conceptions to 
the fundamental conception of unity in the science of number, — these, with 
many similar results, are not to be ranked as merely probable or analogical 
conclusions, but are entitled to be regarded as truths of science. Whether they 
be termed metaphysical or not, is a matter of indifference. The nature of the 
evidence upon which they rest, though in kind distinct, is not inferior in value to 
any which can be adduced in support of the general truths of physical science. 

Again, it is agreed that there is a certain order observable in the progress of 
all the exacter forms of knowledge. The study of every department of physical 
science begins with observation, it advances by the collation of facts to a pre- 
sumptive acquaintance with their connecting law, the validity of such presump- 
tion it tests by new experiments so devised as to augment, if the presumption be 
well founded, its probability indefinitely; and finally, the law of the phaenomenon 
having been with sufficient confidence determined, the investigation of causes, 
conducted by the due mixture of hypothesis and deduction, crowns the inquiry. 
In this advancing order of knowledge, the particular faculties and laws whose 
nature has been considered in this work bear their part. It is evident, therefore, 
that if we would impartially investigate either the nature of science, or the in- 
tellectual constitution in its relation to science, no part of the two series above 
presented ought to be regarded as isolated. More especially ought those truths 
which stand in any kind of supplemental relation to each other to be considered 
in their mutual bearing and connexion. 

4. Thus the necessity of an experimental basis for all positive knowledge, 
viewed in connexion with the existence and the peculiar character of that sys- 
tem of mental laws, and principles, and operations, to which attention has been 
directed, tends to throw light upon some important questions by which the 
world of speculative thought is still in a great measure divided. How, from the 
particular facts which experience presents, do we arrive at the general proposi- 
tions of science? What is the nature of these propositions? Are they solely the 
collections of experience, or does the mind supply some connecting principle of 
its own? In a word, what is the nature of scientific truth, and what are the 
grounds of that confidence with which it claims to be received? 

That to such questions as the above, no single and general answer can be 
given, must be evident. There are cases in which they do not even need dis- 
cussion. Instances are familiar, in which general propositions merely express 
per enumerationem simplicem, a fact established by actual observation in all 
the cases to which the proposition applies. The astronomer asserts upon this 
ground, that all the known planets move from west to east round the sun. But 
there are also cases in which general propositions are assumed from observation 
of their truth in particular instances, and extension of that truth to instances 
unobserved. No principle of merely deductive reasoning can warrant such a 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


314 


procedure. When from a large number of observations on the planet Mars, Ke- 
pler inferred that it revolved in an ellipse, the conclusion was larger than his 
premises, or indeed than any premises which mere observation could give. What 
other element, then, is necessary to give even a prospective validity to such gen- 
eralizations as this? It is the ability inherent in our nature to appreciate Order, 
and the concurrent presumption, however founded, that the phaenomena of Na- 
ture are connected by a principle of Order. Without these, the general truths of 
physical science could never have been ascertained. Grant that the procedure 
thus established can only conduct us to probable or to approximate results; it 
only follows, that the larger number of the generalizations of physical science 
possess but a probable or approximate truth. The security of the tenure of 
knowledge consists in this, that wheresoever such conclusions do truly represent 
the constitution of Nature, our confidence in their truth receives indefinite con- 
firmation, and soon becomes undistinguishable from certainty. The existence of 
that principle above represented as the basis of inductive reasoning enables us 
to solve the much disputed question as to the necessity of general propositions 
in reasoning. The logician affirms, that it is impossible to deduce any conclu- 
sion from particular premises. Modern writers of high repute have contended, 
that all reasoning is from particular to particular truths. They instance, that in 
concluding from the possession of a property by certain members of a class, its 
possession by some other member, it is not necessary to establish the interme- 
diate general conclusion which affirms its possession by all the members of the 
class in common. Now whether it is so or not, that principle of order or analogy 
upon which the reasoning is conducted must either be stated or apprehended 
as a general truth, to give validity to the final conclusion. In this form, at least, 
the necessity of general propositions as the basis of inference is confirmed, — a 
necessity which, however, I conceive to be involved in the very existence, and 
still more in the peculiar nature, of those faculties whose laws have been investi- 
gated in this work. For if the process of reasoning be carefully analyzed, it will 
appear that abstraction is made of all peculiarities of the individual to which 
the conclusion refers, and the attention confined to those properties by which 
its membership of the class is defined. 

5. But besides the general propositions which are derived by induction from 
the collated facts of experience, there exist others belonging to the domain of 
what is termed necessary truth. Such are the general propositions of Arithmetic, 
as well as the propositions expressing the laws of thought upon which the general 
methods of this treatise are founded; and these propositions are not only capable 
of being rigorously verified in particular instances, but are made manifest in all 
their generality from the study of particular instances. Again, there exist general 
propositions expressive of necessary truths, but incapable, from the imperfection 
of the senses, of being exactly verified. Some, if not all, of the propositions of 
Geometry are of this nature; but it is not in the region of Geometry alone 
that such propositions are found. The question concerning their nature and 
origin is a very ancient one, and as it is more intimately connected with the 
inquiry into the constitution of the intellect than any other to which allusion 
has been made, it will not be irrelevant to consider it here. Among the opinions 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


315 


which have most widely prevailed upon the subject are the following. It has 
been maintained, that propositions of the class referred to exist in the mind 
independently of experience, and that those conceptions which are the subjects 
of them are the imprints of eternal archetypes. With such archetypes, conceived, 
however, to possess a reality of which all the objects of sense are but a faint 
shadow or dim suggestion, Plato furnished his ideal world. It has, on the other 
hand, been variously contended, that the subjects of such propositions are copies 
of individual objects of experience; that they are mere names; that they are 
individual objects of experience themselves; and that the propositions which 
relate to them are, on account of the imperfection of those objects, but partially 
true; lastly, that they are intellectual products formed by abstraction from the 
sensible perceptions of individual things, but so formed as to become, what 
the individual things never can be, subjects of science, i.e. subjects concerning 
which exact and general propositions may be affirmed. And there exist, perhaps, 
yet other views, in some of which the sensible, in others the intellectual or ideal, 
element predominates. 

Now if the last of the views above adverted to be taken (for it is not pro- 
posed to consider either the purely ideal or the purely nominalist view) and if 
it be inquired what, in the sense above stated, are the proper objects of science, 
objects in relation to which its propositions are true without any mixture of 
error, it is conceived that but one answer can be given. It is, that neither do 
individual objects of experience, nor with all probability do the mental images 
which they suggest, possess any strict claim to this title. It seems to be certain, 
that neither in nature nor in art do we meet with anything absolutely agreeing 
with the geometrical definition of a straight line, or of a triangle, or of a circle, 
though the deviation therefrom may be inappreciable by sense; and it may be 
conceived as at least doubtful, whether we can form a perfect mental image, 
or conception, with which the agreement shall be more exact. But it is not 
doubtful that such conceptions, however imperfect, do point to something be- 
yond themselves, in the gradual approach towards which all imperfection tends 
to disappear. Although the perfect triangle, or square, or circle, exists not in 
nature, eludes all our powers of representative conception, and is presented to 
us in thought only, as the limit of an indefinite process of abstraction, yet, by a 
wonderful faculty of the understanding, it may be made the subject of propo- 
sitions which are absolutely true. The domain of reason is thus revealed to us 
as larger than that of imagination. Should any, indeed, think that we are able 
to picture to ourselves, with rigid accuracy, the scientific elements of form, di- 
rection, magnitude, &c., these things, as actually conceived, will, in the view of 
such persons, be the proper objects of science. But if, as seems to me the more 
just opinion, an incurable imperfection attaches to all our attempts to realize 
with precision these elements, then we can only affirm, that the more external 
objects do approach in reality, or the conceptions of fancy by abstraction, to 
certain limiting states, never, it may be, actually attained, the more do the 
general propositions of science concerning those things or conceptions approach 
to absolute truth, the actual deviation therefrom tending to disappear. To some 
extent, the same observations are applicable also to the physical sciences. What 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


316 


have been termed the “fundamental ideas” of those sciences as force, polarity, 
crystallization, &c., 2 are neither, as I conceive, intellectual products indepen- 
dent of experience, nor mere copies of external things; but while, on the one 
hand, they have a necessary antecedent in experience, on the other hand they 
require for their formation the exercise of the power of abstraction, in obedience 
to some general faculty or disposition of our nature, which ever prompts us 
to the research, and qualifies us for the appreciation, of order. 3 Thus we study 
approximately the effects of gravitation on the motions of the heavenly bodies, 
by a reference to the limiting supposition, that the planets are perfect spheres 
or spheroids. We determine approximately the path of a ray of light through 
the atmosphere, by a process in which abstraction is made of all disturbing 
influences of temperature. And such is the order of procedure in all the higher 
walks of human knowledge. Now what is remarkable in connexion with these 
processes of the intellect is the disposition, and the corresponding ability, to 
ascend from the imperfect representations of sense and the diversities of indi- 
vidual experience, to the perception of general, and it may be of immutable 
truths. Whereever this disposition and this ability unite, each series of con- 
nected facts in nature may furnish the intimations of an order more exact than 
that which it directly manifests. For it may serve as ground and occasion for the 
exercise of those powers, whose office it is to apprehend the general truths which 
are indeed exemplified, but never with perfect fidelity, in a world of changeful 
phaenomena. 

6. The truth that the ultimate laws of thought are mathematical in their 
form, viewed in connexion with the fact of the possibility of error, establishes a 
ground for some remarkable conclusions. If we directed our attention to the sci- 
entific truth alone, we might be led to infer an almost exact parallelism between 
the intellectual operations and the movements of external nature. Suppose any 
one conversant with physical science, but unaccustomed to reflect upon the na- 
ture of his own faculties, to have been informed, that it had been proved, that 
the laws of those faculties were mathematical; it is probable that after the first 
feelings of incredulity had subsided, the impression would arise, that the order 
of thought must, therefore, be as necessary as that of the material universe. 
We know that in the realm of natural science, the absolute connexion between 

2 Whewell’s Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, pp. 71, 77, 213. 

3 Of the idea of order it has been profoundly said, that it carries within itself its own 
justification or its own control, the very trustworthiness of our faculties being judged by the 
conformity of their results to an order which satisfies the reason. “L’idee de l’ordre a cela 
de singulier et d’eminent, qu’elle porte en elle meme sa justification ou son controle. Pour 
trouver si nos autres facultes nous trompent ou nous ne trompent pas, nous examinons si 
les notions qu’elles nous donnent s’enchainent on ne s’enchainent pas suivant un ordre qui 
satisfasse la raison.” — Cournot, Essai sur les fondements de nos Connaissances. Admitting 
this principle as the guide of those powers of abstraction which we undoubtedly possess, it 
seems unphilosophical to assume that the fundamental ideas of the sciences are not derivable 
from experience. Doubtless the capacities which have been given to us for the comprehension 
of the actual world would avail us in a differently constituted scene, if in some form or other 
the dominion of order was still maintained. It is conceivable that in such a new theatre of 
speculation, the laws of the intellectual procedure remaining the same, the fundamental ideas 
of the sciences might be wholly different from those with which we are at present acquainted. 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


317 


the initial and final elements of a problem, exhibited in the mathematical form, 
fitly symbolizes that physical necessity which binds together effect and cause. 
The necessary sequence of states and conditions in the inorganic world, and 
the necessary connexion of premises and conclusion in the processes of exact 
demonstration thereto applied, seem to be co-ordinate. It may possibly be a 
question, to which of the two series the primary application of the term “neces- 
sary” is due; whether to the observed constancy of Nature, or to the indissoluble 
connexion of propositions in all valid reasoning upon her works. Historically we 
should perhaps give the preference to the former, philosophically to the latter 
view. But the fact of the connexion is indisputable, and the analogy to which 
it points is obvious. 

Were, then, the laws of valid reasoning uniformly obeyed, a very close paral- 
lelism would exist between the operations of the intellect and those of external 
Nature. Subjection to laws mathematical in their form and expression, even 
the subjection of an absolute obedience, would stamp upon the two series one 
common character. The reign of necessity over the intellectual and the physical 
world would be alike complete and universal. 

But while the observation of external Nature testifies with ever-strengthening 
evidence to the fact, that uniformity of operation and unvarying obedience to 
appointed laws prevail throughout her entire domain, the slightest attention to 
the processes of the intellectual world reveals to us another state of things. The 
mathematical laws of reasoning are, properly speaking, the laws of right reason- 
ing only, and their actual transgression is a perpetually recurring phenomenon. 
Error, which has no place in the material system, occupies a large one here. 
We must accept this as one of those ultimate facts, the origin of which it lies 
beyond the province of science to determine. We must admit that there exist 
laws which even the rigour of their mathematical forms does not preserve from 
violation. We must ascribe to them an authority the essence of which does not 
consist in power, a supremacy which the analogy of the inviolable order of the 
natural world in no way assists us to comprehend. 

As the distinction thus pointed out is real , it remains unaffected by any 
peculiarity in our views respecting other portions of the mental constitution. If 
we regard the intellect as free, and this is apparently the view most in accordance 
with the general spirit of these speculations, its freedom must be viewed as 
opposed to the dominion of necessity, not to the existence of a certain just 
supremacy of truth. The laws of correct inference may be violated, but they 
do not the less truly exist on this account. Equally do they remain unaffected 
in character and authority if the hypothesis of necessity in its extreme form be 
adopted. Let it be granted that the laws of valid reasoning, such as they are 
determined to be in this work, or, to speak more generally, such as they would 
finally appear in the conclusions of an exhaustive analysis, form but a part of 
the system of laws by which the actual processes of reasoning, whether right or 
wrong, are governed. Let it be granted that if that system were known to us in 
its completeness, we should perceive that the whole intellectual procedure was 
necessary, even as the movements of the inorganic world are necessary. And let 
it finally, as a consequence of this hypothesis, be granted that the phaenomena of 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


318 


incorrect reasoning or error, wheresoever presented, are due to the interference 
of other laws with those laws of which right reasoning is the product. Still it 
would remain that there exist among the intellectual laws a number marked 
out from the rest by this special character, viz., that every movement of the 
intellectual system which is accomplished solely under their direction is right , 
that every interference therewith by other laws is not interference only, but 
violation. It cannot but be felt that this circumstance would give to the laws in 
question a character of distinction and of predominance. They would but the 
more evidently seem to indicate a final purpose which is not always fulfilled, to 
possess an authority inherent and just, but not always commanding obedience. 

Now a little consideration will show that there is nothing analogous to this 
in the government of the world by natural law. The realm of inorganic Nature 
admits neither of preference nor of distinctions. We cannot separate any portion 
of her laws from the rest, and pronounce them alone worthy of obedience, — 
alone charged with the fulfilment of her highest purpose. On the contrary, all 
her laws seem to stand co-ordinate, and the larger our acquaintance with them, 
the more necessary does their united action seem to the harmony and, so far 
as we can comprehend it, to the general design of the system. How often the 
most signal departures from apparent order in the inorganic world, such as 
the perturbations of the planetary system, the interruption of the process of 
crystallization by the intrusion of a foreign force, and others of a like nature, 
either merge into the conception of some more exalted scheme of order, or lose 
to a more attentive and instructed gaze their abnormal aspect, it is needless 
to remark. One explanation only of these facts can be given, viz., that the 
distinction between true and false, between correct and incorrect, exists in the 
processes of the intellect, but not in the region of a physical necessity. As we 
advance from the lower stages of organic being to the higher grade of conscious 
intelligence, this contrast gradually dawns upon us. Wherever the phaenomena 
of life are manifested, the dominion of rigid law in some degree yields to that 
mysterious principle of activity. Thus, although the structure of the animal 
tribes is conformable to certain general types, yet are those types sometimes, 
perhaps, in relation to the highest standards of beauty and proportion, always, 
imperfectly realized. The two alternatives, between which Art in the present 
day fluctuates, are the exact imitation of individual forms, and the endeavour, 
by abstraction from all such, to arrive at the conception of an ideal grace and 
expression, never, it may be, perfectly manifested in forms of earthly mould. 
Again, those teleological adaptations by which, without the organic type being 
sacrificed, species become fitted to new conditions or abodes, are but slowly 
accomplished, — accomplished, however, not, apparently, by the fateful power of 
external circumstances, but by the calling forth of an energy from within. Life in 
all its forms may thus be contrasted with the passive fixity of inorganic nature. 
But inasmuch as the perfection of the types in which it is corporeally manifested 
is in some measure of an ideal character, inasmuch as we cannot precisely define 
the highest suggested excellency of form and of adaptation, the contrast is less 
marked here than that which exists between the intellectual processes and those 
of the purely material world. For the definite and technical character of the 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


319 


mathematical laws by which both are governed, places in stronger light the 
fundamental difference between the kind of authority which, in their capacity 
of government, they respectively exercise. 

7. There is yet another instance connected with the general objects of this 
chapter, in which the collation of truths or facts, drawn from different sources, 
suggests an instructive train of reflection. It consists in the comparison of the 
laws of thought, in their scientific expression, with the actual forms which phys- 
ical speculation in early ages, and metaphysical speculation in all ages, have 
tended to assume. There are two illustrations of this remark, to which, in 
particular, I wish to direct attention here. 

1st. It has been shown (III. 13) that there is a scientific connexion between 
the conceptions of unity in Number, and the universe in Logic. They occupy 
in their respective systems the same relative place, and are subject to the same 
formal laws. Now to the Greek mind, in that early stage of activity, — a stage 
not less marked, perhaps not less necessary, in the progression of the human 
intellect, than the era of Bacon or of Newton, — when the great problems of 
Nature began to unfold themselves, while the means of observation were as 
yet wanting, and its necessity not understood, the terms “Universe” and “The 
One” seem to have been regarded as almost identical. To assign the nature 
of that unity of which all existence was thought to be a manifestation, was 
the first aim of philosophy. 4 Thales sought for this fundamental unity in water. 
Anaximenes and Diogenes conceived it to be air. Hippasus of Metapontum, 
and Heraclitus the Ephesian, pronounced that it was fire. Less definite or less 
confident in his views, Parmenides simply declared that all existing things were 
One; Melissus that the Universe was infinite, unsusceptible of change or motion, 
One, like to itself, and that motion was not, but seemed to be. 5 In a spirit which, 
to the reflective mind of Aristotle, appeared sober when contrasted with the 
rashness of previous speculation, Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, following, perhaps, 
the steps of his fellow-citizen, Hermotimus, sought in Intelligence the cause of 
the world and of its order. 6 The pantheistic tendency which pervaded many of 
these speculations is manifest in the language of Xenophanes, the founder of 
the Eleatic school, who, “surveying the expanse of heaven, declared that the 
One was God.” 7 Perhaps there are few, if any, of the forms in which unity 
can be conceived, in the abstract as numerical or rational, in the concrete as 
a passive substance, or a central and living principle, of which we do not meet 
with applications in these ancient doctrines. The writings of Aristotle, to which 
I have chiefly referred, abound with allusions of this nature, though of the 

4 See various passages in Aristotle’s Metaphysics, Bookl. 

5, E56k£l Si avrip to irav aireupov eivai, nai avaXXoCurTov, nai AkCvtitov , kql 
ev, opoiov eavri/j nai irXrjpEg. KivprrCv re prj eivoa Sokelv Si sivai. — Diog. Laert. ix. 
cap. 4. 

e Novv Sr/ ng eti niiv eveZvoi, nadairep ev ToZg (piporg, /cat ev tt) tpvaei, Ton 
Q'iTiov tov nocrpov nai Trjg Ta^Eiog iraor/g oiov vyjrpujv i<j>avr] Trap’ elkt} Xe^ovTag 
Tovg npoTEpov. QavEpdg pen ovv ’ Ava^a'yopav Zcrpsv aipapevov tovtuiv tujv 

Xo'jujv, aiTLav S’ £X ei Tporepoi / ’ EppoTipog o KXaQopiviog eiirelv. — Arist. Met. I. 3. 

7 Se^O(/>dt/? 7 c Si . . . eig tov oXov ovpavov bnoZlXSipa^, to iv eivai i>r]m. tov Oeov. — lb. 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


320 


larger number of those who once addicted themselves to such speculations, it 
is probable that the very names have perished. Strange, but suggestive truth, 
that while Nature in all but the aspect of the heavens must have appeared as 
little else than a scene of unexplained disorder, while the popular belief was 
distracted amid the multiplicity of its gods, — the conception of a primal unity, 
if only in a rude, material form, should have struck deepest root; surviving in 
many a thoughtful breast the chills of a lifelong disappointment, and an endless 
search! 8 

2ndly. In equally intimate alliance with that law of thought which is ex- 
pressed by an equation of the second degree, and which has been termed in this 
treatise the law of duality, stands the tendency of ancient thought to those forms 
of philosophical speculation which are known under the name of dualism. The 
theory of Empedocles, 9 which explained the apparent contradictions of nature 
by referring them to the two opposing principles of “strife” and “friendship;” 
and the theory of Leucippus, 10 which resolved all existence into the two ele- 
ments of a plenum and a vacuum, are of this nature. The famous comparison of 
the universe to a lyre or a bow, 11 its “recurrent harmony” being the product of 
opposite states of tension, betrays the same origin. In the system of Pythago- 
ras, which seems to have been a combination of dualism with other elements 
derived from the study of numbers, and of their relations, ten fundamental an- 
titheses are recognised: finite and infinite, even and odd, unity and multitude, 
right and left, male and female, rest and motion, straight and curved, light and 
darkness, good and evil, the square and the oblong. In that of Alcmaeon the 
same fundamental dualism is accepted, but without the definite and numerical 
limitation with which it is connected in the Pythagorean system. The grand 
development of this idea is, however, met with in that ancient Manichaean doc- 
trine, which not only formed the basis of the religious system of Persia, but 
spread widely through other regions of the East, and became memorable in 
the history of the Christian Church. The origin of dualism as a speculative 

8 The following lines, preserved by Sextus Empiricus, and ascribed to Timon the Sillograph, 
are not devoid of pathos: — 

u>g Kal E'yiov d<j>e\ou irvnivov voov avTifioXr\aoiL 
apifxyrEpofdXE'KTog ( SoXCr/ S' odip e^ETVorrjOijy, 
it pea fdv'yEi'rjg et euv) nal ft yajuprjp/.aroy andarjg 
aKETTToavi/r)<;' OTvuij 'yap ipov voov eipvaaifu, 
eL ev t’ avro te nav oiueXveto. 

I quote them from Ritter, and venture to give the following version: — 

Be mine, to partial views no more confin’d 
Or sceptic doubts, the truth-illumin’d mind! 

For, long deceiv’d, yet still on Truth intent, 

Life’s waning years in wand’rings wild are spent. 

Still restless thought the same high quest essays, 

And still the One, the All, eludes my gaze. 

9 Arist. Met. I. 4. 6. 

10 Arist. Met. I. 4, 9. 

1 1 naXCuTpcmcx; appovitj dewy nsp to£ov nal Xvprj g. — Heraclitus, quoted in Origenis 
Philosophumena, IX. 9. Also Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride. 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


321 


opinion, not yet connected with the personification of the Evil Principle, but 
naturally succeeding those doctrines which had assumed the primal unity of 
Nature, is thus stated by Aristotle: — “Since there manifestly existed in Nature 
things opposite to the good, and not only order and beauty, but also disorder 
and deformity; and since the evil things did manifestly preponderate in num- 
ber over the good, and the deformed over the beautiful, some one else at length 
introduced strife and friendship as the respective causes of these diverse phaenor- 
nena.” 12 And in Greece, indeed, it seems to have been chiefly as a philosophical 
opinion, or as an adjunct to philosophical speculation, that the dualistic theory 
obtained ground. 13 The moral application of the doctrine most in accordance 
with the Greek mind is preserved in the great Platonic antithesis of ’’being and 
non-being,” — the connexion of the former with whatsoever is good and true, 
with the eternal ideas, and the archetypal world: of the latter with evil, with 
error, with the perishable phsenomena of the present scene. The two forms of 
speculation which we have considered were here blended together; nor was it 
during the youth and maturity of Greek philosophy alone that the tendencies 
of thought above described were manifested. Ages of imitation caught up and 
adopted as their own the same spirit. Especially wherever the genius of Plato 
exercised sway was this influence felt. The unity of all real being, its identity 
with truth and goodness considered as to their essence; the illusion, the pro- 
found unreality, of all merely phsenomenal existence; such were the views, — such 
the dispositions of thought, which it chiefly tended to foster. Hence that strong 
tendency to mysticism which, when the days of renown, whether on the field of 
intellectual or on that of social enterprise, had ended in Greece, became preva- 
lent in her schools of philosophy, and reached their culminating point among 
the Alexandrian Platonists. The supposititious treatises of Dionysius the Are- 
opagite served to convey the same influence, much modified by its contact with 
Aristotelian doctrines, to the scholastic disputants of the middle ages. It can 
furnish no just ground of controversy to say, that the tone of thought thus 
encouraged was as little consistent with genuine devotion as with a sober phi- 
losophy. That kindly influence of human affections, that homely intercourse 
with the common things of life, which form so large a part of the true, because 
intended, discipline of our nature, would be ill replaced by the contemplation 
even of the highest object of thought, viewed by an excessive abstraction as 
something concerning which not a single intelligible proposition could either be 
affirmed or denied. 14 I would but slightly allude to those connected speculations 
on the Divine Nature which ascribed to it the perfect union of opposite quali- 
ties, 15 or to the remarkable treatises of Anselm, designed to establish a theory 

12 ’ EiteI 5e Kal TavauTLQ toZ<; d'yadolc; evovto. E<j>aCuETO ev rfj (fnj&Ei, Kal or: 
fioi/ou rbAyy nal to KaXou dAAa Kal ara^Ca Kal to aiaxpbv , Kal ttXeClo Ta KaKa 
Tujir aQurv Kal Ta tpavXa Tivu koXlZij. ovtuj<; aXX op rip tptXCair Ei’cnjvEOKE Kal ueZko<;, 
EKaTEpov EKaTEpuju alTLOv tovtuiv. — Arist. Metaphysica, I. 4. 

13 Witness Aristotle’s well-known derivation of the elements from the qualities ’’warm,” and 
’’dry,” and their contraries. It is characteristic that Plato connects their generation with 
mathematical principles.- Timteus, cap. xi. 

14 Autoc xcu rijjTtep xrpaiv ecra xca aTtiqaipEaiv. 

15 See especially the lofty strain of Hildebert beginning ’’Alpha et C2 magne Deus.” (Trench’s 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


322 


of the universe upon the analogies of thought and being . 16 The primal unity is 
there represented as having its abode in the one eternal Truth. The conformity 
of Nature to her laws, the obedience of moral agents to the dictates of rectitude, 
are the same Truth seen in action; the world itself being but an expression of 
the self-reflecting thought of its Author. 17 Still more marked was the revival of 
the older forms of speculation during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
The friends and associates of Lorenzo the Magnificent, the recluses known in 
England as the Cambridge Platonists, together with many meditative spirits 
scattered through Europe, devoted themselves anew, either to the task of solv- 
ing the ancient problem, De Uno, Vero, Bono, or to that of proving that all 
such inquiries are futile and vain . 18 The logical elements which underlie all these 
speculations, and from which they appear to borrow at least their form, it would 
be easy to trace in the outlines of more modern systems, -more especially in that 
association of the doctrine of the absolute unity with the distinction of the ego 
and the non-ego as the type of Nature, which forms the basis of the philosophy 
of Hegel. The attempts of speculative minds to ascend to some high pinnacle 
of truth, from which they might survey the entire framework and connexion of 
things in the order of deductive thought , have differed less in the forms of the- 
ory which they have produced, than through the nature of the interpretations 
which have been assigned to those forms. 19 And herein lies the real question as 
to the influence of philosophical systems upon the disposition and the life. For 
though it is of slight moment that men should agree in tracing back all the 
forms and conditions of being to a primal unity, it is otherwise as concerns their 
conceptions of what that unity is, and what are the kinds of relation, beside that 
of mere causality, which it sustains to themselves. Herein too may be felt the 

Sacred Latin Poetry.) The principle upon which all these speculations rest is thus stated in 
the treatise referred to in the last note. OuSev ouv tioitottov, zc vqyopov eixovov era to 
xavxov oraov ocvapavTotc, ri^xepxoaiiiioi!; ojnqTTqaApoi? xrieopaeacu itavxa ev tx? xavxov aixixc, 
xou xa aXXoteXoic evavxioi [rovoeiooc: xai riaeoirevoc; . — De Divinis Nominibus , cap. v. And the 
kind of knowledge which it is thus sought to attain is described as a ’’darkness beyond light,” 
vn£p<f>u)TO<; 7 votfiog. (De Mystica Theologia, cap. I.) Milton has a similar thought — 

’’Dark with excessive bright Thy skirts appear.” 

Par. Lost , Book III. 

Contrast with these the nobler simplicity of I John, i. 5. 

16 Monologium, Prosologium, and De Veritate. 

' ” Idcirco cum ipse sumrnus spiritus dicit seipsum dicit omnia quae facta sunt.” — 
Monolog, cap. XXIII. 

18 See dissertations in Spinoza, Picus of Mirandula, H. More, &c. Modern discussions of this 
nature are chiefly in connexion with aesthetics, the ground of the application being contained 
in the formula of Augustine: ’’Omnis porro pulchritudinis forma, unitas est.” 

19 For instance, the learned mysticism of Gioberti, widely as it differs in its spirit and its 
conclusions from the pantheism of Hegel (both being, perhaps, equally remote from truth), 
resembles it in applying both to thought and to being the principles of unity and duality. It 
is asked: — ”Or non e egli chiaro che ogni discorso si riduce in fine in fine alle idee di Dio, del 
mondo, e della creazione, l’ultima dellc quali e il legame delle due prime?” And this question 
being affirmatively answered in the formula, ’’l’Ente crea le esistenze,” it is said of that 
formula, — ”Essa abbraccia la realta universale nella dualit del necessario e del contingente, 
esprime il vincolo di questi due ordini, e collocandolo nella creazion sostanziale, riduce la 
dualita reale a un principio unico, all unita primordiale defi’Ente non astratto, complessivo, e 
generico, ma concreto, individuato, assoluto, e creatore.” — Del Bello e del Buono , pp. 30, 31. 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


323 


powerlessness of mere Logic, the insufficiency of the profoundest knowledge of 
the laws of the understanding, to resolve those problems which lie nearer to our 
hearts, as progressive years strip away from our life the illusions of its golden 
dawn. 

8. If the extremely arbitrary character of human opinion be considered, it 
will not be expected, nor is it here maintained, that the above are the only 
forms in which speculative men have shaped their conjectural solutions of the 
problem of existence. Under particular influences other forms of doctrine have 
arisen, not unfrequently, however, masking those portrayed above. 20 

But the wide prevalence of the particular theories which we have considered, 
together with their manifest analogy with the expressed laws of thought, may 
justly be conceived to indicate a connexion between the two systems. As all 
other mental acts and procedures are beset by their peculiar fallacies, so the 
operation of that law of thought termed in this work the law of duality may 
have its own peculiar tendency to error, exalting mere want of agreement into 
contrariety, and thus form a world which we necessarily view as formed of parts 
supplemental to each other, framing the conception of a world fundamentally 
divided by opposing powers. Such, with some large but hasty inductions from 
phaenomena, may have been the origin of dualism, — independently of the ques- 
tion whether dualism is in any form a true theory or not. Here, however, it is 
of more importance to consider in detail the bearing of these ancient forms of 
speculation, as revived in the present day, upon the progress of real knowledge; 
and upon this point I desire, in pursuance of what has been said in the previous 
section, to add the following remarks: 

1st. All sound philosophy gives its verdict against such speculations, if re- 
garded as a means of determining the actual constitution of things. It may be 
that the progress of natural knowledge tends towards the recognition of some 
central Unity in Nature. Of such unity as consists in the mutual relation of the 
parts of a system there can be little doubt, and able men have speculated, not 
without grounds, on a more intimate correlation of physical forces than the mere 
idea of a system would lead us to conjecture. Further, it may be that in the bo- 
som of that supposed unity are involved some general principles of division and 
re-union, the sources, under the Supreme Will, of much of the related variety of 
Nature. The instances of sex and polarity have been adduced in support of such 
a view. As a supposition, I will venture to add, that it is not very improbable 
that, in some such way as this, the constitution of things without may corre- 
spond to that of the mind within. But such correspondence, if it shall ever be 
proved to exist, will appear as the last induction from human knowledge, not as 
the first principle of scientific inquiry. The natural order of discovery is from the 

20 Evidence in support of this statement will be found in the remarkable treatise recently 
published under the title (the correctness of which seems doubtful) of Origenis Philosophu- 
mena. The early corruptions of Christianity of which it contains the record, though many 
of them, as is evident from their Ophite character, derived from the very dregs of paganism, 
manifest certain persistent forms of philosophical speculation. For the most part they either 
belong to the dualistic scheme, or recognise three principles, primary or derived, between two 
of which the dualistic relation may be traced — Orig. Phil., pp. 135, 139, 150, 235, 253, 264. 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


324 


particular to the universal, and it may confidently be affirmed that we have not 
yet advanced sufficiently far on this track to enable us to determine what are 
the ultimate forms into which all the special differences of Nature shall merge, 
and from which they shall receive their explanation. 

2ndly. Were this correspondence between the forms of thought and the 
actual constitution of Nature proved to exist, whatsoever connexion or relation 
it might be supposed to establish between the two systems, it would in no degree 
affect the question of their mutual independence. It would in no sense lead to 
the consequence that the one system is the mere product of the other. A too 
great addiction to metaphysical speculations seems, in some instances, to have 
produced a tendency toward this species of illusion. Thus, among the many 
attempts which have been made to explain the existence of evil, it has been 
sought to assign to the fact a merely relative character, — to found it upon a 
species of logical opposition to the equally relative element of good. It suffices 
to say, that the assumption is purely gratuitous. What evil may be in the eyes of 
Infinite wisdom and purity, we can at the best but dimly conjecture; but to us, 
in all its forms, whether of pain or defect, or moral transgression, or retributory 
wo, it can wear but one aspect, — that of a sad and stern reality, against which, 
upon somewhat more than the highest order of prudential considerations, the 
whole preventive force of our nature may be exerted. Now what has been said 
upon the particular question just considered, is equally applicable to many other 
of the debated points of philosophy; such, for instance, as the external reality of 
space and time. We have no warrant for resolving these into mere forms of the 
understanding, though they unquestionably determine the present sphere of our 
knowledge. And, to speak more generally, there is no warrant for the extremely 
subjective tendency of much modern speculation. Whenever, in the view of the 
intellect, different hypotheses are equally consistent with an observed fact, the 
instinctive testimony of consciousness as to their relative value must be allowed 
to possess authority. 

3rdly. If the study of the laws of thought avails us neither to determine the 
actual constitution of things, nor to explain the facts involved in that constitu- 
tion which have perplexed the wise and saddened the thoughtful in all ages, — 
still less does it enable us to rise above the present conditions of our being, or 
lend its sanction to the doctrine which affirms the possibility of an intuitive 
knowledge of the infinite, and the unconditioned, — whether such knowledge be 
sought for in the realm of Nature, or above that realm. We can never be said 
to comprehend that which is represented to thought as the limit of an indefi- 
nite process of abstraction. A progression ad infinitum is impossible to finite 
powers. But though we cannot comprehend the infinite, there may be even sci- 
entific grounds for believing that human nature is constituted in some relation 
to the infinite. We cannot perfectly express the laws of thought, or establish 
in the most general sense the methods of which they form the basis, without 
at least the implication of elements which ordinary language expresses by the 
terms “Universe” and “Eternity.” As in the pure abstractions of Geometry, so 
in the domain of Logic it is seen, that the empire of Truth is, in a certain sense, 
larger than that of Imagination. And as there are many special departments of 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


325 


knowledge which can only be completely surveyed from an external point, so 
the theory of the intellectual processes, as applied only to finite objects, seems 
to involve the recognition of a sphere of thought from which all limits are with- 
drawn. If then, on the one hand, we cannot discover in the laws of thought 
and their analogies a sufficient basis of proof for the conclusions of a too dar- 
ing mysticism; on the other hand we should err in regarding them as wholly 
unsuggestive. As parts of our intellectual nature, it seems not improbable that 
they should manifest their presence otherwise than by merely prescribing the 
conditions of formal inference. Whatever grounds we have for connecting them 
with the peculiar tendencies of physical speculation among the Ionian and Italic 
philosophers, the same grounds exist for associating them with a disposition of 
thought at once more common and more legitimate. To no casual influences, at 
least, ought we to attribute that meditative spirit which then most delights to 
commune with the external magnificence of Nature, when most impressed with 
the consciousness of sempiternal verities, — which reads in the nocturnal heavens 
a bright manifestation of order; or feels in some wild scene among the hills, the 
intimations of more than that abstract eternity which had rolled away ere yet 
their dark foundations were laid. 21 

9. Refraining from the further prosecution of a train of thought which to 
some may appear to be of too speculative a character, let us briefly review 
the positive results to which we have been led. It has appeared that there ex- 
ist in our nature faculties which enable us to ascend from the particular facts 
of experience to the general propositions which form the basis of Science; as 
well as faculties whose office it is to deduce from general propositions accepted 
as true the particular conclusions which they involve. It has been seen, that 
those faculties are subject in their operations to laws capable of precise scien- 
tific expression, but invested with an authority which, as contrasted with the 
authority of the laws of nature, is distinct, sui generis, and underived. Further, 
there has appeared to be a manifest fitness between the intellectual procedure 
thus made known to us, and the conditions of that system of things by which we 
are surrounded, — such conditions, I mean, as the existence of species connected 
by general resemblances, of facts associated under general laws; together with 
that union of permanency with order, which while it gives stability to acquired 
knowledge, lays a foundation for the hope of indefinite progression. Human 
nature, quite independently of its observed or manifested tendencies, is seen to 
be constituted in a certain relation to Truth; and this relation, considered as a 
subject of speculative knowledge, is as capable of being studied in its details, 
is, moreover, as worthy of being so studied, as are the several departments of 
physical science, considered in the same aspect. I would especially direct at- 
tention to that view of the constitution of the intellect which represents it as 
subject to laws determinate in their character, but not operating by the power 
of necessity; which exhibits it as redeemed from the dominion of fate, without 
being abandoned to the lawlessness of chance. We cannot embrace this view 
without accepting at least as probable the intimations which, upon the principle 


21 Psalm xc. 2 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


326 


of analogy, it seems to furnish respecting another and a higher aspect of our 
nature, — its subjection in the sphere of duty as well as in that of knowledge 
to fixed laws whose authority does not consist in power, — its constitution with 
reference to an ideal standard and a final purpose. It has been thought, indeed, 
that scientific pursuits foster a disposition either to overlook the specific differ- 
ences between the moral and the material world, or to regard the former as in 
no proper sense a subject for exact knowledge. Doubtless all exclusive pursuits 
tend to produce partial views, and it may be, that a mind long and deeply 
immersed in the contemplation of scenes over which the dominion of a physical 
necessity is unquestioned and supreme, may admit with difficulty the possibility 
of another order of things. But it is because of the exclusiveness of this devo- 
tion to a particular sphere of knowledge, that the prejudice in question takes 
possession, if at all, of the mind. The application of scientific methods to the 
study of the intellectual phaenomena, conducted in an impartial spirit of inquiry, 
and without overlooking those elements of error and disturbance which must be 
accepted as facts, though they cannot be regarded as laws, in the constitution 
of our nature, seems to furnish the materials of a juster analogy. 

10. If it be asked to what practical end such inquiries as the above point, it 
may be replied, that there exist various objects, in relation to which the courses 
of men’s actions are mainly determined by their speculative views of human 
nature. Education, considered in its largest sense, is one of those objects. The 
ultimate ground of all inquiry into its nature and its methods must be laid in 
some previous theory of what man is, what are the ends for which his several 
faculties were designed, what are the motives which have power to influence 
them to sustained action, and to elicit their most perfect and most stable results. 
It may be doubted, whether these questions have ever been considered fully, 
and at the same time impartially, in the relations here suggested. The highest 
cultivation of taste by the study of the pure models of antiquity, the largest 
acquaintance with the facts and theories of modern physical science, viewed 
from this larger aspect of our nature, can only appear as parts of a perfect 
intellectual discipline. Looking from the same point of view upon the means to 
be employed, we might be led to inquire, whether that all but exclusive appeal 
which is made in the present day to the spirit of emulation or cupidity, does 
not tend to weaken the influence of those more enduring motives which seem to 
have been implanted in our nature for the immediate end in view. Upon these, 
and upon many other questions, the just limits of authority, the reconciliation 
of freedom of thought with discipline of feelings, habits, manners, and upon 
the whole moral aspect of the question, — what unfixedness of opinion, what 
diversity of practice, do we meet with! Yet, in the sober view of reason, there 
is no object within the compass of human endeavours which is of more weight 
and moment than this, considered, as I have said, in its largest meaning. Now, 
whatsoever tends to make more exact and definite our view of human nature, in 
any of its real aspects, tends, in the same proportion, to reduce these questions 
into narrower compass, and restrict the limits of their possible solution. Thus 
may even speculative inquiries prove fruitful of the most important principles 
of action. 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


327 


11. Perhaps the most obviously legitimate bearing of such speculations would 
be upon the question of the place of Mathematics in the system of human knowl- 
edge, and the nature and office of mathematical studies, as a means of intellec- 
tual discipline. No one who has attended to the course of recent discussions can 
think this question an unimportant one. Those who have maintained that the 
position of Mathematics is in both respects a fundamental one, have drawn one 
of their strongest arguments from the actual constitution of things. The material 
frame is subject in all its parts to the relations of number. All dynamical, chem- 
ical, electrical, thermal, actions, seem not only to be measurable in themselves, 
but to be connected with each other, even to the extent of mutual convertibility, 
by numerical relations of a perfectly definite kind. But the opinion in question 
seems to me to rest upon a deeper basis than this. The laws of thought, in all 
its processes of conception and of reasoning, in all those operations of which 
language is the expression or the instrument, are of the same kind as are the 
laws of the acknowledged processes of Mathematics. It is not contended that it 
is necessary for us to acquaint ourselves with those laws in order to think coher- 
ently, or, in the ordinary sense of the terms, to reason well. Men draw inferences 
without any consciousness of those elements upon which the entire procedure 
depends. Still less is it desired to exalt the reasoning faculty over the faculties 
of observation, of reflection, and of judgment. But upon the very ground that 
human thought, traced to its ultimate elements, reveals itself in mathematical 
forms, we have a presumption that the mathematical sciences occupy, by the 
constitution of our nature, a fundamental place in human knowledge, and that 
no system of mental culture can be complete or fundamental, which altogether 
neglects them. 

But the very same class of considerations shows with equal force the error 
of those who regard the study of Mathematics, and of their applications, as a 
sufficient basis either of knowledge or of discipline. If the constitution of the 
material frame is mathematical, it is not merely so. If the mind, in its capacity 
of formal reasoning, obeys, whether consciously or unconsciously, mathematical 
laws, it claims through its other capacities of sentiment and action, through its 
perceptions of beauty and of moral fitness, through its deep springs of emotion 
and affection, to hold relation to a different order of things. There is, moreover, 
a breadth of intellectual vision, a power of sympathy with truth in all its forms 
and manifestations, which is not measured by the force and subtlety of the 
dialectic faculty. Even the revelation of the material universe in its boundless 
magnitude, and pervading order, and constancy of law, is not necessarily the 
most fully apprehended by him who has traced with minutest accuracy the steps 
of the great demonstration. And if we embrace in our survey the interests and 
duties of life, how little do any processes of mere ratiocination enable us to 
comprehend the weightier questions which they present! As truly, therefore, as 
the cultivation of the mathematical or deductive faculty is a part of intellectual 
discipline, so truly is it only a part. The prejudice which would either banish 
or make supreme any one department of knowledge or faculty of mind, betrays 
not only error of judgment, but a defect of that intellectual modesty which is 
inseparable from a pure devotion to truth. It assumes the office of criticising 



CHAPTER XXII. CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT 


328 


a constitution of things which no human appointment has established, or can 
annul. It sets aside the ancient and just conception of truth as one though 
manifold. Much of this error, as actually existent among us, seems due to 
the special and isolated character of scientific teaching — which character it, 
in its turn, tends to foster. The study of philosophy, notwithstanding a few 
marked instances of exception, has failed to keep pace with the advance of the 
several departments of knowledge, whose mutual relations it is its province to 
determine. It is impossible, however, not to contemplate the particular evil in 
question as part of a larger system, and connect it with the too prevalent view of 
knowledge as a merely secular thing, and with the undue predominance, already 
adverted to, of those motives, legitimate within their proper limits, which are 
founded upon a regard to its secular advantages. In the extreme case it is not 
difficult to see that the continued operation of such motives, uncontrolled by 
any higher principles of action, uncorrected by the personal influence of superior 
minds, must tend to lower the standard of thought in reference to the objects 
of knowledge, and to render void and ineffectual whatsoever elements of a noble 
faith may still survive. And ever in proportion as these conditions are realized 
must the same effects follow. Hence, perhaps, it is that we sometimes find juster 
conceptions of the unity, the vital connexion, and the subordination to a moral 
purpose, of the different parts of Truth, among those who acknowledge nothing 
higher than the changing aspect of collective humanity, than among those who 
profess an intellectual allegiance to the Father of Lights. But these are questions 
which cannot further be pursued here. To some they will appear foreign to 
the professed design of this work. But the consideration of them has arisen 
naturally, either out of the speculations which that design involved, or in the 
course of reading and reflection which seemed necessary to its accomplishment. 

THE END. 



Chapter XXIII 

PROJECT GUTENBERG 
“SMALL PRINT” 


End of the Project Gutenberg EBook An Investigation of the Laws 
of Thought , by George Boole 

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAWS OF THOUGHT *** 

***** This file should be named 15114-pdf.pdf or 15114-pdf.zip ***** 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in: 
http : //www. gutenberg. org/ 1/5/ 1/1/ 15 114/ 


Produced by David Starner, Joshua Hutchinson, David Bowden 
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team. 

Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions 
will be renamed. 

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no 
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without 
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, 
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to 
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project 
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you 
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If 
you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with 
the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any 
purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances 
and research. They may be modified and printed and given away — you 
may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. 



CHAPTER XXIII. PROJECT GUTENBERG “SMALL PRINT 


Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially 
commercial redistribution. 


*** START: FULL LICENSE *** 

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU 
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK 

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free 
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work 
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project 
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full 
Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license) . 


Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project 
Gutenberg-tm electronic works 

l.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree 
to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual 
property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to 
abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and 
return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic 
works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of 
or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a 
refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set 
forth in paragraph l.E.8. 

l.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be 
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people 
who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement . There are a 
few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic 
works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement . 
See paragraph l.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with 
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of 
this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project 
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. See paragraph l.E below. 

l.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the 
Foundation" or PGLAF) , owns a compilation copyright in the 
collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the 
individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the 
United States. If an individual work is in the public domain in the 
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 



CHAPTER XXIII. PROJECT GUTENBERG “SMALL PRINT 


displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as 
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting 
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project 
Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of this agreement 
for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. 
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping 
this work in the same format with its attached full Project 
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others . 

l.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also 
govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most 
countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the 
United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the 
terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, 
performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this 
work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes 
no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in 
any country outside the United States. 

l.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg: 

l.E.l. The following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must 
appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work 
(any work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with 
which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, 
displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed: 

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included 
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

l.E. 2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating 
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder) , the work 
can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without 
paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing 
access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with 
or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the 
requirements of paragraphs l.E.l through l.E. 7 or obtain permission 
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as 
set forth in paragraphs l.E. 8 or l.E. 9. 

l.E. 3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and 
distribution must comply with both paragraphs l.E.l through l.E. 7 
and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. 

Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License 



CHAPTER XXIII. PROJECT GUTENBERG “SMALL PRINT 


for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder 
found at the beginning of this work. 

I.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project 
Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any files containing a 
part of this work or any other work associated with Project 
Gutenberg-tm. 

I.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute 
this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph l.E.l 
with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the 
Project Gutenberg-tm License. 

I.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide 
access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a 
format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the 
official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web 
site (www.gutenberg.net), you must, at no additional cost, fee or 
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or 
a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its 
original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format 
must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in 
paragraph l.E.l. 

I.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or l.E.9. 

I.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing 
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

- You pay a royalty fee of 2O°/ 0 of the gross profits you derive from 

the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is 
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the 
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns . Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the 
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to 
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation." 

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies 

you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 



CHAPTER XXIII. PROJECT GUTENBERG “SMALL PRINT 


does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm 
License . You must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of 
Project Gutenberg-tm works. 

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of 

any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in 
the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 
days of receipt of the work. 

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 

distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works. 

I.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project 
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms 
than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in 
writing from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation 
and Michael Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. 
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below. 

l.F. 

l.F.l. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend 
considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, 
transcribe and proofread public domain works in creating the Project 
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project 
Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be 
stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, 
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a 
copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective 
or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes 
that damage or cannot be read by your equipment . 

l.F. 2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the 
"Right of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph l.F. 3, the 
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the 
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a 
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim 
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including 
legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, 
STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT 
THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE 
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT 
BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, 
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE 
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. 

l.F. 3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you 



CHAPTER XXIII. PROJECT GUTENBERG “SMALL PRINT 


can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by 
sending a written explanation to the person you received the work 
from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must 
return the medium with your written explanation. The person or 
entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to 
provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the 
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may 
choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work 
electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also 
defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunities to fix the problem. 

I.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set 
forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS’, WITH 
NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY 
PURPOSE. 

I.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied 
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of 
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or 
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void 
the remaining provisions. 

I.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, 
the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone 
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with 
the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of 
this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, 
or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) 
any Defect you cause. 


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm 

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of 
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. 
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and 
donations from people in all walks of life. 


Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’ s 



CHAPTER XXIII. PROJECT GUTENBERG “SMALL PRINT 


goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the 
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide 
a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see 
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at 
http : //www.pglaf . org. 


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive 
Foundation 

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the 
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal 
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project 
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full 
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws. 

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S. 
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are 
scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business office is 
located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 
596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s web site 
and official page at http://pglaf.org 

For additional contact information: 

Dr . Gregory B . Newby 
Chief Executive and Director 
gbnewby@pglaf . org 

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg 
Literary Archive Foundation 

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of 
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can 
be freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the 
widest array of equipment including outdated equipment . Many small 
donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining 
tax exempt status with the IRS . 

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating 
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United 
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep 



CHAPTER XXIII. PROJECT GUTENBERG “SMALL PRINT 


up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in 
locations where we have not received written confirmation of 
compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance 
for any particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where 
we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no 
prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in 
such states who approach us with offers to donate. 

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make 
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from 
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff. 

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation 
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card 
donations. To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. 

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project 
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely shared with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and 
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of 
volunteer support . 

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed 
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. 
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily 
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search 
facility : 

http : //www. gutenberg.net 

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks 