This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



LOGIC 



ur ITS 



APPLICATION TO LANGUAGE. 



R. G. LATHAM, M.A., M.D., F.R.S., 

LATS 7BLL0W OF KING'S COLLEaS, OAMBRISGB ; LATB PB0FS880R OF THS 
BNOLISH LANaUAOB IN UNIYBBSITT GOLLEOB, LONDON. 



LONDON: 
WALTON AND MABEELT, 

tnPPEB GOWEB STREET, AND lYI lANE, PATEBNOSTEB BOW. 
1856. 



Digitized by 



Google 



^3 



LONDON: PRINTBD BY WOODFALL AND KINDER, 
ANRBI. COURT* SJUNNBR STRSBT. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PKEFACE. 



The title of the present work is by no means 
unexceptionable. So sensible, indeed, is the Author 
of the objections that lie against it, that he is the 
first to take notice of them. 

Instead of passing for a work upon Logic as Ap- 
plied to the Study of Language, the following pages 
should be considered as an exposition of that amount 
of Grammar and Philology which applies to Logic. 
In other words, the view suggested by the term 
should be reversed. The Language should lead 
to the Logic, and not the Logic to the Language. 
The true relations of the two subjects to each other 
make a certain amount of the one a preliminary 
or introduction to the other. This preliminary, 
however, lies in the phenomena of SpeecL These 
lead to Logic, but not vice verad. 

Why, then, does the present treatise give us, as 
fer, at least, as its title goes, precisely the reverse of 
this doctrine ? Why does it treat Logic as the pre- 
liminary and Language as the subject to which it 
conducts us ? 

" So much must be known of ttie elements of 

220700 

Digitized by VjOOQIC 



IV PREFACE. 

Logic, in order that the common terms of Grammar 
may be understood/' — So runs the import of our 
title-page. 

" So much of the elementary facts of Language 
must be known before the study of Logic com- 
mences." — So runs the real fiict. 

So runs the real fact — at least, in the eyes of the 
present writer, and many like him who hold that, 
in strict language. Logic begins with the syllogism, 
and that the structure of single and v/aconnected, 
propositions is no portion of that science — that 
science dealing less with propositions themselves 
than with the relations which, imder certain cir- 
cumstances^ and with certain combinations, they 
bear to each other. 

The nature of the single, or unconnected propo- 
sition must, of course, be known. It is submitted, 
however, that the knowledge of this is to be got 
from the study of Language as applied to Logic. 

To this, however (as has been stated), the import 
of the present title-page runs directly contrary. 
Nor is the opposition difficult of explanation, pro- 
vided the commonplace and practical character of 
the treatise be borne in mind. It i^ the wish of 
the writer to avail himself of an old name for a 
somewhat new study — ^the old name being Logic. 

Now Grammar being taught early, and Logic (if 
taught at all) late, the effect of such a title as 
Language applied to Logic, would be to engender 
the notion that the work wherein the application 
was exhibited was for adults rather than boys and 
youths. Its real object is the reverse of this. Its 
real object is to get certain so-called points of Logic 
studied as early as the elements of Grammar. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PKEFAC^ V 

If the term Logic be a misnomer, the reason for 
its use Kes in the contrast between the practice of 
the ordinary grammarians and the logicians. Of 
the former, many admit that the nature of terms 
and copulas, along with the structure of the propo- 
sition, is a matter which lies within their own 
jurisdiction. On the other hand, there are plenty 
of logicians who treat everything anterior to 
the syllogism as phenomena, not of Logic, but of 
Language. The practice, however, nowhere, or but 
rarely, coincides with the theory. Look in an ordi- 
nary grammar for anything about propositions, and, 
in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, you will look 
in vain. It is in the books upon Logic that you will 
find them. At the present moment I remember but 
one grammar written in English, and written for 
the practical purpose of teaching a foreign lan- 
guage rather than with a strictly scientific view, 
wherein the truly grammatical phenomena of the 
structure of propositions are exhibited. This is Dr. 
Lee's Hebrew Grammar ; and even here the notice 
is short, and appears no earlier than the first page 
.of the Syntax. Throughout the Etymology no 
word about propositions is spoken. I repeat, 
however, that in thus limiting the grammars that 
treat of a proper grammatical Logic, I speak fi*om 
memory. There may be many others. Neverthe- 
less — whether many or few, they bear but a small 
proportion to those which relegate the subject to the 
domain of the logician. 

And he always supplies them. Yet they are not 
his own wares ; and he would manifestly and ad- 
vantageously disencumber his subject of more than 
one imnecessary appendage if, presuming the gram- 

a 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



VI PBEFACE- 

maxians to have cultivated their own domain up to 
its true boundary, he supposed, on the part of his 
reader, a knowledge of Terms, Copulas, Propositions, 
Names, and the like, and began his own subject 
where the preliminaries supplied by another ended. 

Enough, however, of the remarks upon the title 
of the work. The work itself is by no means an 
ambitious one. Saving the sections upon the con- 
vertibility of the pronoun, and those wherein the 
connotation of Names is quantified, it contains 
next to nothing of original matter. The im- 
portance, however, of these I place high, espe- 
cially as elements in the Natural History of Lan- 
guage. 

This is a sea upon which, if I consulted my in- 
dinations only, I would wiUingly launch. But the 
mass of detail is enormous, whilst the principles of 
criticism that should regulate its construction are 
but faintly foreshadowed. Nevertheless, whenever 
such a Natui'al History is attempted, the remarks- 
just alluded to will find their place. 

So far as they do this the present treatise con- 
tains materials connected with the advancement 
rather than the mere diffusion of knowledge. In 
all other respects, however, it is educational rather 
than scientific, advertising and promulgating what 
is known rather than investigating and illustrating 
the unknown. 

The line of study to which it is more especially 
preparatory, so far as it deals with Logic 'per se, is 
easily seen, inasmuch as it manifests itself trans- 
parently through the names of the authors most 
especially quoted, and the nature of the (perhaps) 
over-abundant extracts. These point to the writers 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE. Vll 

who, above all others, have within the last few 
years carried Logic beyond the point where its re- 
vivers (by whom I mean the school to which Arch- 
bishop Whately has been the Coryphaeus) left it — 
Mill, in his System of Logic; De Morgan, in his 
Formal Logic; Boole, in his Laws of Thought; 
and Sir William Hamilton, in his Discussions on 
Philosophy and his edition of the Works of Eeid. 

I repeat the statement that the present treatise 
is vmtten for young students. And here the title 
Logic has its disadvantage. To many it conveys 
the idea of something subtle, metaphysical, difficidt, 
sophistical, and the like ; something useless, or 
worse ; something quite as difficult as profitable 
— difficult, at least, to students of an early age 
and uncultivated imderstandings. To those who 
think loosely enough to think thus, the idea of 
boys being employed upon what they may choose 
to call chopping Logic must be ridiculous. 
' Be it so. I wish the name were more popular. 
Popular, however, or unpopular, it is one with which 
even the unlearned are acquainted. That Logic is 
neither nonsense nor sophistry I shall not attempt 
to show. I shall only ask how far it is difjicult 
— difficult for young students, too difficult for 
being taught in schools. 

Many of the studies of youth are held to be 
adapted to the youthful capacities not so much 
because they are more or less easy, but because 
they happen to be taught. When such is the case, 
the particular branch of education is not taught 
because it is easy but is easy because it is 
taught. Where there are many teachers, methods 
of instruction improve, simply from the practice of 



Digitized by 



Google 



VUl PBEFACE. 

conmmnicating knowledge being general. Opinions 
upon points connected with it become interchanged. 
Errors have a tendency to become exploded. Ideas 
are ventilated ; the result being that subjects lose 
much of their difficulty when they lose their 
novelty. 

This is not the case with Logic and its allied 
subjects. There is no trained body of teachers, 
no series of explanatory books, no Logic made 
easy. 

The exact time of life for the study of elemen- 
tary Logic is not to be given in years and months. 
The age, however, at which ordinary grammar, as it 
is usually taught, is understood is the time of life 
at which anything conveyed by the forthcoming 
pages can be understood also. How far the mean- 
ing of such words as Substantive, Adjective, Noun, 
Concord, and the like, along with the so-called rules 
of Orthography, Etymology, Syntax, and Prosody, is 
actually understood, teachers in schools and classes 
know better than I. They have, doubtless, too 
good reasons for teaching them, even when not un- 
derstood ; as is too often the case. 

Now what I hold respecting the logical part of 
Language as compared with Grammar as usually 
taught is this — 

1. That, as far as the thing taught is to be 
imderstood, Terms and Copulas are no whit more 
unintelligible or difficult than Nouns and Verbs. 

2. That if the memory is to be^ appealed to 
without the understanding, the appeal may as well 
be made for Logic as for Grammar. 

This means that where Grammar can be taught, 
Logic can be taught also, the one subject being in 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEEFACE. 



IX 



reality no harder or more inaccessible than the 
other. 

The real amount of thought is much the same on 
both sides; indeed, the thought is of the same 
kind. It results in the analysis of what we say or 
write, and the observation of what we think. The 
terminology certainly is the easier in Logic. The 
logical terms remarkable for either their length or 
exotic origin are only three in number — ^Categore- 
matic, Syncategorematic, and Hypercategorematic ; 
and these may (at first), by a little management on 
the part of the teacher, be dispensed with. Of the 
remainder, the list is but short. It consists of — 



Subject, 


Conci*ete, 


Predicate, 


Abstract, 


Copula^ 


Denotation, 


Term, 


Connotation, 


Proposition, 


Summum Genus, 


Substance, 


Infima Species, 


Attribute, 


Subaltern, 



and a few others less distantly removed from the 
language of common life. Will any one say that 
these are more diflScult of either explanation on the 
part of the teacher, or remembrance on the part of 
the learner, than the longer and more technical list, 
consisting of names like — 

Article, Adverb, 

Substan tive. Preposition, 

Adjective, Conjunction, 

Noun, Interjection, 

Pronoim, Copulative, 

Verb, Disjunctive, 

Participle, Indicative, 



Digitized by 



Google 



X PBEFACE. 

Imperative, Potential, 

Infinitive, Conjunctive, 

and the like 7 

If Logic be too difficult for beginners, Grammar is 
too difficult also. 

It is submitted, however, that the real difficulties 
lie in the facts already alluded to, viz. the slight 
extent to which the subject has been made a branch 
of early education ; the intrinsic difficulties of the 
subject being but smalL 

The sections whereof the numbers stand in pa- 
rentheses (56), need not be attended to at the first 
reading. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. 



PART I. 

PROPOSITIONS. 



Pi.GB 

§ 1. Statements^ Assertions, Declarations, or Proposi- 
tions 1 

§ 2. Two parts, members, or constituent elements ne- 
cessary to the structure of Propositions. — The 

two Somethings 6 

§ 3. The third Part, Member, Element, or Constituent 

of Propositions — the yord is . . . .9 

§ 4. It is coming 10 

§',5. Loaves abb dear, <fec 11 

§ 6. I AM coming, &c 11 

§ 7. A Proposition consists of three Parts, and no fewer 12 

§ 8. Apparent exceptions 13 

§ 9. A Proposition consists of Three Parts, and no more. 

— ^Apparent exceptions 15 

§ 10. Propositions Affirmative or Negative . . .16 
§ 11. Special names of the three Parts, Members, Ele- 
ments, or Constituents of a Statement, Assertion, 
Declaration, or Proposition — Subject, Predicate, 

Copula 18 

§ 12. Order of the three Parts, Members, or Elements, of 

a Proposition — Copula in the middle . . .19 
§ 13. General name for Subject and Predicate — Term . 21 
§ (14.) Remarks on the Copula. — Apparent absence of a 

Predicate 22 

§ (15.) Remarks on the Copula. — ^Division between the 
several Parts of a Proposition. — Incidence of the 
Negative Element. — Negative Predicates (?) .23 
§ (16.) Differences between the logical and philological 

view of Propositions 27 

§ 17. Questions 31 



Digitized by 



Google 



XU CONTENTS. 

§ 18. Questions of appeal 33 

§ 19. Commands 34 

§ 20. Grammatical Propositions of three kinds— declara- 
tory, interrogative, and imperative . . .35 
§ 21. Practice in columns. — ^Words capable of forming, 

by themselves, Terms 35 

§ 22. Practice in columns. — Words capable of forming 

Predicates, but not capable of forming Subjects 37 
§ 23. Practice in columns. — Words capable of forming 

both Subjects and Predicates ... .39 
§ 24. Practice in columns. — Words capable of forming 

both Predicates and Copulas .... 40 
§ 25. Practice in columns. — Words capable of forming 

only parts of Terms 42 

§ 26. Propositions Universal or Particular . . .46 

§ 27. Many-worded Terms 49 

§ 28. Many-worded Copulas. — ^Negative element com- 
pound 57 

§ 29. Propositions isolate or connected — Theeefoeb . 57 
§ 30. Propositions isolate or connected — Because . . 60 
§ 31. Propositions isolate or connected — If — And . . 60 
§ 32. Propositions isolate or connected — ^As (or since), 

FOE, then 61 

§ 33. Propositions isolate or connected — But . . 62 

§ (34.) Sketch of the structure of the Ordinary Syllogism 

— its mechanism 62 

§ (35.) Structure of the Ordinary SyllogisnL — Combina- 
tion of Propositions. — ^Mood . . . .71 
§ (36.) Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Combina- 
tions of Terms. — Figure 75 

§ (37.) Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Combina- 
tions of Propositions and of Terms considered 
together. — Mood and Figure . , . .77 
§ (38.) Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism. — White. — 

Socrates. — Some 80 

§ (39.) Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Quantity 

or Extent of the Predicate . . . .83 
§ (40.) Operations on the Ordinary Syllogism — Strength- 
ening and Weakening .... 85 
§ (41.) Operations on the Ordinary Syllogism — Conver- 
sion and Reduction 86 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. XUl 

PAGB 

§ (42.) Structure of the Syllogism illustrated by treat- 
ing its Terms as the Names of Classes. — Is equiva- 
lent to INCLUDED IN 87 

§ (43.) Structure of the Syllogism. — Symbolic Repre- 
sentation of Terms by means of Letters . . 89 
§ (44.) Propositions Categoric or Hypothetic . . .96 

§ (45.) Mnemonics 97 

§ (46.) Analysis and Synthesis 101 

§ (47.) Rationale of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Its Terms 
viewed as the Names of Classes. — The dictum de 

OMNI ET NULLO 104 

§ (48.) Rationale of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Its Middle 

Term viewed as a Measure 108 

§ (49.) Rationale of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Its Terms 
viewed as expressive of the co-existence of cer- 
tain Attributes . ^ 109 

§ (50.) Rationale of the Ordinary Syllogism. — The Mid- 
dle Term always in the Premises, and never in 
the Conclusion Ill 

§ (51.) The Place of the Middle Term in the several 

Figures. — The Figures four in Number . .114 

§ (52.) The Moods.— Mood and Figure.— A Real and Ra- 
tional Relation of the Middle Term essential to 
the Perfection of the Syllogism . . . .118 

§ (53.) The Mnemonics. — What is meant by their Conso- 

naYits. — Reduction 122 

§ (54.) The Middle Term, as Contained and Containing. 

— Perfection of the First Figure . . . 129 

§ (55.) Contained and Containing capacities of the Mid- 
dle Term. — Predicates Containing, Subjects Con- 
tained, Terms 130 

§ (56.) Imperfection of the Second Figure. — The Middle 

Term not really Middle 132 

§ (57.) Imperfection of the Third Figure.— -The Middle 

Term not really Middle . , . -. .133 

§ (58.) Imperfection of the Fourth Figure. — The Middle 

Term not rationally Middle .... 133 

§ (59.) Recapitulation 135 

§ (60.) Rules 137 

§ (61.) The Ordinary Syllogism called Aristotelian . 138 

§ (62.) Certain Aristotelian Syllogisms over-strong . 140 

b 



Digitized by 



Google 



XIV CONTENTS. 

PAGB 

§ (63.) Certain Aristotelian Syllogisms over-strong. — ^Con- 
clusions A rOBTIOBI 143 

§ (64.) Syllogisms in which both the Premises are Par- 
ticular 144 

§ 65. Two, or more, Propositions disguised as one . . 146 
§ 66. Propositions as Parts of Terms .... 147 
§ 67. Extent to which Language consists of Propositions. 

—Extracts 148 

§ 68. Criticism 153 



PART II. 

NAMES. 
§ 69. Names, Individual or Common . . . .158 

§ 70. Individual Names, Singular 160 

§ 71. Individual Names, Proper 161 

§ 72. Common Names also called General , . .162 

§ 73. Collective Names 162 

§ 74. Individual Names essentially Singular . . . 163 
§ 75. Individual and Common Names. — ^Names of Per- 
sons and Places 164 

§ 76. Individual and Common Names. — ^Necessity and 

Usefulness of Common Ones. — Extract . .167 
§ 77. Common, General (Generic), and Subaltern Terms . 168 
§ 78. Individual and Common Names. — ^Degrees of Ge- 
nerality. — Generic 173 

§ 79. Individual and Common Names. — The Extremes. 

— Infima Species and Individuals . . .174 
§ 80. Individual and Common Names. — The Extremes. 

— Summa Genera and the Universe . . .175 
§ 81. The Universe. — Positive and Negative Names. — 

Non-effective Negative Names . . . .177 
§ 82. The Universe. — Its Limitations .... 180 
§ 83. The Universe.— Negative Names effective when it 

is limited. — Contraries 181 

§ 84. Negative Names. — Opposites. — Privatives . . 182 
§ (85.) I and Not-I.— Ego and Non-Ego . . .184 
§ 86. Substance and Attribute. — ^Abstract and Concrete . 188 
§ 87. Substance and Attribute 189 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. XV 

PAGB 

§ 88. Concrete Names the Names of Substances. — Ab- 
stract, the Names of Attributes .... 193 
§ 89. Abstract Names of different Degrees of Generality 194 
§ 90. Abstract Names, how far Individual . . .195 
§ 91. Attribute — why a better Term than Quality — ^At- 
tribute of a Quantity 196 

§ 92. Attribute of Relation 199 

§ 93. Convertible Names 201 

§ 94. Notation (or De-notation) and Con-notation. — ^In- 
dividual Names not Connotative . . . 204 
§ 95. Notation, &c. — Common Names connotative. — Cha- 
racteristics, or essential Attributes . . . 209 
§ 96. Difference of view respecting the characteristics of 

Classes . . 211 

§ 97. Kelation between Names and Classes. — ^The Class 

growing out of the Name 212 

§ 98. Relations, &c. — The Name growing out of the 

Class 214 

§ 99. Classification 214 

§ 100. Definitions 217 

§ 101. Classification by Type 219 

§ 102. Equivocal Names 220 



PAET III. 

PARTS OF SPEECH. 

§ 103. Parts of Speech 222 

§ 104. Parts of Speech.— Number, Criteria, &c. . . 223 
§ 105. Parts of Speech. — ^Number of them . , . 223 

§ 106. Parts of Speech.— -Criteria 224 

§ 107. Parts of Speech. — Criterion, the Place of a Word 

in a Proposition. — Categorematic, Syncategore- 

matic, and Hypercategorematic Words . . 225 

§ 108. Categorematics, &c 226 

§ 109. Categorematics . 227 

§ 110. Categorematic Words Subjective or Predicative . 227 
§ 111. Categorematic Words Nominal (Subjective) and 

Quasi^Nominal (Predicative) .... 228 
§ 112. Names. — Convertible or Inconvertible. — ^Pronouns 

or Substantives 230 



Digitized by 



Google 



XVI CONTENTS, 

PAGI 

§ 113. Pronouns Names of Substances. — ^How far Indi- 
vidual 230 

§ 114. Pronouns the Names of Substances. — How far Com- 
mon 233 

§ 115. Pronouns the Names of Substances. — Simply Nota- 
tive (Denotative). — The Attribute they denote 

that of Relation 234 

. 236 
. 237 
. 239 
. 241 



§ 116. Pronouns as compared with Proper Names 
§ 117. Pronouns as compared with Adjectives . 
§ 118. Pronouns as compared with Abstracts . 
§ (119.) Criticism.— Use of the Word Noun . 
§ (120.) Criticism. — Plurality and Non-plurality of Attri- 
butes 243 

§ 121. The Attribute of Quantity. — Quantity a Relation . 246 
§ 122. The Attribute of Quantity. — Crrdinals and Or- 
dinals 247 

§ 123. The Article ........ 249 

§ 124. The Substantive 254 

§ 125. The Adjective . . . . . . , 255 

§ 126. The Adjective. — Its relation to the Participle and 

the Verb. — States and Actions .... 255 

§ 127. The Verb 261 

§ 128. The Participle 261 

§ 129. Adverbs 262 

§ 130. Prepositions . . . • 263 

§ 131. Conjunctions 264 

§ 132. Yes and No 265 

§ 133. Interjections 266 

§ 134. Inflection 2.66 

§ 135. Inflection.— Number 270 

§ 136. Inflection.— Gender . . . . . ,270 

§ 137. Inflection.— Gender.— Of Pronouns . . .271 
§ 138. Inflection. — ^Degrees of Comparison . . . 271 
§ 139. Inflection of Verbs. — Conjugation . . . 272 

§ 140. Criticism 273 

§ 141. Determination of Forms by Inflection . . .274 

§ 142. Criticism 275 

§ 143. Pronouns and Participles as compared with Sub- 
stantives and Adjectives 276 

§ 144. Recapitulation 277 

§ 145. Place of the Article 280 

§ 146. Development of Inflections. — Conclusion . . 218 



Digitized by 



Google 



LOGIC AND PHILOLOGY. 



PAET I. 

PBOPOSinONS. 



Btatements, Assertions, Declarations, or Proposi- 
tions. 

§ The first subject that requires to be con- 
sidered is the nature of statements, assertions, 
declarations, or propositions. 

In order to understand what is meant by a 
proposition, let us suppose that two persons are 
talking together. 

They talk about something. Let us suppose 
that they talk about bread. 

Bread being the something concerning which 
they talk, what is it that they say about it? 

Let us suppose that they say that it is dear. 

They then make the statement, declaration, or 
assertion, that bread is dear, and this statement, 
declaration, or assertion, is, in the language of 
logidans and grammarians, a proposition. 



Digitized by 



Google 



2 PROPOSITIONS. 

Let us now suppose their conversation to have 
been heard by some third person, and reported to 
a fourth, and that the two, on their part, talk it 
over after the following fashion : — 

DIALOGUE. 

A. What was said by the two men you saw just now ? 

B. A great deal. They talked together more than an 
hour. 

A. What did they say? 

B. More than I can remember. I only know that 
they talked about something or other. One of them 
tallied about bread, 

A, What did he say? 

B, Something that I did not quite understand, but 
which was contradicted by the other. 

^. What did hes&y? 

B. Something that the other disapproved of. 

A, So all that you can tell me is, that they talked about 
something ? 

B, Aye ! and that something was bread, 

A, And that they said something about it? 

B. They said a good deal about it ; and as fast as one 
said something one way, the other said something another 
way. 

A, Did either of them say that it was dear ? 

B. Yes. 

A. And did the other say that it was cheap ? 

B. He did. 

So end the two conversations which four 
imaginary speakers have made for the sake of 
illustrating the nature of a proposition. We might 
have made two serve our purpose. Four, how- 
ever, make the matter somewhat clearer. We 
might, indeed, have done with only one, for it 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



PROPOSITIONS. 3 

requires no great stretch of the imagination to 
suppose a single person talking to himself or 
writing ; in either of which cases he would be in 
a condition to form propositions. For the sake, 
however, of giving all the prominence possible to 
the essential and fundamental character of the 
proposition, the Dramatis Personse were raised to 
the number of four. 

Which of these speakers is right, and which 
wrong ? The one whose statement, assertion, 
declaration, or proposition, is true, is right ; and 
the one whose statement, assertion, declaration, or 
proposition, is untrue, is wrong. Common sense 
teUs us this. There is a reason, however, for 
asking the question. It suggests the fact that 
propositions are, at least, of two kinds, either true 
or false ; the men who make them being right or 
wrong accordingly. 

Which, then, of the two sta^ments, assertions, 
declarations, or propositions, is true, and which 
untrue? This is a question which we cannot 
answer, inasmuch as we do not know what par- 
ticular bread is talked about, and, even if we 
did, we might not, ourselves, know the price of it. 
All we know is, that two persons, speaking about 
breadj make different statements. 

But these statements are opposite, and contra- 
dictory to one another. Hence, we may fairly say, 
that, as both cannot be true, one of them must be 
the contrary, or untrue. Even tliis, however, is 
more than we are justified in asserting ; inasmuch 
as we are by no means certain that they both talk 
about the same bread. We have a notion that 
they do ; nevertheless, this notion is very far from 

b2 



Digitized by 



Google 



4 PROPOSITIONS. 

being a certainty. We have only learnt a part of 
the conversation, whereas, if we had had the whole, 
the result might have been that the bread which was 
declared cheap was the bread of one year, the 
bread which was declared dear, the bread of another. 

We need not, however, go ftirther in this ques- 
tion ; for it is not the price of bread that we are 
investigating, neither have we any interest in the 
comparative merits of the statements of our two 
speakers. Both may be right, inasmuch as they 
may be talking of different breads; or both 
may be wrong, inasmuch as bread may have been 
neither dear nor cheap, but moderate in price ; or 
one may have been wrong, and the other right. 
We do not, however, care which of the two it was. 
Yet the price of bread is seldom or never a matter 
of indifference to either us or any one else. We 
may not, perhaps, either make or sell, but the 
chances are strongly in favour of our either buying 
it, or consuming it. Besides this, the political 
economists tell us, that the price of bread enters 
into the price of everything else. So that the 
question is anything but an indifferent one. 

The fact, however, is, that the case before us is 
not one of either domestic or social economy 
at all ; but merely an illustration drawn from those 
departments of inquiry for another and a very 
different investigation ; an investigation which we 
have undertaken, not as millers, or bakers, or 
buyers of bread, or economists of any kind, but as 
grammarians; and it is only with the eye of a 
gramm/irian that we look upon such sentences as 
the one under notice. 

All propositions must be either spoken or 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 5 

written by some one. They cannot make them- 
selves ; neither are they self-existent. They are 
made in words by some one who uses language. 

Whab do they convey ? At the first view of 
this question, we are inclined to answer that they 
convey a fact Yet this is not the case. A speaker 
may as easily put an incorrect statement in the 
shape of a proposition as a correct one. He may 
as easily say gold is not yellow^ which is contrary to 
feet, as gold is yellow, which is a true and real fact. 

Propositions, then, by no means convey facts : 
that is, they by no means necessarily and essen- 
tially do so. They may do so, but they do not do 
so on the strength of their being propositions. 

Do they convey the belief, on the part of the 
speaker, that what he asserts is a fact ? Not 
exactly ; though something like it. The same per- 
son who has said gold is yellow, may, immediately 
afterwards, and in the very next breath or sentence, 
say gold is Twt yellow. He cannot be said to 
believe both these assertions. 

What a proposition conveys is this. It conveys 
what the speaker chooses to pass off as his belief ; 
so that it may give us something in which he 
reaUy believes, or it may give us something that he 
does not believe in at all. 

EXAMPLES. 

1. Man is mortal. — This is true. 

2. Man is five-headed, — ^This is false. 

3. Man is man, — This is true, and something 
more. It is so true that it is unnecessary to be 
stated. It is a truism. 



Digitized by 



Google 



6 PROPOSITIONS. 

4. Somebody is nobody. — ^This is not only false, 
but impossible. 

5. Bread is dear, — ^This, in the mouth of a 
person who believes, when he utters it, that bread 
is actually dear, is a real belief, and, if the price be 
actually high, it is a true fiict. Again — 

6.^ Bread is dear, — ^This, in the mouth of a 
person who believes, when he utters it, that bread 
is really cheap, is a simulated, or pretended belief, 
even if it be true as a statement. 

All which instances serve to show that truths, 
falsehoods, truisms, wilful perversions of fiujt, mis- 
takes, and, even, impossibilities, may form equally 
imimpeachable propositions; the proposition being 
considered only in respect to its grammatical cha- 
racter. 



Two parts, mernherSj or constituent elements neces- 
sary to the structure of Propositions. — The 
two Somethings. 

§ K we have clearly seen what is not essential 
to the structure of a proposition, we shall all the 
better understand what is essential to it. 

There must be two sometMngs — ^the something 
we speak about, and the something we say con- 
cerning it. 

In order to form an estimate of the value of 
these two somethings, let us try to form a judg- 
ment, or express some act of belief by a sentence 
(if so it can be called) in which one of them is 



Digitized by 



Google 



PKOPOsrrioNS. 7 

wanting. We shall find that it is no easy opera- 
tion. 

Suppose, for instance, that I say the 8Vm. Here 
there is a distinct object before me, and before the 
person whom I address. But here the matter 
ends. We have a conception, an idea — each of us; 
but we have nothing more. What about the sun ? 
What about its properties or its powers ? Nothing 
whatever. What is said about it ? Nothing. What 
is believed about it ? Nothing. What is disbelieved 
about it ? Nothing. There is no assertion made 
concerning it — ^nothing affirmative, nothing nega- 
tive, nothing false, nothing true, nothing that I 
maintain, nothing that I deny, nothing that I pre- 
tend to believe in, nothing that I pretend to dis- 
believe in. How can there be ? What can I say 
of it ? What can I compare it to ? What can I 
say it is ? What can I say it is not ? Suppose I 
make one of the simplest of all possible assertions, 
and say the dun is existing^ or the sun exists. Even 
here there are two elements, or parts, one denoting 
sv/n and the other denoting eadstence. Suppose I 
say the sun is the sun. There are two somethings 
even here. Both (it is true) are expressed by the 
same word; and that makes the proposition a 
truism. Nevertheless, the parts, members, elements, 
or constituents of the sentence are two, and the 
sentence itself is a statement, assertion, declaration 
or proposition, consisting of two soraethingSy 
though not of two different somethings. 

A truism, however, is the rarest kind of propo- 
sition. It will be well for the world when mis- 
takes and untruths are equally so. In these, as 
well as in the ordinary statements of fact, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 PROPOSITIONS. 

two somethings are different. Contrast with sen- 
tences Uke — 

Bread is bread, 

Water is water, 

Man is man, &c., 

such propositions as — 

Bread is dear, 
Bread is cheap, 
Water is scarce, 
Water is abmidant, 
Man is mortal, 
Man is immortal. 
Summer is coming. 
Summer is departing. 
Winter is cold. 
Life is short, 
Life is long, 
Life is uncertain. 

In each of all these sentences, and in each and 
all of the thousands that could be framed like them, 
the two questions that suggest themselves have dif- 
ferent answers. 

Thus : — 

Q. What do you talk about ? 

A. Bread. 

Q. What do you say that bread is ? 

A. Dear, cheap, food, or anything else as the 
case may be. 

Should any doubts remain as to the absolute 
necessity of there being, at least, two parts, mem- 
bers, or elements to a statement, assertion, or pro- 
position, they will disappear as we proceed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PftOPOSITlONS. 



The third Part, Member, Element^ or Coiistitv^nt 
of Propositions — the word is. 

§ It now remains for us to ask whether these 
same parts, members, or elements of a proposition 
are more than two. 

It is by no means impossible to frame an intel- 
ligible sentence out of the two elements wliich have 
been the subject of the foregoing remarks alone. 
Indeed, children do so very often. The child says 
sun bright, or fire burn, and is understood. So 
are the up-grown men of more countries than one, 
in the languages of which the tliird part, member, or 
element of a proposition is omitted. 

It is not, however, the business of the men and 
women who use language to make propositions 
that are simply intelligible, or capable of being 
understood. It is their business to make proposi- 
tions which cannot be misunderstood. And to do 
this, they must use something more than the words 
expressive of our two somethings. 

No man can conclude to a certainty that, because 
he sees certain words in juxtaposition, they are in a 
given relation to each other. No man can con- 
clude to a certainty that they are in any relation 
at alL He may, indeed, make a good guess ; but 
he can do no more. 

There is, then, a third part, member, or ele- 
ment, generally found in most propositions, and 
without which (as will be seen hereafter) many 
propositions cannot be constructed. This expresses, 
over and above the two somethings already men- 

B 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



1 PROPOSITIONS, 

tioned, an intervening link between them. In all 
the previous examples, this part, member, or ele- 
ment, has been the word is, 

4. 
It is coming. 

§ In all the examples hitherto given, the 
author has taken care to use words of which the 
meaning lies on the surfeice and is transparently 
clear and visible. There can be no doubt as to the 
meaning of such words as bread, water, man, 
summer, winter, fee. 

Suppose, however, that, instead of expressing 
himself thus, he had written — 

It is coming, 

It is dear. 

It is scarce, fee., 

what would have been the effect ? No one would 
have known what it meant. Nevertheless, it would 
have denoted something, and that something would 
have been the thing spoken about ; and the several 
sentences would have been propositions. They 
would have been propositions of which one of the 
parts, members, elements, or constituents, was un- 
knowD. Still, in form, at least, the sentences 
would have been propositions. 

And a very little more would have made them 
clear and intelligible ones. Supposing, that, im- 
mediately before I said 

It is coming — 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 11 

I had been talking about summer, or immediately 
before I said 

It is dear-— 

I had been talking about bread, all would, in that 
case, have been transparently clear, and the word 
it would have had a meaning — bre(j(,d or summer, 
as the case might be. 



Loaves Are dear, &c. 

§ In all the examples hitherto given, the author 
has used the word is, but he has done so only for 
the sake of clearness. He has chosen that the 
two somethings he said sorriethmg about, should, 
each, be single ejects. He might, however, have 
said — 

Loaves are dear ; 

or, he might, after speaking about loaves, have 
added — 

They are dear. 

6. 

I AM coming, &c. 

§ In all the examples hitherto given, the author 
has taken care to use the words is or are; but 
he has done it only for the sake of deamess and 
simplicity. Instead of using such examples as 

Summer is coining. 
Winter is departing, 
Loaves a/re dear. 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 PROPOSITIONS, 

he might have said— • 

I am coming, wet, dry, &c.. 
Thou art departing, tired, &c. 

In both of these instances, the two somethings 
are in the same condition as they were before ; the 
word, however, which connects them, is different. 

7. 

A Proposition consists of three Parts and no 
fewer. 

§ In every proposition, there are three parts, 
members, or constituent elements : — 

(1.) (2.) (3.) 
Summer is pleasant. 

(l.)(2.)(3.) 
Winter is cold. 
(1.) (2.) (3.) 
Life is short, &c. 

To say surmner is — winter is — life is — &c., is 
to combine words to no purpose. The combina- 
tions convey no meaning. 

To say is pleasant — is cold — is short — &c., is 
also to combine words to no purpose. The com- 
binations convey no meaning. 

But, further, to say surmner — pleasant, winter 
^-'^cold, life — short, is to combine words to no pur- 
pose. The combinations convey no meaning ; at 
least, no dear, unequivocal, and - necessarily intel- 
ligible meaning. 

Each of the above-mentioned expressions is im- 
perfect, and it may be seen how it is imperfect. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEOPosrnoNS. 13 

In the expression svmimer is, we have the name 
(summer) denoting the something concerning which 
"we assert something ; and we have also the word 
denoting the existence of an assertion (is). What, 
however, that assertion is, is imexplained. 

In the expression is pleasant, we find what was 
wanted in the previous one, viz., an assertion con- 
cerning something. The name, however, of this 
sorriething, is unexplained. 

Lastly, in the expression summer — pleascmt, 
although we find both the name of the thing 
spoken of {summer), and the word which tells us 
what was said about it (jpleasant), we find no word 
or sign by which we can tell whether this property, 
quality, or attribute of pleasantness belong or do 
not belong to sv/mmer ; in other words, there is 
nothing to show whether the idea expressed by 
the word pleasant apply to the word summer 
at an. 

What are we to call these incomplete and im- 
perfect combinations? There is no very conve- 
nient name for them. 

They scarcely rise to the rank of sentences. They 
are rather utterance^, or ejaculations. At any 
rate, they are but imperfect sentences. 



8. 

Apparent exceptions. 

§ In all the examples hitherto given, the 
author has taken care, that, whilst the number of 
parts in a proposition is not less than three, the 
number of words by which the proposition is ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 i^ROPosrnoNS. 

pressed should be three also ; neither less nor more. 
But he has done this only for the sake of clearness ; 
only in order that the number of words and parts 
should agree. In the first three of his examples, 
the number of words might easily have been no 
more than two^ and instead of 

Smnmer is coming, 
Winter is departing, 
He is calling, 

the propositions might have run thus : — 

Summer comes. 
Winter departs. 
He caUs. 

Nay more, if instead of writing English, he had 
been writing Latin, the whole of the third and 
fourth propositions might each have been packed 
up in a single word. The Latin for 

He calls, is Vo(xit. 
The Latin for 

He is caUedy is Vacatur. 

Hence, although no proposition can consist of 
less than three parts, members, or elements, many 
propositions may be expressed by less than three 
words, viz. by two, and in some cases by only one. 
In the English language, however, this extreme ab- 
breviation in the expression of a proposition is un- 
common. We generally in English require at least 
two words for our propositions. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 15 



A Proposition condsta of three Parts and no more, 
Apparent eccceptioTis. 

§ In all the previous examples, the author 
took care that, whilst the number of the parts, 
members, or elements of the propositions was no 
more than three, the number of the words by 
which the proposition was expressed should also 
be no more than three. He did this, however, 
only for the sake of clearness and simplicity ; for it 
is very evident that the number of words in every 
one of his examples might have been increased, and 
that without violating the idiom of the English 
language. How easily, for instance, might some of 
them have begun with the word the: — 

The summer is coming. 
The winter is departing. 

How little would the other propositions have been 
affected, if, instead of simply saying. 

Bread is cheap. 

Life is short, &c., 
we had said, 

Some bread is cheap. 
Human life is short, 
AU iron is useful, &c. ; 

or (adding somewhat more to the complexity of the 
proposition). 

Some bread is very cheap, 
Human life is comparatively short. 
Iron is always useful for some purpose, 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 PROPOSITIONS. 

An axe of good stroDg iron is useful in 
the backwoods of America. 

And so on, with other examples easily framed. 

10. 

Propositions Affirmative or Negative, 

§ In all the previous examples, we have had 
a statement of a very clear and definite kind ; and 
we have- not only had a very clear and definite 
statement or assertion, but that statement or asser- 
tion has been what is called affirmative. The 
supposed speaker has said 

Bread is dear. 

Water Ls scarce, fee. 
But it by no means follows that, because he says so, 
the fact should agree with his statement ; still less 
that' all the world should agree with him. On the 
contrary, we are at liberty to bring another speaker 
on the stage, and to make him express a series of 
statements or assertions diametrically opposite to 
those of our first dramatis persona. Thus, when 
A says, 

Bread is dear, 

Water is scarce, &c., 
let B say, 

Bread is cheap. 
Water is abundant, &c. 

What takes place when this happens ? We get two 
opposition statements or assertions, declarations or 
propositions. 

Now, although these statements or assertions are 
antagonistic or contradictory to each other, they are 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 17 

both equally affirmative* They are both equally 
affirmative, though the one actually denies what the 
other states. The denial, however, is anything but 
direct. On the contrary, it is got at in a somewhat 
roundabout way. It is got at by making an 
affirmative assertion incompatible with the one to 
which it stands in opposition. 

The man who says that bread is cheap leaves his 
hearer to infer that bread is not dear ; and his 
hearer draws this inference without much difficulty, 
because he knows at once that a thing cannot be . 
cheap and dear at the same time. It cannot, 
at one and the same time, be something and its 
opposite. And, vice versd, the speaker who com- 
mits himself to the doctrine that bread is cheap, 
means to say that it is not dear on the same prin- 
ciple. It cannot be two things at once. Thus, 
whilst one denies that bread is dear, and another 
that it is cheap, neither of them expresses his de- 
nial in the form of a negative. They only leave 
a negative to be inferred. 

But what if, instead of thus meeting one affir- 
mation by another, they had recourse to the little 
word not? In this case, one of the two words 
dear and cheap could be dispensed with ; for it 
would be sufficient to say, 

Bread is not cheap, 
instead of 

Bread is dear ; 
or. 

Bread is not dear, 

instead of 

Bread is cheap. 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 PROPOSITIONS. 

In this case, too, we should have a truly negative 
assertion. 

By changing is into is noty are into are not, am 
into am not, &c., we can convert an affirmative 
into a negative proposition ; and, viae versa, by 
ejecting the word not in such combinations as is 
not, am not, are not, &c., we can make a negative 
proposition affirmative. 

Now is or is not, be it remembered, is the ele- 
ment which connects the two somethings that con- 
stitute, on one side, the subject of our discourse, 
and, on the other, the something said concerning it. 

What, then, is its function ? It shows whether 
the two somethings are conformable or unconform- 
able with each other ; whether they coincide or 
differ, agree or disagree. 

11. 

Special nam£s of the three Parts, Members, Me- 
ments, or Constituents of a Statement, Asser- 
tion, Declaration, or Proposition — Subject, 
Predicate, Copula. 

§ The something concerning which we make 
the statement, assertion, declaration, or proposition 
is called the Subject. Words like mxin, summer, 
winter, fee., are subjects, and we can assert of them 
that they are mortal, or warm, or cold, fee., or else 
the contrary, i. e. that they are nx)t mortal, not 
warm, fee. 

The assertion made concerning the subject, is 
called the Predicate ; so that mortal, warm, cold, 
&c., are predicates, and we can speak of certain things 
as being mortal, warm, cold, or the contrary. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEOPOSITIONS- 19 

The element which connects the subject and 
predicate is called the Copula. If the copula stand 
by itself, the preposition is affirmative ; if it be ac- 
companied by the word not, it is negative. 



12. 

Order of the three Parts, Members, or Elements, of a 
Proposition — Copula in the middle. 

§ Enough has now been written concerning 
the number of the parts, members, or elements of 
propositions ; enough, and perhaps more than 
enough, so ample has been the exposition of a 
question that, at first sight, seems sufficiently 
simple to be explained in a few words. Such im- 
portance, too, has been given to the number three, 
that it almost looks as if, after the fashion of the 
old cabalist philosophers, we founii something 
mystic in it. Nevertheless, there are good reasons 
for the prominence that this number has assumed. 

The question of order comes next. 

In all the examples hitherto given, the subject 
has come first, the copula next, and the predicate 
last, just as if the sequence were invariable. 
Thus — 

1. Bread (or water) . Subject. 

2. Is . . • Copula. 

3. Dear (or scarce) . Predicate. 

Such is the usual course in the English language, 
as well as in many others. In the English it is 
much more natural to say — 

Wat-er is scarce, 



Digitized by 



Google 



20 PROPOSITIONS. 

than 

Scarce is water, 
though the latter expression is by no means either 
unintelligible or in)possible. Even such a phrase as 

Scarce water is 
is imaginable. 

There is no need, however, of going to these 
extreme and artificial forms in order to show that 
the usual sequence is by no means the only one. 
Even in English, it often suits the purpose of the 
rhetorician to transpose the predicate and the sub- 
ject. Plain prose would say- 
Diana of the Ephesians is great ; 

but it is only the very plainest prose that would 
do so. Our fine translation of the Scriptures (as 
is well known) gives us— 

Great is Diana of the Ephesians. 

In Latin, even the copula may be final : e. g. 
vocatua sum = / am called. So it does in our own 
language, in such phrases as, 

Proud I am. 

As far, then, as the ordinary practice of the 
English language is concerned, the order of the 
parts, members, or elements of a proposition is re- 
gular ; so regular that we should not be far wrong if 
we talked of the first, second, or third prepositional 
elements, instead of talking of subjects, copulas, or 
predicates. On the other hand, however, the eodror- 
ordinary cases within the pale of our own language, 
along with the pra<!tice of many other tongues, 
imply that the sequence is really a matter of 
indiflference. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsrrioNS. 21 

But, although the order of the words may be 
indifferent, the order of the ideas that they express 
may be regular. 

Again, although the order of the ideas may be 
indifferent, the inventors of the words Subject, 
Copula, and Predicate, may not have thought them 
so. More than this, they may have framed their 
phraseology accordingly. Now this seems to have 
been the case. Whatever were the places of the 
subject and predicate, the copula stood between 
them ; for the meaning of the word copula is link, 
union, tie, or connection. 



13. 

General name for Subject and Predicate — Term. 

§ The question of the order or sequence of 
the parts of a proposition brings us towards the 
introduction of a new word. 

Terminus is the Latin for a boundary, limit, 
or end. 

As the copulas stood between the subjects and the 
predicates of a proposition, the subjects and the 
predicates themselves must have stood at its two 
ends, limits, or boundaries. Which stood first and 
which stood last, which began the proposition and 
which ended, was a matter of indifference. It was 
enough that between them they gave it its limits ; 
that each was -mm-medial, final, or terminal. 

And now we get a new word, in the shape of a 
general name for subject and predicate collectively 
— the word term; a word of which we have 



Digitized by 



Google 



22 PROPOSITIONS. 

hitherto eschewed the use, writing name or word 
instead. Now, however, that its meaning has been 
explained, it will appear in ahnost every page of 
our treatise, and that fi^uently. 



(14.) 

Remarks on the Copula, — Apparent absent of a 
Predicate, 

§ We have seen that a predicate, under cer- 
tain conditions, can be something more than a 
predicate ; i. e. a predicate and copula as well. 

Can a copula, under any condition or modifica- 
tion, be anything more than a copula ? Especially 
can it be a copula and predicate also ? To this 
question many logicians say Yes. They say that 
is^is eodsting^is a/n existence = is a hemg^is 
an entity^ or something of this kind, and that 
when the predicate implies simple eodstence, it can 
be expressed by the copula alone. Such is the case 
in the sentence God is, which is considered to con- 
sist of a; subject and copula alone. To this view, 
several writers (Mill amongst them) object, and 
that very decidedly ; arguing that a copula, as a 
copula, is merely a sign of predication, and nothing 
more. The instances, therefore, in question are 
merely instances of the ambiguity of the word 
by which the copula is expressed. The word 
is — a word which not only performs the function 
of a copula, but has a meaning of its own, by 
virtue of which it may itself be made a predicate 
— ^is not a copula which has enlarged its powers. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSITIONS. 23 

but th6 dgn of the copula which has a double 
function. 

Such an error as the one befwe us is best 
guarded against by bearing in mind the essentially 
relative character of the copula. All that it ex- 
l^resses, in any proposition, is agreement or dis- 
agreement between the two terms. 

Let A stand for the Subject, 
„ B „ „ Predicate, 

,, = „ „ Affirmative Copula, 

„ :^ „ „ Negative Copula, 

and all such errors are avoided. 



(15.) 

Remarks on the Copula. — Division between the 
several Parts of a Proposition, — Incidence of 
the Negative Mement — JS^egative Predicates (T). 

§ The present section is devoted to what may 
be called the incidence of the negative element 
It will show that certain writers have divided the 
proposition into its three parts differently, the gene- 
rality having referred the negative element to the 
copula, whilst some have connected it with the 
predicate. 

a. By changing is into is not^ we convert an 
affirmative into a negative proposition. This is 
how the statement stands in words. 

6. By changing = into :^ we convert A == B into 
A:;tB. This is how the statement stands in 
symbols. 

From this it follows, that it is the character of 



Digitized by 



Google 



24 PROPOSITIONS. 

the copula, that determines the character of the 
proposition ; the rules being that — 

a. Affirmative copulas make affirmative proposi- 
tions, and (vice versa) that — 

b. Negative copidas make negative propositions. 
Such is the current doctrine. But it is clear, 

that a very little ingenuity may modify it. An 
affirmative copida with a negative predicate, will 
give us the same result as an affirmative predicate 
with a negative copula. Thus : — 

Caesar is not dead, 

may be read either 

Caesar (is-not) dead, or — 
Caesar is (not-dead). 

If this be true, the symbolic formula lately sug- 
gested, requires alteration. If so — 

Let A stand for the Subject. 
„ B „ „ Affirma 
„ B' „ „ Negati 
„ .= „ „ Copula. 

Here we get rid of :#:, but take B' in its place. 

This difference of the distribution of the nega- 
tive element of propositions has not obtained the 
assent of either the major or the most distin- 
guished part of our recent writers. 

EXTRACT. 

** Some logicians state this distinction differently ; they 
recognise only one form of copula, is, and attach the nega- 
tive sign to the predicate. * Csesar is dead,' and * Caesar is 
not dead/ according to these writers, are propositions 
agreeing not in the subject and predicate, but in the sub- 



" " ^™«ti^« I Predicate, 
tive J 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 25 

ject only. They do not consider * dead,* but * not dead,' to 
be the predicate of the second proposition, and they ac- 
cordingly define a negative proposition to be one in which 
the predicate is a negative name. The point, though not 
of much practical moment, deserves notice as an example 
(not unfrequent in logic) where, by means of an apparent 
simplification, but which is merely verbal, matters are 
made more complex than before. The idea of these writers 
was, that thej could get rid of the distinction between 
affirming and denying, by treating every case of denying 
as the affirming of a negative name. But what is meant 
by a negative name ? A name expressive of the absence 
of an attribute. So that when we affirm a negative name, 
what we are really predicating is absence, and not pre- 
sence ; we are asserting not that anything is, but that 
something is not; to express which operation no word 
seems so proper as the word denying. The fundamental 
distinction is between a fact and the non-existence of that 
fact ; between seeing something aud not seeing it, between 
Caesar's being dead and his not being dead ; and if this 
were a merely verbal distinction, the generalisation which 
brings both within the same form of assertion would be a 
real simplification: the distinction, however, being real, 
and in the facts, it is the generalisation confounding the 
distinction that is merely verbal ; and tends to obscure the 
subject, by treating the diflference between two kinds of 
truths as if it were only a diflference between two kinds of 
words. To put things together, and to put them or keep 
them asunder, will remain diflPerent operations, whatever 
tricks we may play with language." — Mills, Logic, i. 4, 
§2. 

Now it is clear that this refinement on the ordi- 
nary view is made for the sake of simplicity. But 
is not the ordinary view made so too ? And, if 
• this be the case, is it not possible, that an undue 
sacrifice may have been made ? It is transparently 

C 



Digitized by 



Google 



26 PROPOSITIONS. 

dear that those who take the view of Hobbes (for 
it is to the view of that writer that Mill takes his 
exceptions), and those who take the other, admit 
but one formula., the doctrine on both sides being 
that either the copida or the predicate is negative, 
and that as a general rule. But is this assxmiption 
the true one ? May we not err in looking towards 
simplicity too exclusively ? What if Hobbes' view 
be the true one in some, the ordinary in other, 
cases? Propositions would then be less uniform 
in their construction, less simple in their form, and 
less manageable in their handling. Logic, in short, 
would be somewhat more complex. But this is no 
reason for ignoring a distinction, provided that the 
distinction be real. Grenerality and simplicity are 
good things, but they must not be bought at the 
price of facts. 

The present writer suggests that, in philology at 
least, it may be inaccurate to hold that, because the 
negative belongs to the copula in aome cases, it 
does so in aU. 

And it may be just as inaccurate to maintain 
that, because it aometimes attaches itself to the pre- 
dicate, it is essentially and necessa/rily predicative. 

He believes that negatives are sometimes what 
he woidd call terminal, and sometimes inter-ter- 
mi/nal ; terminal negatives belonging to the predi- 
cate rather than the copula, inter-terminals to the 
copula rather than the predicate. 

As a philologue he goes farther still. He doubts 
whether it be in accordance with the phenomena of 
language to make the) negative element of proposi- 
tions a part of either predicate or copula. It 
eertaiuly simplifies matters to say that the parts of 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 27 

a proposition, whether negative or affirmative, are 
three, and no more than three ; and that the one 
sort differs from the other simply in the different 
character of one of these three constituents. But 
what if the truer view be that the negative sign is 
no modification of any pre-existing element, but a 
fresh element altogether ? 

Certain languages dispense with the copula when 
it is affirmative ; but not when it is negative. If 
we say ^re hMy the word is may be supplied by the 
person spoken to, when we simply mean that the 
property of heat is connected with substance fire. 
But what if we deny this ? We cannot leave the 
person spoken to to supply such a word as not 

(16.) 

Differences between the logical and philological 
view of Propositions. 

§ It may now be said that, if the logical form 
of a proposition be thus imsuited to the purposes 
of the grammarian, the ^ammarians and the logi- 
dans should part company, and that the former 
should find their own formula for their own propo- 
sitions, making it no part of their business to attend 
to the view taken by the latter. In this there is 
much, but not, perhaps, enough to constitute the 
whole, truth. There is, doubtless, a certain amount 
of difference between the operations of thp philo- 
logue and the logician ; but there is also a very 
dose connection, as we have seen already. 

Nine-tenths of what has been written in the pre- 
sent treatise is as much a matter of logic as it is of 
language. Neither can anything easily be found con- 

C 2 



Digitized by 



Google ' 



28 PKOPOsmoNS. 

nected with the latter of these two subjects, which 
has not some bearing upon the former. It may, pos- 
sibly, be wrong to say that our modes of speaking act 
upon our modes of thinking ; in other words, that 
Thought without Language would be something 
different from Thought with Language. It would 
not be expressed so as to be inteUigible to a second 
person ; nevertheless, it would be Thought. 

Again, it may possibly be right to say, that 
language is limited to the eocpression of our thoughts 
(just as pictures express the objects they represent, 
and the letters of the alphabet stand as signs of 
certain sounds), and that language so limited has 
nothing to do but to take thought as it finds it, 
and put it in a form that shall communicate it to 
some one external to the sentient or thinker ; the 
sentient or thinker beiug able to commune with 
himself without language, i, e. to think to himself 
without talking to himself. 

All this may be true. Nevertheless, excellent 
logicians (and I believe a vast majority of them) 
hold that language is not only the expression of 
thought, but, to a certain extent, the instrument by 
which thought is formed. 

Extracts. 

1. 
"Logic is derived from a Greek word {\6yoq) which sig- 
nifies communication of thought, usually by speech. It is 
the name which is generally given to the branch of in- 
quiry (be it galled science or art) in which the act of the 
mind in reasoning is considered, particularly with refer- 
ence to the connection of thought and language." — De. 
MoEGAN, Formal Logic, chap. ii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 29 

"Logic is a portion of the art of thinking. Language 
is evidently, and by the admission of all philosophers, one 
of the principal instruments or helps of thought; and any 
imperfection in the instruments, or in the mode of employ- 
ing it, is confessedly liable, still more than in almost any 
other art, to confuse and impede the process and destroy 
all ground of confidence in the result. For a mind not 
previously versed in the meaning and right use of the 
various kinds of words, to attempt the study of methods of 
philosophising, would be as if some one should attempt to 
make himself an astronomical observer, having never 
learned to adjust the focal distance of his optical instruments 
80 as to see distinctly." — Mills, Logic, i. \,% 1. 

3. 

" Here, therefore, we find a new reason why the signifi- 
cation of names, and the relation, generally, between 
names and the things signified by them, must occupy the 
preliminary stage of the inquiry we are engaged in. 

** It may be objected, that the meaning of names can 
guide us at most only to the opinions, possibly the foolish 
and groundless opinions, which mankind have formed con- 
cerning things, and that as the object of philosophy is 
truth, not opinion, the philosopher should dismiss words 
and look into things themselves, to ascertain what ques- 
tions can be asked and answered in regard to them. This 
advice (which fortunately no one has it in his power to 
follow) is in reality an exhortation to discard the whole 
fruits of the labours of his predecessors, and demean him- 
self as if he were the first person who had ever turned an 
inquiring eye upon nature. 

** What does any one*s personal knowledge of things 
amount to, after subtracting all which he has acquired by 
means of the words of other people ? Even after he has 
learned as much as men usually do learn from others, will 



Digitized by 



Google 



30 PROPOSITIONS. 

the notions of things contained in his individual mind 
afford as sufficient a hasis for a catalogue raisonnee as the 
notions which are in the minds of all mankind?" — ^Mills, 
Logic, i. 1, § 3. ^ 

4. 

" That language is an instrument of human reason, and 
not merely a medium for the expression of thought, is a 
truth generally admitted. It is proposed in this chapter 
to inquire what it is that renders language thus suhser- 
vient to the most important of our intellectual faculties. 
In the various steps of this inquiry, we shall he led to 
consider the constitution of language, considered as a 
system adapted to an end or purpose ; to investigate its 
elements ; to seek to determine their mutual relation and 
dependence ; and to inquire in what manner they contri- 
hute to the attainment of the end to which, as co-ordinate 
parts of a system, they have respect 

" In proceeding to these inquiries, it will not be neces- 
sary to enter into the discussion of that famous question 
of the schools, whether language is to be regarded as an 
essential instrument of reasoning, or whether, on the other 
hand, it is possible for us to reason without its aid. I 
suppose this question to be beside the design of the present 
treatise, for the following reason ; viz. that it is the busi- 
ness of science to investigate laws ; and that, whether we 
regard signs as the representatives of things and of their 
relations, or as the representatives of the conceptions and 
operations of the human intellect, in studying the laws of 
signs we are in effect studying the manifested laws of rea- 
soning. If there exists a difference between the two 
inquiries, it is one which does not effect the scientific ex- 
pressions of formal law, which are the objects of investiga- 
tion in the present stage of this work, but relates only to 
the mode in which those results are presented to the 
mental regard. For though in investigating the law 
of signs, a posteriori, the immediate subject of examina- 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 31 

tion is language, with the rules which govern its use; 
while making tiie internal processes of thought the direct 
ohject of inquiry, we appeal in a more immediate way to 
our personal consciousness, — it will be found, that in both 
cases the results obtained are formally equivalent. Nor 
could we easily conceive that the unnumbered tongues and 
dialects of the earth should have preserved through a 
long succession of ages so much that is common and uni- 
versal, were we not assured of die existence of some deep 
foundation of their agreement in the laws of the mind 
itself." — Boole, Laws of Thottght, 

17. 

Questions, 

§ All statements, assertions, or declarations, are 
propositions. 

Is the converse of this true ? 

Are all propositions statements, assertions, or de- 
clarations ? 

Up to the present stage of our inquiries, the 
three parts, members, or constituent elements of a 
proposition — the two somethings, and the link that 
joins them — the subject, predicate, and copula — 
have been considered from one point of view only. 

Let us now, however, instead of saying 
Bread is dear, 
say, 

Is bread dear ? 

Does this latter combination of words constitute 
a proposition ? 

It certainly has some of the elements of one, and 
those very important ones. 

It contains the two words significant of the two 
somethings — bready dea/r. It contains the word 
which connects them — is. 



Digitized by 



Google 



32 PROPOSITIONS. 

It contains all this, and it contains notliing be- 
sides. A chemist would say that a sentence like 
the one in question, gave us the same elements as 
the other, with a different arrangement. 

Nevertheless, there is no assertion, no state- 
ment, no declaration ; none, at least, of a direct 
and straightforward kind. 

Instead of this, there is a question. 

Now, at the first view, few things can be more 
unlike each other than a question and an assertion. 
The latter implies knowledge, the former the want 
of it. The latter contains a certain amount of 
information, real or supposed ; the former seeks for 
such information; and for this reason, the chief 
works on logic have formally, and by name, ex- 
cluded Queationa firom the class of propositions. 
All, however, that the grammarian says is, that a 
question is not an assertion, a declaration, or a 
statement. All that the grammarian says is, that 
whenever there is an assertion, a declaration, or a 
statement, there is also a proposition. He never 
says that wherever there is a proposition, there is 
also a statement. 

The feet is, that in grammar, a Question is 
neither more nor less than a variety of the ordinary 
proposition, implying that the subject is something 
concerning which the speaker requires information ; 
something unexplained, but not incapable of ex- 
planation- ; explanation that may possibly be sup- 
plied by the person spoken to. 

The sentence — 

What is this ? = this is what ? 
What = something upon which information is re- 
quested. 

It may be objected, however, that it is not the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 33 

habit of language to use such expressions as this is 
wttat ? but, on the contrary, to prefer the form, what 
is this ? All that need be said upon this point is, 
that it is not the general custom of the English, 
and certain other languages, to do so. The Eng- 
Ush, and certain other languages, transpose the 
predicate and subject when the proposition is a 
question ; but there is no necessity for their doing 
so. It is merely a particular practice, and no ge- 
neral law of language. 

A question, then, or interrogation, is only an 
ordinary assertional or declaratory proposition with 
its parts transposed. 

18. 

Questions of appeal, 

§ There is a certain sort of question which 
is neither more nor less than a negative. When a 
person in extreme perplexity says, What am I to 
cfo ? he often means that there is nothing that can 
be done. In like manner — 

Whxd do you, say to that ? means You have no- 
thing to say to it. 

Who would rely on the word of a convicted 
perjurer, or on the honour of a notorious cheat ? 
Kete, who means no one. 

In questions of this kind, we not only appeal 

to the person spoken, as to whether such or such 

a feet is true, but we imply our own belief to 

the contrary; in which case our last example means, 

/ know of n/) one who relies on the word and 

honour of perjurers and cheats, and have a strong 

conviction that nx) one does do so, 

« « « « « 

c 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



34 PROPOSITIONS. 

" The miserable Sporus is too vain and fidvolous 
a thing to be the object of either advice or anger. 
No one uses a wheel to break a butterfly/^ 

Such the plain prose ; but not so the verses of 
Pope : — 

" Satire or sense can wretched Sporus feel? 
Who breaks a butterfly upon a wheel?'* 
Again : — 

'* Or* hear'st thou rather pure sBtherial stream, 
Whose fountain who can tell ? 

Paradise Lost 
Who -=. 710 one. 

Questions of this kind are called Questions of 
Appeal. 

19. 

GomTnands. 

§ At the first view, few things can be more 
unlike each other than an assertion and a com- 
mand ; indeed, it may be admitted, that the pro- 
positional character of commands is less clear than 
that of questions. Words like walk, stand, &c., con- 
vey neither an affirmation nor a denial, as a matter 
of direct assertion. Nevertheless, they are essen- 
tially affirmative, and, by attaching to them the 
word not, can be made negative : wcdk n/)t, sta/nd 
not, fear not, eat not, drmk not, do not 
Ag5^.in — 

Walkz=,thxyii he waUci/ng. 

Stand zn thou be stamdin^g. 

Eat zz thou be eating, &c. 
And what is thou but a subject, be but a copula, 
and walking but a predicate ? 

* This means. Do y(m hear as yov/r name f art thou called ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 35 

20. 

Orammatical Propositions of three kinds — declara- 
tory, interrogative, and imperative. 

§ A proposition that conveys an assertion, 
statement, or declaration, i& called a declaratory 
proposition. It may also be called an assertional 
one. 

A proposition by which we ask a question is 
called an vnterrogative proposition. 

A proposition that conveys a command is called 
an imperative proposition. 

The grammarian recognizes all these three 
varieties as propositions. The logician recognizes 
the first only. Questions and commands he ex- 
cludes. In his eyes there is no proposition where 
there is no declaration or assertion. 

21. 

Practice in columns. — Words capable of forming, 
by themselves, terms. 

§ Peruse the following columns, noting that they 
are marked 1 and 2. 

Draw a line sufficiently long to have three words 
written on it. 

Take any word fi'om list 1, and write it on the 
left end of the line. 

Take any word from list 2, and write it on the 
right end of the line. 

Insert between the words thus written the word 
is. 

Before the left-hand words, put a, an, or the, if 
necessary to make sense. 



Digitized by 



Google 



36 


PROPOSITIONS. 






List 1. 




man 


bow 


wealth 


woman 


arrow 


happiness 


chad 


dart 


goodness 


father 


spear 


strength 


mother 


fishing-rod 


length 


son 


fisherman 


air 


daughter 


hunter 


fire 


horse 


shooter 


water 


mule 


lioness 


body 


dog 


book 


soul 


ox 


pen 


atmosphere 


ass 


ink 


firmament 


fowl 


paper 


sun 


bird 


virtue 


sky 


^g 


vice 

(2.) 


essence. 


good 


deep 


shooting 


bad 


broad 


shining 


indifferent 


long 


weeping 


big 


short 


groaning 


little 


fierce 


blazing 


great 


happy 


laughing 


small 


virtuous 


thinking 


black 


vicious 


standing 


white 


manly 


conquering 


red 


womanly 


conquered 


green 


childish 


himted 


hot 


fatherlike 


moved 


cold 


bodily 


beaten 


weak 


atmospheric 


drifted 


strong 


essential 


sifted 


high 


personal 


driven. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSITIONS, 37 

The lines will then run thus : — 

Man is good, &c., 

A child is little, 

The bow is small. 

The woman is thinking. 

The water is beaten, &c., &c., 

in any sort of combination or to any number. 

Or we may throw the two lists into two 
columns, the former on the left, the latter on the 
right side of the paper, and connect the two by 
is, writing — 

The man ^ (good. 

The woman r is ^ bad, 

The child ) (indifferent, &c. 

In each and aU of these instances, we have a 
proposition — a proposition with its subject at the 
beginning (or on the left-hand side as we write), 
its predicate at the end (or right-hand side), and 
its copula between them (or in the middle). 

Some of these propositions are felse, improbable, 
and even impossible. Nevertheless, they are all 
propositions, grammatically constructed, and accu- 
rate in form. And this is aU that need be. 

22. 

Practice in columns. — Words capable of form- 
ing Predicates, but not capable of fomrvmg 
Subjects. 

§ The previous lists have shown us that there 
is a certain dass of words which can constitute 
the subjects of propositions. 



Digitized by 



Google 



38 PROPOSITIONS. 

They have also shown that there is another class 
which can constitute the predicates. 

Can the same words constitute hoth subjects and 
predicates ? 

Let us answer this by again operating on our 
lists. 

Reverse the order of the columns by writing the 
words of No. 2 on the left-hand side of the paper, 
and those of No. 1 on the right. 

Good is man, 
Little is child, 
Small is bow, 
Thinking is woman, 
Beaten is water, &c., &c. 

Are these sentences grammatical? Do they 
constitute propositions? No. It may be said 
that they are intelligible, and that> if interpreted 
so as to be made so, they would be no more un- 
true, improbable, or impossible than some of the 
acknowledged propositions of the previous section. 
It may be said, for instance, that good^ littlSy small, 
&c., mean a good thing, a little thing, goodness, or 
littleness, &c., and that 

Goodness is (a) man. 
Littleness is (a) child, &c., 

are propositions. The qualities in question may, it 
may be said, have been personified, so that Good- 
ness may be a man, just as Britannia is a woman, 
or Cupid a boy. AH this may be the case ; but if 
it be so, the words must have changed their mean- 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS, 39 

ing. In the plain unvarnished language of common 
sense no one will say that 

Gk)od is man 

is a proposition in the same way as 

Man is good 
is one. 

Again, it may be said, that combinations like 
good is mem, are combinations like one already 
quoted, viz. great is Diq,na of tJie EphesicmSf which 
is the same as Diana of the Uphesians is great. 
This, however, is by no means an instance of the 
word great being used as a subject. It is only an 
instance of the usual order of the subject and pre- 
dicate being reversed. 

We may, then, safely say there is a certain dass 
of words — ^words like those in No. 2 — ^which can 
form the predicates of propositions, but not the 
subjects. And this gives us a partial answer to 
the question with which we commenced, viz. Can 
the same word constitute both subjects and predi- 
cates? 

Answer, Whatever may be the case with the 
words of No. 1, the words of No. 2 have no such 
double power. They constitute predicates only. 
23. 

Practice in columns, — Words capable of forrmng 
both Subjects amd Predicates. 

§ This answer, however, is only partial, in- 
asmuch as it applies only to the words of list 2. 
What can those of list 1 do ? They can certainly 
form subjects. This we have seen. Can they also 



Digitized by 



Google 



4 a PROPOSITIONS. 

form predicates ? They can. Tbey can do tWo 
things at once. Operate on the columns, and you 
will see that this is the case. 

A man is a man ; 
this is a truism. Nevertheless, it is a proposition. 

A man is a woman ; 
this is an untruth. Nevertheless, it is a proposi- 
tion. 

Insert the word not, so converting the aflSrma- 
tive into the negative. 

A man is not a man ; 
this is no longer a truism, but an untruth. 

A man is not a woman; 
this is no longer an untruth, but a truism. 
An egg is food, 
Vice is not virtue ; 
these are truths. All, however, are propositions. 
And now our question is answered altogether. 
Question. Can the same words constitute both 
subjects and predicate? 

Ariswer, The words of No. 2 can constitute 
predicates only ; but the words of No. 1 can con- 
stitute subjects and predicates both. 



24. 

Practice in columns. — Words capable of forming 
both Predicates and Copulas. 

§ From list 2, select all the words ending in 
-ing, as tliokring, remembering that they had 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 41 

the property of being able to form predicates— not 
subjects, still less subjects and predicates as well — 
but only predicates. 

Form a certain number of propositions with 
them, 

The woman is thinking, &c. 

Separate the syllable -ing from the syllable that 
precedes it by a hyphen — 

The woman is think-iri^. 

Write -a instead of it, and omit the word is. 

The result is a series of propositions of the 
following form : 

The woman thinks, &c. 

In these propositions which is the subject ? The 
words womcm, &c. 

And which the predicate and copula? The 
words thinks, &;c. They are predicates and copulas 
at once. 

Mutatis mutandis, the same applies to the words 
in ed and en, conquered, beaten, &c. 

The himter is conquered, 
The fisherman is beaten, 

or 
The hunter is conquer-ec?, 
The fishermen is beat-eri, 

or 
The hunter conquer-8. 
The fisherman beat-s, 

or 
The hunter conquers. 
The fishermen beats, &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



42 



PBOPOsrnoNS. 



The following words, amongst others, axe capable 
of forming by themselves both a predicate and a 
copula at once. 



eat 


teach 


shoot 


drink 


learn 


shine 


speak 


read 


weep 


breathe 


write 


groan 


live 


worship 


blaze 


die 


petrify 


laugh 


fear 


boil 


think 


hope 


ride 


stand 


love 


walk 


conquer 


see 


sigh 


simmer 


hear 


hunt 


astonish 


feel 


fish 


pine 


hunger 


impeach 


beat 


mock 


drive 


driJPb 


stain 


move 


sift. 



25. 

Prcbctice in coIutmis. — Words capable of forming 
only parts of Terms. 

§ The examples of propositions hitherto given 
have been of either the simplest form possible, or 
very simple. They have rarely consisted of more 
than three words, and even when they have done 
so, the additional word has generally been either am 
(a) or the ; as — 

An eagle is a bird ; or — 
The man is good, &c. 

Sometimes, however, it has been som^, and all ; 
whilst in § 9, for the sake of showing that it was 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsinoNS. 43 

by no means necessary for a proposition to be ab- 
solutely simple, we find such ones as — 

Human life is comparatively short, 
Iron is always useful to man. 
An axe of good iron is very useful in the 
backwoods of America. 

Examples of this kind may be multiplied inde- 
finitely. They are examples of comparatively, 
though not of absolutely simple propositions. 

Analyse them, and classify the words of which 
they consist. 

In doing this, first find the terms. 

This we do by finding the copula — is. 

The words to the left of it (for we still proceed 
mechanically) form the subject : the words to the 
right of it the predicate. 

SUBJECTS. PREDICATES. 

Human life 
Good iron 
An axe of 
good iron 



IS 



comparatively short, 
always usefid, 

very useful in the back- 
woods of America. 



Now, pick out fi^om the terms of these three pro- 
positions all the words that find a place in either of 
the lists of the previous section. These will be 
Ufe, axe, iron, hackwood, and America, for the 
dass capable of forming either subjects or predi- 
cates, and human, good, short, and useful for the 
dass capable of forming predicates only. Verify 
this, if necessary, by constructing propositions ac- 
cordingly. 

The remaining words will be an,, the, compara- 
tivdy, at/ways, very, in, of. 



Digitized by 



Google 



44 PROPOSITIONS. 

To see whether any of these words, hy themselves, 
will form either subject or predicate ; i.e. write is 
in the middle of a line, and the words in question 
on either side of it. 

The is comparatively. 
Comparatively is the, 
In is very, 
Very is in, &c., &c. 

Eing what changes we may upon them, the re- 
sult is the same ; or rather the no-result is the 
same. No proposition is created ; and this is be- 
cause the words in question, though capable of 
forming parts of either a subject or a predicate, 
cannot form a whole one. 

The previous examples have shown something 
more. They have shown that it by no means 
follows, that because a word can, by itself, consti- 
tute the whole of a term, it cannot, therefore, con- 
stitute a part of one. A, the, in, very, &c., can 
constitute parts of terms only ; iron, good, &c., can 
constitute whole terms, but they can constitute parts 
of terms as well. 

The words of our two lists — the words like 
man, iron, good, useful, &c. — were only a few out 
of many. There were many others like them. 
The same is the case with a, the, very, compara- 
tively, in, and of. They are simply specimens or 
samples of a class. 

The character of the class last under notice was, 
that the words which it contained (man, good, &c.) 
were capable of forming by themselves, and without 
the aid pf other words, terms ; the terms thus 
formed being, of course, simple. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS, 45 

The character of the class now claiming conside- 
ration is, that the words which it contains (a, very, 
in, &c.) are not capable of forming, by themselves, 
but only with the aid of other words, terras; the 
terms thus formed are, of course, other than abso- 
lutely simple. 

The class last under notice fell into certain divi- 
sions, one containing the words capable of forming 
both subjects and predicates ; another, the words 
capable of forming predicates only ; another, the 
words that formed predicates and copulas as well. 
Hence, whilst Tna/a and good agreed in the general 
character of being able, by themselves, to form 
terms, the terms that they severally formed were 
diflFerent. 

The same applies to the class containing a, the^ 
very, in, &c. They agree gev-erally, i.e. they agree 
in the fact of their powers or fiinctions being 
limited to the formation of parts of terms only. 
They differ in the particular parts of a term that 
they severally have the power, or function, to 
form. 

They agree, however, generally. 

a. Of this general class to which they all belong 
a and the form one division — a small one, for there 
are not many other words in the same predicament 
as these. 

6. Comparatively and very form a second — the 
largest. 

c. In and of form a third, intermediate in mag- 
nitude. 

A further illustration of the characteristics of 
these three classes will be found in Part II. 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 PBOPOsmoNS. 

26. 
Propodtions Universal or Particular, 

§ It may, perhaps, have already struck the 
reader that the division of propositions into Nega- 
tive and Aflirmative, the only division hitherto 
made, has been insufficient. If so, he will anti- 
cipate the introduction of new terms, some of which 
may be, more or less, technical. And this is exactly 
what he wiU find. Propositions may be of any 
amount of simplicity or complexity. They may be 
three-worded, i, e, with no more words than elements, 
or they may extend over whole lines, and fill up 
moderate-sized pages. 

In the following pair of propositions, one of 
which is negative and the other affirmative, it is 
more important to notice the likeness between them 
than the difference. 

Swans are white, 
Swans are not white. 

All the parts here are clear. The words swan 
and white tell us what is meant by the subject and 
the predicate; the words are and are not give us the 
copulas. All, then, is clear — but only to a certain 
extent; for a little reflection wiU show us that 
there is still a piece of information wanting. 

How many swans are white ? How ma/ay swans 
are not white ? This is what we have yet to be 
told. It may be that the whole class, genus, or 
group of swans — every individual bird belonging to 
it — is of the same colour, or it may be that only 
one per cent, thereof is so. What, in short, does 
the word swcms mean ? Does it mean all or some, 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 47 

the whole of a class or the part of one? Does 
it mean swcma universally, or swans partially ? All 
that the wording of the proposition supplies us 
with is the statement that there is more than one 
swan which is white ; more than one swan other 
than white. This we collect from the copula being 
are instead of is ; and it is all that we do collect. 

So that our notion of a proposition is stiU in- 
complete, and we still want a fresh dass of words. 
Nor is it difficult to see what sort of words these 
must be. They must stand in the very closest 
juxtaposition with the subject. They must ahnost 
be part and parcel of the subject. They must com- 
bine or coalesce with the subject much in the same 
way that the negative combines with the copula. 
Whether they will be separate words, or words in- 
separably united, will depend upon circumstances. 

The two chief words of this kind are all and 
some ; as we may see by prejBxing them to the two 
propositions under notice, and writing 

J.Zt-swans are white, 
iSome-swans are not white. 

By writing all or some, we know what we may 
call the extent, or quantity, of our proposition ; i.e. 
we know how far the words white and not white ex- 
tend to the class of birds called swans. We know 
that in the first proposition, they extend over the 
whole dass ; whereas, in the second, they extend 
over only a part of it. 

To say that soms swa/ns are white, is to say that 
a portion, or part, of the class of birds called swan 
is endued with the property or attribute of white- 
nMs — a portion, or part ; not the whole. Some of 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 PROPOSITIONS. 

them may be brown ; some even black. What are 
we to call such an affirmative as this, an affirmative 
that applies only to a part of a class ? We are to 
call it a Particular ajffirmaiive ; just as we called 
the other a Universal one. If we choose, we may 
contrast these two sorts of propositions. We must 
remember, however, that they are both Affirmative. 
The same difference presents itself, when we come 
to the Negative. 

No swan is white. 

Some swans are not white. 

The first of which is an universal, the second a 
particular, negative. 

There are, then, four sorts or species of propo- 
sitions ; and these it is the business of the logician 
to arrange or classify. In doing this, he has his 
choice between two principles. 

a. He may do as has just been done. He may 
make the primary divisions, affirmative and 
oiegative, each billing into the universal and par- 
ticular, or sub-divisions, in which cases his table 
stands thus : — 

Universal — All swans are 

^ white, 

Particular — Some swans are 

white ; 
Universal — No swans a/re 

white. 
Particular — Some swans are 
not white : 
or, 

6. He may make the division into universal and 
particular primary, and that of affirmative and 



Affirmatives. 



Negatives. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 49 

negative secondary. If he do this, his table stands 
as follows : — 

Affirmative — AU swans are 

white, 
Negative — No swans a/re 

white; 
Affirmative — Some swans a/re 

white, 
Negative — Some swans are 
not white. 



Universal. 



Particular. 



Now, it is this latter arrangement which is 
the arrangement of the logician, in whose writings 
the sequence (which it is very important to re- 
member) is — 

1. Universal Affirmative, 

2. „ Negative ; 

3. Particular- Affirmative, 

4. „ Negative. 

We now proceed to the consideration of — 

27. 

Many-worded Terms. 

I should be glad to think that either the present 
work, or some work like it, was to be studied 
earlier than . even the first rules of the ordinary 
grammars. But this is a thing to be desired rather 
than expected — optandum mxigls quam sperandum. 
Such being the case, I assume that the ordinary 
grammatical meaning of such words as mxisculine, 
feminine, neuter, and gender, is understood by the 
reader. 

D 



Digitized by 



Google 



50 PROPOSITIONS. 

Now the old grammarians are in the habit 
of speaking of the relative value, dignity, or 
worth of these three genders. The " masculine," 
they say, " is more worthy than the feminine, and 
the feminine more worthy than the neuter."" They 
generally proceed to show what this means by 
examples. I stop, however, here ; using the words 
only as an illustration. For — 

Just as one gender in grammar is more worthy 
than another, one class of words in logic has greater 
worth than its fellows. And it is evident where 
this greater worth or value lies. It is to be found 
with those words which can not only form, by 
themselves, and single-handed, terms, but terms of 
either kind. A word that can be both predicate 
and subject, may fairly be called worthier than one 
which can form a predicate only. A word like sun, 
for instance, is a worthier word (so to say) than a 
word like bright. 

I shall often have to speak of these words, but, 
at present, we have no names for the classes to 
which they belong. To speak of words-which-can- 
form-both-subjects-and-predicates, and words-which- 
can-form-predicates-only, is somewhat inconvenient. 
We want a shorter term. But this we shall not 
get, until we reach the third part of our treatise, 
and it is not expedient to anticipate. What are 
we to call them ? I shall take a word from each 
class, as a sample of the whole group ; say smi 
and bright. Then for those that can form both 
copulas and predicates, I shall make shine stand 
as a specimen. Hence, the phraseology for the 
present section will be — 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 51 

1. Words like sun — ^words that can be either 
subjects or predicates. 

2. Words like bright — ^words that can be predi- 
cates only : and 

3. Words like shirpe^-^^words that can be copulas 
and predicates. 

With this preliminary, we may investigate the 
natm'e of many-worded terms. 

Before we have jfinished doing this, other classes 
of words will have to be treated in a similar 
manner. First — 

- The words by which we expressed the extent of 
propositions require notice; — all, some, nx). These, 
for the present, may be looked upon as parts of the 
word which they precede, rather than as separate 
words i-j-all-swa/ns, some-swaTis, nx>-swa/as. The 
fuller explanation of this will appear in the sequel. 

The same applies to the little words an, a, and 
the ; and it applies to them even more strongly and 
decidedly than it did to all, som^, and none ; in- 
asmuch as they have no separate independent exist- 
ence at all. We cannot use them by themselves. 
On the contrary, wherever they appear, they appear 
as the part of some other term, and that insepa- 
rably; — Orman, cm-egg, the^ma/n, &c. 

Examples. 

A heaijy body, or orheavy-body, is a many- 
worded term. 

So is a court of justice, or Orcourt-of-justice. 

So is John-Nokes-the-m/xyor-of-the-town, {Ex- 
a/mples from Mill^) 

So iBa-m^an-in-a-black-coat-ridvng-aloTig-the- 
road-on-Orbay-horse, 

D 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



52 PROPOSITIONS. 

We " might/' writes De Morgan, " coin a single 
word to express " this. 

Let us keep, however, as much as possible to the 
words which we have chosen as samples of these 
several classes, viz. : aun^ bright, and akme. 

1. The-bright-sun is shining — 

2. The-sun-of-summer is shining — 

3. The-bright-sun-of-summer is shining — 

4. The-bright-sun-of-summer is shining-cheer- 
folly— 

5. The-sun-of-summer shines-cheerfally — 

6. The-sun-of-smnmer shines-cheerfuUy-with-its- 
beams-through-the-air-of-the-morning-in-this-lovely- 
month-of-June. 

All these are instances of many-worded-terms. 

They give us two new words — samples of classes, 
viz. : a — of — and cJteerfuUy, Let us add these 
to our previous list, which now runs thus; sun 
— bright — shine — cheerfully — of — a, 

SvmiTYier, beams, air, and morning, belong to 
the same class as sv/n. 

With and through belong to the same class as of 

What is the principle upon which these several 
words (and the words like them) combine, so as to 
form many-worded-terms ? 

First rule, — ^This is the rule for words like 
bright They combine with words like su/n ; and 
that without the interposition of any intermediate 
link ; — the bright sun. They can, however, form 
terms by themselves ; i. e. they can form predicates. 
Hence they suggest no new class, having been 
already considered. This is not the case with the 
words that come next. They give us new classes 
of words. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 53 

Second rule, — This is for words like cheerfully, 
which can only form parts of terina. They com- 
bine only with words like bright We cannot say 
the cheerfully sun shines. We com say the cheer- 
fully bright sun shvnes. 

We can also say, the bright sun shines cheer- 
fully, or the cheerful swn shines brightly; for 
cheerfully is in the same class with brightly, and 
cheerful is in the same class with bright. 

But is not this an exception to the rule ? Is 
not shi/nes in a different class from bright ? It is, 
and it is not. Shines^ is shining, and shining 
and bright are in the same class. Bright is a word 
that forms a predicate. So is shining. But shines 
is a predicate and copula as well. Hence, when 
we say the sun shines brightly, we attach the word 
brightly to the predicative, and not to the copular 
part of shi/ne. 

1. The sun shines = the sun is shining, 

2. The sun shines brightly = the sun is shining 

brightly ; 

or, 

3. The sun is brightly-shining, 

not 

4. The sun is-brightly shining. 
We caumot say — 

The sun is brightly ; 
we ccm say — 

The sun is shining. 
Third rule, — ^This applies to words like of, with, 
through, &c., words which, like the last, can only 
form pa/rts of terms. They combine with words 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 PROPOSITIONS. 

like avM, summer, becum, and air, and with no 
others. We cannot say — 

This is the sun of bright. 

We can say — 

This is the sun of summer. 

More than this ; they cannot enter into the struc- 
ture of a term, unless there be not only (me word 
like 8un, with which alone they can be combined, 
but two such. Strike out from the example last 
given either of the two words sun or summer, 
and you must strike out of also. 

Now it is clear that, in the different places in 
the structure of many-worded terms which these 
several words fill, we have the basis of a division 
of them into classes. 

One of these contains words like a, an, and the, 
which blend themselves, almost inseparably, with 
words like sun, summer, beam, &c. 

An anatomist may compare these combinations 
to the bones and ligaments of the human body, 
with which his professional studies have made him 
familiar. If so, he sees in such combinations as 
Orm^n, and the-sun, two parts joined, or jointed 
together — articulate, as he calls them in the lan- 
guage of his science; articulate, from the Latin 
word articulus =. joint, knucUe, What if we see, 
in some ftiture page of this work, this word ar- 
ticulus again, and that with a meaning very unlike 
its anatomical one ? It will not be the only in- ¦ 
stance of the kind. Dactylus is the Greek for a 
finger. It is also the Greek for a combination of 
syllables of different quantities or lengths. A 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSITIONS. 55 

finger has one longer and two shorter joints ; a 
dactyle has one longer and two shorter syllables. 

A second of these suggested classes contains 
cheerfully, and a vast number of words like it ; 
words which may be said to qualify the meaning 
of terms like bright or shining. And this is what 
they do. They do it, however, in various ways. 

Sometimes they give us the mcmner in which 
the predicate applies to the subject. 

Now this is only another way of saying that they 
give us the manner in which a cei*tain thing is 
done, or a certain state occurs. To say the aiin is 
shining cheerfully, is to connect the predicate 
shining, qualified by the word cheerfully, with the 
subject sun ; but it is also to make the statement 
that the object called sv/n does a certain act (i. e. the 
act of shining), in a certain manner, i. e. cheer- 
fully. He might have done it differently, i. e. the 
sv/n might have shone dully, or faintly. In like 
manner to say / am rather tired, is to say that / 
(the person who speaks) am (or is) in a certain 
state, i. e. the state expressed by the word tired. 
But 1 might be very tired ; in which case the 
predicate (tired) would have been qualified by a 
different word from rather, but still by a word of 
the same dass. 

Now the words of this class are numerous, and 
they fall into divisions and sub-divisions. And 
this is no more than what we expect from the 
word manner, which is a word of wide significa- 
tion. There are many manners in which a thing 
may be 'done. It may be done slowly, quickly, 
well, ill, &c., &c. 

Again, in respect to states of being, there are 



Digitized by 



Google 



56 PROPOSITIONS. 

many degrees in which they may occur ; for in- 
stance, men may be just-Orlittle, or alight-ly, or 
rather, or very, or eocceeding-ly tired. 

Then there are the words denoting tvme and place; 
for it is clear that an action done in one place, or 
at one time, differs from an action done elsewhere, 
and at another. We may, perhaps, say that it 
differs in the mxinner of its doing ; for though the 
two actions, when taken by themselves, may be 
alike, the circumstances under which they occur 
constitute a difference of no small importance. 
This gives us words like here and there, and also 
words like now and thefn. 

Other examples may be given, but they wiU 
probably suggest themselves spontaneously. They 
are by no means either few or rare. They have 
what may be called their fuTiction, which is to 
qualify or modify the meaning of words like 
bright, tired, shvrwng, &c. And now — 

Observe the word modify. It is derived from 
modus, a mode or mammer. From modus the 
Latin language derived the word modalAs, from 
which grammarians and logicians get the term 
Tnodal =z in mode or mcmner of a thing. 

All the words belonging to the present class are 
more or less modal in their ftmction. 

1. Words like of, with, through, &c., still stand 
over for notice. The dass that they form, though 
important, is small. It consists chiefly of the fol- 
lowing words— fty, from, i/n, out, near, through, 
with, up, down, along with a few others. 

This is all that will be said about it at present. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 67 

28. 

Many-worded copulas, — Negative element 
compound. 

§ So much in respect to the complexity of 
terms. We may add that, even the sign of the 
negative copula is rarely, if ever, simple. The 
word nx)t = 71+ whit, n + aught, n -f ot, its sense 
being not-a-whit, Twt-oMt, not-at-aU. The French 
language illustrates this still more clearly — ^where 
the second element (pas or point) is separated 
from the negative proper by the verb. Je ne Vai 
vu pojS = I have not him seen at all, being, as in 
English, only more evidently, a negative, and some- 
thing else. 

This second element of the negative is m/>daL 
It gives not only the negative itself but its Toan- 
ner or degree as well. 

29. 

Propositions isolate or connected — ^Therefore. 

§ In sentences like bread is dear, &c., we have 
the connection between two terms. 

Can two propositions be connected ? The pro- 
per logicians are those who have most to do with 
this branch of inquiry ; and it is in the language 
of the proper logicians that the illustration of it 
may best begin. The proper logicians have so 
much to do with the connection of propositions 
that their whole science turns upon it : indeed, if a 
proposition stand alone, they have nothing to* do 

D 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



58 PKOPOSITIONS. 

with it. One of the most important words in all 
logic is a word which makes no part of a term, no 
part of a copula, no part of a proposition at all. It 
is extra-terminal, so to say— extra-copular— extra- 
propositional. It comes between two propositions, 
but belongs to neither. It is part of the masonry 
of logic, but it is neither brick nor scaffolding. It 
is the cement or mortar. The word in question is 
therefore. There are other words like it ; but if 
we understand the import of the word therefore^ 
we shall understand the basis and foundation of 
the science of formal logic. 

1. Frame a universal proposition, and let it be 
aflSrmative. — All swans are white, 

2. Fix your attention on its subject — swans, 

3. Frame a second proposition, which shall also 
be affirmative, but not universal. Let it be par- 
ticular. 

4. Let the predicate of this second proposition 
be the same as the subject of the first. — 

Some-^f'the-birds-iTv-St-Jarries's-Park are 
swans. 

5. Out of these two propositions make a third. 
There is no difficulty in doing it. It will be as 
follows — 

Some-of'the-hirds-in'St.'-Jarries'S'Parh are 
white, 

6. Consider the nature of the connection be- 
tween this third proposition and the two which 
preceded, and select the proper word for expressing 
it. This will be therefore. 

1 . All swans are white. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PKOPOSITIONS. 59 

2. Some-of-the-birds-in-St.-JamesVPark are 
swans. 

Therefore 

4. Some-of-the-birds-in-St.-James's-Park are 
white. 

Instead of the second of the three propositions 
being universal, let it be particular. The result 
will be the same. There will be a place for a 
word between the second and third, and the word 
that fills that place will be therefore, 

1 . All swans are black.] 

2 . Some-of-thcrbirds-in-the-pond-in - St. - James's- 
Park are swans. 

Therefore 

3. Some-of-the-birds-in-the-pond-in-St. - James's- 
Park are black. 

We may substitute for swcms, birds, &c., and 
white (or black), any words whatever which can 
take their place as terms of a proposition, and the 
result will be the same. The statement conveyed 
in the third proposition will necessarily follow, 
and be deduced from the statements of the first 
and second, and this necessary relation will be ex- 
pressed by the word therefore, the first example 
of a peculiar class of words, viz. words that enter 
into language without entering into propositions. 

They- enter into language without entering into 
propositions. Nevertheless, they are anything but 
independent of them. On the contrary, they have, 
in one sense, more to do with them tljan even 
words like mom, bright, and shiTie, Words like 
man, bright, and shine, can exist where there is 
only a single proposition into which they may enter. 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 PROPOSITIONS. 

Words like therefore enter into no proposition at 
all ; yet they require two before they can exist. 
This is because they must have something that 
they can come between. The copula is somewhat 
in the same way. It requires two terms before 
it can exist ; two terms between which it can find 
its place. The words, too, like of and withy origi- 
nated under like conditions. They come between 
two other words. 

' 30. 

Propositions isolate or connected — Because. 

§ Transpose the order of the three propositions 
last given, beginning with the last and ending with 
the first; and instead of writing therefore after the 
second, write because after the first 

Some-of-the-birds-in-the-pond-in-St.-James's- 
Park are white, 

because 
Some-of-the-birds-in-the-pond-in-St.-JamesV 

Park are swatis, (and) 
All swans are white. 

This is a second instance of a word coming be- 
tween two propositions, but belonging to neither. 

31. 

Propositions isolate or connected — If — ^And, 

§ Instead of stating directly and unconditionally 
that all swans are white, or that certain birds-in^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 61 

the-pond, &c., are awcms, qualify one or both of 
the propositions by the word if. Thus — 

If 

All swans are white, (and) 
Some-of-the-birds, &c., are swans, 
Some-of-the-birds, &c., are white. 
Or,— 

All swans are white, (and) 

Some-of-the-birds, &c., are swans, 
Some-of-the-birds, &c., are white. 

These are additional instances of a word stand- 
ing between two propositions, but belonging to 
neither of them. 



32. 

Propositions isolate or connected — ^As (or since), 

FOR, THEN. 

§ As (or since), for, and then, are in the same 
dass with therefore, because, and if. Thus— 

Some-of-the-birds, &c., are white, 

because, 
They are swans ; 

for, as (smce) 
All swans are white, 
Some-of-the-birds, &c., must be white. 



Or,— 



If 
All swans are white, 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 PROPOSITIONS. 

thmi 
Some-of-the-birds, &c., are white, 

for {as or smce) ' 

They are 8wans. 

33. 

Propositions isolate or connected — But. 

§ The word but shall supply us with our last 
illustration, and it shall do so in a sentence arising 
out of the subject itself, and already made femiliar 
to us — 

" Therefore^ becaiLse, if, and, OjS, since, for, then, 
and hut, stand between two propositions, 
hut 
They belong to neither.'' 

(34.) 

Sketch of the structure of the ordinary syllogism — 
its mechanism, 

A combination of three propositions, the third 
of which is connected with the other two by means 
of the word therefore, is called a syllogism ; and 
with the structure of the syllogism the province of 
the logician begins — the province of the logician aa 
distinguished from that of the grammarian. The 
latter deals with single propositions, and with pro- 
positions in pairs ; the former with propositions in 
threes, or tp>ads, if we may borrow an expression 
from the Welsh antiquarians. 

If he strictly limit himself to his own subject, 
the grammarian will have nothing to say to syl- 
logisms. However, in. the present work we have 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 63 

said so much about terms that we will utilize our 
familiarity with them, carry our observations a 
little fiirther, and (although wide of our mark) 
direct our attention to a point of proper logic. 

Our first analysis of the syllogism will be that 
of a watchmaker, who, in explaining the mechanism 
of a watch, is satisfied, in the first instance, at least, 
with taking one to pieces, numbering the several 
parts of which it consists, and naming them. The 
principles of his art he reserves for a second di- 
vision of his subject. 

A syllogism, then, consists of three propositions, 
the third of which is connected with the other 
two by means of the word therefore. And 
this alone is sufficient to suggest the nature of 
the proposition thus connected, and, through it, of 
the syllogism altogether. It suggests that it is a 
form of reasonvng. Something has gone before, 
and therefore something else will come after it. 

Of the three propositions that constitute a syllo- 
gism, the third is called the coTwlusion, the other 
two the premises. 

So much for the number and names of the three 
propositions that constitute a syllogism. 

Next follows the question as to the number of 
its terms. How many of these are there? In 
one sense, there are six; in another, only three. 
There are six, because each proposition contains 
two, a subject and a predicate. There are six, 
because 3x2 = 6. There could not be fewer 

But it by no means follows that because there 
are six terms altogether in a proposition there 
should be six different ones. One, or more, of 
them may be repeated. The subject of one propo- 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 PROPOSITIONS. 

sition may be the predicate of another, as is the 
case with the following pair of sentences : — 

Mem is mortal, 
Socrates is a man ; 

and with innumerable others. 

Now the real number of the different terms of 
a proposition is three ; so that our formula is three 
a/ad three — three propositions and three terms, 
each term appearing twice — ^three propositions — 
three pairs of terms. 

So now we see why the number of terms in a 
syllogism is, in one sense, six, in another, three. 
There are six, if we look to the whole number of 
predicates and subjects ; three, if we look only to 
the different words that constitute them. 

All men are mortal! r^ 

c, X . \Premwe8, 

Socrates is a man, J 

therefore 

Socrates is a mortal. — Conchision, 

In this conclusion, Socrates is the subject, mortal 
the predicate. 

It is absolutely necessary to the structure of the 
syllogism that the terms of the conclusion must 
previously have appeared in the premises. How 
could it be otherwise, when each term has to be 
taken twice? 

But this is not all ; the two premises have to be 
distinguished from one another. If so, they require 
to be named. 

Now the names for the premises are obtained 
from the names of the terms of the conclusion, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 65 

predicate of the conclusion being called the major 
term, the 'subject of the conclusion the Tninor. 

Each of these not only (as has been already 
stated) appears in the premises generally, but in dif- 
ferent and specific parts of them ; i.e, one appears 
in their first, the other in their second proposition ; 
and this is only another way of saying that^ of the 
two premises in a syllogism, one must contain the 
subject, the other the predicate, of the conclusion. 
Unless this be the case, there is no syllogism at all. 

The premiss that contains the predicate of the 
conclusion, is called the major premiss; the predicate 
of the conclusion having been called the Tnajor 
term. 

The premiss that contains the subject of the 
conclusion is called the minor premiss ; the subject 
of the conclusion having been called the minor 
term. Hence—- 

A premiss often takes its name firom the name 
of the' term it includes ; and major terms make 
major premises, and vice versa. 

Major, — ^All men are mortal. 
Minor, — John is a man. 

Therefore, 
Conclusion, — John is mortal. 

(Barbara,)^ 

Here mortal, the predicate of the conclusion, is 
the subject of the m/ijor premiss as well. 

John, the subject of the conclusion, is also the 
subject of the minor, 

? The words in italics appended to the end of each syllogism 
need not be noticed at present ; they are explained in § 45. 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 PKOPOsmoNS. 

But what is the third term, mem, which has no 
place in the conclusion at all ? 

This will be considered after the order of our 
three propositions has been examined. 

In the examples jiist given, the major preceded 
the m^irior, and the minor the conclusion. Was 
this necessary ? No. The minor might have come 
first. 

John is a man. 
All men are mortal. 

Therefore, 
John is mortal. — {Barbara) 

More than this : substitute because for therefore, 
and the conclusion might have come first, i. e. we 
might have begun with the end. 

John is mortal, 
Because 
John is a man, (and) 
All men are mortal, 
or, 

John is mortal. 

Because 
All men are mortal, (and) 
John is a man. 

It is a matter of custom, however, to use there- 
fore instead of because, and, in accordance there- 
with,, to write the mxijor first, and the conclusion 
last, the mi/nor coming between. It is only, how- 
ever, a matter of custom. 

And now we may ask the name of the third 
term, mxji/n ; the term that has no place in tte con- 
clusion at all. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 67 

It is called the middle term ; and a very im- 
portant term it is. It is called middle, because 
it is neither the greater, like the m^jor, nor the 
smaller, like the minor. It appears in the minor 
premiss; and as the minor premiss is between the 
major and the conclusion, its place in the syllogism 
looks like a reason for the name middle. It is, 
however, only an apparent, the other being the true, 
one. Besides this, the middle term is not limited 
to the middle proposition ; but occurs in the first 
as well: — 

1. All m^n (middle term being the subject) are 
mortal; 

2. Socrates is a man (middle term beimg the pre- 
'dioat^) ; 

ITierefore, 

3. Socrates is mortal (no middle term at aU). 

A middle term in the conclusion, either as sub- 
ject or predicate, is a logical impossibility, as the 
very terms major and minor exclude it. A major 
is a major because it is one term of the conclusion ; 
And a minor is a minor because it is the other. 
Now there is no third term at all ; and hence a 
middle term in the conclusion of a proposition is a 
contradiction in terms. 

A middle term, then, takes its name fi*om the 
fact of its being intermediate to its greater and 
lesser fellows, or co-terms ; its major on one side, 
and its minor on the other. But what sort of an 
explanation is this ? Is it not an instance of the 
obscurum per obscurius ? What are majors that 
they should be made much of, and called great ? 
What are mimors that they should be made little 
of, and called small ? Whence the idea of size, 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 PROPOSITIONS. 

magnitude, or quantity ; these notions of little- 
ness, of much-ness, and of mean-ness ? By mea/ifi 
I mean middlCj as is meant in the expression 
golden mea/n=^aurea Tnediocritas. 

Any affirmative proposition whatever answers 
this question ; e, g. All swans are birds^ What 
is swan ? The name of a class consisting of an 
indefinite number of objects, to all of which the 
characteristics of the bird called swcm apply. 
SwaUy then, is the name of a class. And what is 
bird ? The name of a class also ; the name of a 
class which contains all the swans in the universe, 
and in addition to these, all the geese, eagles, pigeons, 
sparrows, &c., besides. Which of these two classes 
is the larger ? The dass of birds. Why ? Be- 
cause, though all swans are birds, all birds are not 
swans. Hence, the term bird is the term by which 
the greater dass is denoted. The same applies to All 
m&ri are mortal, though not quite so evidently, inas- 
much as mortal is not so evidently the name of a 
dass as lii'd. Yet what does it mean ? All beings 
endowed with the attribute of mortality. Call 
them mortals, and you have a class of them. Now 
as this dass comprises not only man, but all other 
living beings, it is the name of the greater qlass, 
i, e. it is a greater, or major, term. 

^ov negative propositions, this explanation of the 
words major and minor is wanting. 

No bird is a quadruped, 

All swans are birds. 

No swan is a quadruped ; 

(Oelarent) 

Or, 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 69 

No animal is immortal, 

All men are animals, 

No man is immortal. 
It is probable, however, that the phraseology of the 
aflSrmatives has been extended to them. 

PreTniss is derived from the Latin word prcB' 
Tnisaus = sent before, wherein prce = before, and 
missus = sent Its application to the major and 
minor premises of a syllogism is clear and appro- 
priate. These are the fore-runners, heralds, or 
vaunt-couriers of the conclusion. But what are we 
to say to some of its secondary applications, as 
they appear in the language of common life, amongst 
surveyors, beershop-keepers, and legislators, who talk 
of the premises of a house, and of beer that may 
or may not be drunk upon such premises. Strange 
divergence of a meaning ! A word that originally 
meant sent before now means something upon 
which a man either consumes malt liquor or founds 
the conclusion of a syllogism. Strange, but not 
stranger than many hundred others. 

More important than such a question as this is 
the fact that the words conclusion and premiss are 
essentially relational terms, as much so as husband 
and wife, parent and child, sovereign and subject, 
&c. Where there is no conclusion, there is no pre- 
miss ; and there is no premiss where a conclusion is 
wanting. The one leads to, the other foUows from, 
the other. A premiss without a conclusion is a 
road leading to nowhere ; and that is no road at 
all. A conclusion without a premiss is an effect 
without a cause, i. e, no effect whatever. 

Such is the fact, though common language dis- 
guises it. Common language often leads us to say 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 PROPOSITIONS. 

that such and such conclusions are false. So they 
may be as matters of fact, or as propositions ; but 
not as matters of logic, or as conclusions. They 
may be false as matters of fact, because the pre- 
mises from which they are deduced are false ; and 
this is the case with such a statement as, No swan 
is blackj supposing it to be deduced from — 

No bird with web-feet is black. 
Swans have web-feet, 
Swans are not black. 

(Celarent) 

It is false because the premises are false. As a de- 
duction from the premises, it is true ; and would 
have been true as a matter of zoology if they 
had been so. But they were not. On the other 
hand — 

Some web-footed birds are black, 

Swans are web-footed, 

Some swans are black, 

gives us a true piece of ornithology, but a bad piece 
of logic. In other words, the proposition, as a 
proposition, is true, as a conclusion false. 

A conclusion is a conclusion because it follows 
from its premises ; and premises are premises be- 
cause they lead to their conclusion : the terms being 
relative. A false conclusion is, in reality, a loose 
and inaccurate name for no-conclusion. Premises, 
on the other hand, may be false as single proposi- 
tions, though true as parts of a syllogism ; false as 
matters of fact, but true as leading to the inference 
which follows them. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEOPOsinoNS. 71 

(35.) 

Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Corribinar 
tion of Propositions, — Mood, 

§ We shall now find it convenient to depart 
pretty widely from the language of the first sections 
of this treatise, and to adapt our phraseology to 
our new department, which has ceased for a 
while to be that of the grammarian rather than the 
logician, and begins to be that of the logician rather 
than the grammarian. We shall find it, I say, 
convenient to change our phraseology. But, never- 
theless, the things we talk about will be the 
same as before. We have, stUl, under notice, 
subjects and predicates, terms, copulas which con- 
nect them, and statements, assertions, declarations 
or propositions. Terms and propositions — propo- 
sitions and terms — ^it is stUl the old song ; though 
to a somewhat altered tune. It is still the same 
series of pictures ; though we examine them from 
.another point of view. 

It is now convenient to talk less of propositions 
simiply as such than of propositions in their cha- 
racter of premiss or conclusion. It is convenient, 
in short, to talk of conclusions and premises, the 
premises being either majors or minoi's. 

In like manner, it is also convenient to talk less 
of terms simply as such than of terms in their 
characters of major, minor, and middle. At any 
rate, we must fix our attention steadily on these 
five words — conclusion, premiss, middle term, major, 
and minor. We must remember, too, that major 
and minor are the names of certain propositions as 
well as the names of certain terms. 



Digitized by 



Google 



72 PROPOSITIONS. 

The first analysis of the syllogism is into its 
conclusion and premises, the premises being either 
major or minor ; each of the three being a proposi- 
tion of some kind or other, the conclusion being a 
proposition, the major premiss being a proposition, 
the minor premiss being a proposition — ^three propo- 
sitions in all. But propositions are of four kinds : — 

1. Universal Affirmative. 

2. Universal Negative. 

3. Particular Affirmative. 

4. Particular Negative ; 

as has been shown in § 26 ; and any one of these 
four kinds may constitute any one of the parts of 
a syllogism. Thus — 

a. The major premiss may be one of four things ; 
viz. universal affirmative, universal negative, parti- 
cular affirmative, or particular negative. It may 
be any one of these ; and cannot be anything else. 

6. The minor premiss may be one of four things ; 
viz. universal affirmative, &c. 

c. The conclusion may be one of four things, 
&c. 

To proceed — the conclusion may be the same as 
one of the premises, e,g. Say that it is the same as 
the minor, and that they are both universal affirma- 
tives. We, then, have one universal affirmative fol- 
lowed by another 

Again — the minor may be the same as the major. 
Say, that both are universal affirmatives, and (the 
conclusion being the same as the minor), we have, 
then, three universal affirmatives running. This is 
neither more or less than saying that all the three 
propositions of a syllogism are of the same sort, 
i.e. universal and affirmative, affirmative and uni- 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. TS 

versa!. In such a case, the order of the proposi- 
tion would be : — 

Major — Universal Afltanative, 

Minor — Universal Affirmative, 

Conclusion — Universal Affirmative. 

There are plenty of syllogisms of this kind, 
e.g,:— 

All men are mortal ; 
All heroes are men ; 
Therefore, 
All heroes are mortal. — (Barbara,) 

Contrast with this — 

No men are immortal ; 
All heroes are men ; 
Therefore^ 
No heroes are immortal. — (Gelarent) 

What is the order here ? The following : — 

Major — Universal Negative, 
Minor — Universal Affirmative, 
Conclusion — Universal Negative. 

Again, as a third combination, consisting of a 
Universal Affirmative, followed by two Particular 
ones, take — 

All men are mortal ; 
Some heroes are men ; 

Therefore, 
Some heroes are mortal. — (JDarii,) 

Here the order (which we may as well express 
somewhat more compendiously than has hitherto 
been done) is U. A. — P. A. — P. A.; the words 

E 



Digitized by 



Google 



74? PROPOSITIONS. 

major, minor, and conclusion being omitted, and 
the initials standing for the whole word, viz. : — 
U. A. for Universal Affirmative, 
P. A. for Particular AflSrmative. 

To these add — 

U. N. for Universal Negative, 
P. N. for Particular Negative. 

Hence, a fourth combination, — 
No bad-man is happy ; 
Some heroes are bad-men ; 

Therefore, 
Some heroes are not happy, 

{Ferio.) 
may be read off thus— TT. N.— P. A.— P. N. ; 
or — 

Major — ^U. N. (or) Un. Ng. 
Minor — P. A. (or) Pa. Aff. 
Goncludon — P. N. (or) Pa. Ng. 

There is some advantage, as will appear in the 
sequel, in writing the order in which the proposi- 
tions of a syllogism follow each other vertically, or 
from top to bottom, rather than horizontally, or 
from side to side. 

The order in which the propositions of a syllo- 
gism follow each other is called the mood of the 
syllogism. 

Enough has now been said respecting the dif- 
ferent combinations of the different sorts of pro- 
positions that constitute the conclusions and pre- 
mises of syllogisms. The subject is, by no means, 
exhausted ; indeed it is only touched. All that is 
suggested by the present section is, that the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 75 

sequence, order, or combination of the constituent 
propositions of a syllogism is a matter upon which 
we must steadily fix our attention. 

(36.) 

Structure of the Ordmary Syllogism. — Combina' 
iiona of Terms. — Figure. 

The combinations effected through the difference 
between AflSrmatives and Negatives, Universals and 
Particulars, as propositions in the structure of pre- 
mises and conclusions, is one thing ; and this we 
have just noticed. 

The combinations effected through the difference 
between Majors, Minors, and Middles, as terms in 
the structv/re of propositions, is another ; and this 
we are now about to notice. 

They are both questions of order or sequence. 

The following syllogisms are the syllogisms of 
the previous section. Over each of their subjects 
and predicates the word major, minor, or middle, 
according to the nature of the term to which it 
applies, is written : — 

1. 



Middle. 




Major. 


All men 


are 


moi-tal. 


Minor. 




Middle. 


All heroes 


are 


men. 


Mvnor. 




Major. 


All heroes 


are 


mortal. 




2. 


(Barbara.) 


Middle. 


Major. 


No men 


are 


immortal. 

E 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 



PROPOSITIONS, 



Minor. 
All heroes 
Mi/nor, 
No heroes 



Middle. 
All men 
Mi/nor. 
Some heroes 
Minor. 
Some heroes 



are 



are 



are 



are 



are 



Middle. 
men. 
Major. 
immortal. 

(Celarent.) 

Major. 

mortal. 

Middle. 

men. 

Major. 

mortal. 

(DaHi.) 



Middle. Major. 

No bad-man is happy. 

Minor. Middle. 

Some heroes are bad-men. 

Minor. Major. 

Some heroes are not happy. 

(Ferio.) 

Here the sequence, or order, is — middle, major ; 
minor, middle; minor, major. Or, — 

1. Middle, major. 

2. Minor, middle. 

3. Minor, major. 

And it is the same throughout — the same 
throughout, notwithstanding the difference of 
order, sequence, or combination in the propositions. 

What do we infer from this ? Do we infer that 
the order of the terms of a syllogism is constant 
and invariable, whilst the order of the propositions is 
variable and inconstant ? That the affirmatives and 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 77 

negatives, the particulars and tiniversals, may be 
chopped and changed, whilst the majors, minors, 
and middles, have fixed positions ? No such thing. 
So, at least, says the following example, the form of 
which is — 

Major, middle, 
Minor, middle. 
Minor, major, 
or — 

Major, Middle. 

No bird is an-animal-that-brings-forth- 

its-young-alive. 
Minor. Middle. 

Every bat is an-animal-that-brings-forth- 

its-young-alive. 
Therefore, 
Minor. Major. 

No bat is a bird. — (Cesa/re.) 
There are more ways than one, then, in which 
the majors, minors, and middles of the terms of the 
premises and conclusions of syllogisms may be 
arranged, ordered, or combined; and as the object of 
the present notice is to indicate, rather than exhaust, 
this difference, this is as much as need be said at pre- 
sent, except that the order in which the terms of a 
syllogism follow each other is called the syllogism's 
figure. 

(37.) 
Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism. — Combina- 
tions of Propositions and of Terms considered 
together. — Mood and Figure. 

§ The combinations effected through the difference 
between affirmatives and negatives, universals and 



Digitized by 



Google 



78 



PROPOSITIONS. 



particulars, are one thing (i. e. matters of mood). The 
combinations effected through the difference between 
];Qajors, minors, and middles, are another (i. e. matters 
of figure). 

We have hitherto kept them separate. 

Let us now treat the, two together ; briefly, and 
as an illustration rather than a {uU exposition of 
the subject. 

In doing this, it will suffice to select two pairs 
out of the foregoing syllogism, and to contrast them 
with one another. 

FIRST PAIR. 

1. 

A. All men are mortal, 
A. All heroes are men, 
A. All heroes are mortal. — (Barbara.) 

2. 
E. No man is immortal, 
A. All heroes are men, 
E. No hero is immortal. — {Celarent) 

These, considered as combinations of propositions 
and terms, run thus : — 

1. 

AS PROPOSITIONS. AS TERMS. 

A, or, Universal affirmative. Middle, major. 
A, or, Universal affirmative. Minor, middle. 
A, or. Universal affirmative. Minor, major. 

2. 

AS PROPOSITIONS. AS TERMS. 

E, or, Universal negative. Middle, major. 

A, or. Universal affirmative. Minor, middle. 

E, or. Universal negative. Minor, major. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS, 79 

Here the order of the terms is the same, the 
order of the propositions being different ; a fact 
which the next pair of examples will reverse. 

SECOND PAIE. 

1, 

E. No man is immortal, 

A. All heroes are men, 

E. No hero is immortal — {Celarent.) 

2. 

E. No bird is an-animal-that-brings-forth-its- 
yomig-alive, 

A. Every bat is an-animal-that-brings-forth-its- 
young-alive, 

E. No bat is a bird. (Cesare.) 

Or,— 

1. 

AS TERMS. AS PROPOSIHONS. 

Middle, major. E, or^ Universal negative. 
Minor, middle. A, or, Universal aflSrmative. 
Minor, Major. E, or. Universal negative. 

2. 

AS TERMS. AS PROPOSIHONS. 

Major, middle. E, or, Universal negative. 

Minor, middle. A, or, Universal affirmative. 

Minor, major. E, or, Universal negative. 

Here, the combination of the terms differs, the 
combination of the propositions being the same. 
Syllogisms, then, may be of the same Tnood, but of 
different figures, and of the same figure, but of dif- 
ferent moods. 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 PROPOSITIONS. 



(38.) 

Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism, — White. — 
Socrates. — Some. 

This is a convenient place for noticing three 
points of logical language, which, if neglected, may 
strike the reader at some future time as having been 
insufficiently explained. 

I. White, and words like white.— These are 
the words that can, by themselves, constitute predi- 
cates, but which cannot, by themselves, constitute 
subjects, as — 

All swans are white. 

The grammarian has good reasons for denying 
that words of this kind are names. He allows 
whiteness to be a name. White-thing, also, he 
allows to be a name ; but not the simple word 
white. He allows, however, that it is a word 
which suggests and implies a name, and that by 
adding to it the word thing, object, entity, bevng, 
or some equivalent word capable of forming a sub- 
ject, it may be converted into a name. Finally, 
he admits that this conversion is easy, and, in logic, 
always legitimate. 

Now, this reduction of words capable of form- 
ing predicates only into words capable of forming 
predicates and subjects as well, which the gramma- 
rian allows to the logician, the logician finds abso- 
lutely necessary. 

All swans are white. 

But, 
All white are not swans. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS, 81 

We must fill up the blank here, by bird, animaly 
thing, object, erUity, &c., as the case may be. 
Hence, — 

1. White-thing is an actual name, a name in 
esse; whilst — 

2. White, a word implying a name, is a name 
in posse. 

Between these two, the grammarian draws a 
difference. The logician treats them both alike / 
both as actual names. White, in logic, is a name ; 
and, in logic, a term must be a Tvarae. 

In grammar, a term must be either a Tiame or a 
word that iTaplies a Tiame. 

This will be noticed more fully in the sequel. 

II. Socrates, and words like Socrates. — These 
(John, Peter, Julius Caesar, &c.) are names for single 
individuals. As such they wear the appearance of 
being particular rather than universal terms. 

If, for instance, 

Some men are mortal, 

be a particular proposition, surely — 

Socrates is mortal, 

is particular as weU ; inasmuch as Socrates is 
only one man. He is only ons out of some; a 
part of a part ; a fraction of a fraction ; an indivi- 
dual out of a collection ; the collection itself being 
but part of another, and a larger, one. 

Nevertheless, Socrates, and terms like Socrates, 
are not particular, but universal ; the fact being 
that when we say that Socrates {John, Peter, Julius 
GcBsar, &c.) is mortal (man, philosopher, &c.), we 
mean not so much the particular individual as a 
class of individuals whom Socrates {John, &;c.) re- 

E 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 PROPOSITIONS. 

presents. But classes may be either great or small. 
They may consist of a million million millic«i of 
individuals or of only one. 

Now the class that is represented by names like 
Socrates, John, &c., is a class consisting of a single 
member. As a class, however, it is imbroken in 
such propositions as 

Socrates is mortal, 

which give it in full, and not in parts. 

III. Some. — In common conversation, the speaker 
who says that some swans are white, implies that 
there are others which are nx)t white. And, in like 
manner,* the statement that some swcms are not 
white, implies that some are. In other words, the 
affirmation of a part implies the denial of the re- 
mainder, and, vice versa, the denial of part implies 
the affirmation of the remainder. But in logic, 
this is not the case. In logic, every proposition 
means exactly what it states, and implies nothing 
beyond it. In logic, a man may say that some 
swans are white, and, by no means, suggest the 
notion that they are not aZl so. This may, or 
may not be the case. If aZl swans are white, it is 
self-evident that some of them are. If some 
swans are white, all swans Tnay be so. 

Soms, then, in logic, may mean the same as all 
or every ; a meaning which, in common speech, it 
has not. 

Some, in logic, means more than none — i. e. Tnore 
than none, and possibly all. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSITIONS. 83 

(39.) 

Structure of the Ordinary Syllogism, — Quantity 
or Extent of the Predicate. 

The care that is taken by the logicians, that 
the word some should not, by implying (as it does 
in common conversation) something more than it 
actually expresses, mean too much, has just been 
noticed. Through it, we attain (no doubt) a certain 
amount of caution and accuracy of thought. To 
say neither more nor less than we mean, and to 
mean neither less nor more than we say, is 
only what is right and proper. Be it so. The 
accuracy, however, in question is limited to one of 
the members of the proposition. It is only in the 
Subject that it shows itself; the Predicate being, by 
no means, well furnished with signs of its quantity 
or extent. 

Mark the blank in the following syllogism : — 

All men will die, 

All men are rational beings, 

Therefore, 
— ^ rational beings will die. 

Mark the blank ; and ask what is required to 
fill it up. It must be one of three words — no, all, 
or sorrhe. That it cannot he tvo is evident. On the 
contrary, it must be either all or soTYie, Which of 
these two words is the right one remains to be in- 
vestigated, and this investigation must be limited 
to the syllogism itself. We are not allowed to 
argue, from the rationality of immortal spirits, that 
only 807ne of the beings endowed with reason will 



Digitized. by 



Google 



84 PBOPOSITIONS. 

die, and as little are we free to limit the domain 
of rational beings to the earth upon which we 
dwell, and, on the strength of aU the ratioiial beings 
of the world of man being liable to death, to 
assume that all will die. We are precluded from 
all reasoning of this kind ; precluded from it be- 
cause our field of inquiry is limited to the syllogism 
itself. 

In examining this, the first step is to remark 
that the term rational beings in the subject of the 
conclusion is neither more nor less than the rational 
beings which stood as predicate in the minor premiss. 
What is it then ? Universal or particular ? Is it 
all men are (all) rational beiifigs, or oil men are 
(some) rational bemgs; by which is meant, Do men 
constitute the whole of the class of rational beings, 
or do they constitute only a part of it? The 
answer to this must be got at as we best can. It is 
transparently evident that it is not given^in the 
wording of the proposition. The subject {men) was 
preceded by all ; but what precedes the predicate 
{rational being) ? Nothing. As far as words go, 
the whole of the class may as easily be meant as a 
part of it, and vice versa. Now — 

A subject that has previously been a predicate 
retains its predicative qvxintity. 

But this, as long as it was the quantity of a 
predicate, was a matter of inference only. No sign 
expressed it. Hence — 

Wherever there is a subject in a later, which 
has stood as the predicate in a former, proposition, 
the sign of its qvxintity has to be inferred. 

The rules for doing this are simple ; and we 
arrive at them from the quality of the proposition 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 85 

in which the terms occur — ^from its quality, not its 
qv/x/atity, from its character as affirmative or nega- 
tive, rather than from its character as universal or 
particular. 

The quantity helps us but little — 

AU swans are white. 

Admit this to be true, and it will by no means 
follow that — 

AU white-things are swans, 

however much some white-things may be so. 
This gives us the rule, that — 

1. Universal affirmatives have particular predi- 
cates. On the other hand — 

2. With imiversal negatives, the predicates are 
universal. To say that— 

No horse is a bird, 

is to say that — 

No bird is a horse. 

3. The predicates of particulars are of the same 
extent as their subjects. Hence, as the general 
rule, — 

4. Affirmative propositions have particular, ne- 
gative, either universal or particular, predicates. 

(40.) 

Operations on the Ordi/nary Syllogism — Strength* 
ening amd Weakening. 

§ Strengthen and weaken are words of a definite 
and technical meaning in Logic. 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 PEOPOSITIONS. 

If ALL Toen are mortal, it stands to reason that 
SOME rnen must be so. The two propositions, 
however, differ. Some men may be mortal without 
aU being so. 

The two propositions differ, the one being parti- 
cvZar, the other universal. 

To change a proposition from universal to parti- 
cular is to weaken, to change one from particular to 
universal is to strengthen, it. 

Now, a universal conclusion from particular propo- 
sitions is a conclusion too strong for its premises ; 
or rather, it is a conclusion for which the premises 
are too weak ; or rather, it is no conclusion at all. 



(41.) 

Operations on the Ordinary Syllogism — Conversion 
and Reduction. 

§ To change the order of the terms of a propo- 
sition is to change the predicate into the subject, 
and vice versa. This is called conversion. 

Simple conversion occurs where we transpose 
both the term itself and the sign of its quantity, 
i. e. we change their places without making any 
further alteration ; or, as the sign of its quantity 
is a part and parcel of the term itself we have an 
instance of simple conversion where we transpose 
the terms altogether. This we do with such pro- 
positions as — 

No horse is a bird, 

which is the same as 

No bird is a horse ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 87 

and with 

Some quadrupeds are horses, 
which is the same as 

Some horses are quadrupeds. 
With 

All horses are quadrupeds, 
the case is different. Here the conversion into 

All quadrupeds are horses, 
is incorrect. 

Change, however, all into some^ and the conver- 
sion is legitimate. For — 

All horses are quadrupeds, 

avd 
Some quadrupeds are horses. 

This, however, is something more than simple con- 
version. It is conversion accompanied with weak- 
ening. 

It is obvious that by conversion we may change 
the mood and figure of the proposition converted. 
This is called reduction. 

(42.) 

Structure of the Syllogism, illustrated by treati/ng 
its Terms as the Names of Classes, — Is (or =) 
equivalent to included in. 

§ The notion that the terms of propositions 
partake of the nature of the names of classes has 
already been suggested. It may now be added 
that^ upon this view, certain aids to the under- 
standing have been framed; aids to the under- 
standing, because they address themselves to the 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 PROPOSITIONS. 

senses. Form a small triangle, a larger circle, and 
a square larger still ; a square large enough to con- 
tain the circle, a circle large enough to contain the 
triangle, and a triangle small enough to go into 
the square. 

A O D 
It is clear that 

If 

All the A be included in O 

and 
All the O be included in d 

therefore 
All the A must be included in d 

And this may be stated more compendiously by 
writing =, or > for included in^ and .'. for 
therefore. Thus — 

A = O A > O 

O = D or o > a 

.*. A = D .'. A > D 

Again: instead of all a being included in O, 
and all O in D , parts only of the classes thus 
symbolised may be included — ^facts for which it is 
by no means difficult to find material or diagram- 
matic illustrations. Thus — 



® 


means all A 


is 


included in O 


AO 


„ no part of A 




o 


o 


„ some part of A 




o 


o 


„ aU O 




a 


O D 


„ no part of O 




a 



&c., &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS, 89 

EXTRA-GT. 

" Let US take the simple assertion, ' Every living man 
respires,' or * every living man is one of the things (how- 
ever varied they may he) which respire.' If we were to 
enclose all living men in a large triangle, and all respiring 
ohjects in a large circle, the preceding assertion, if true, 
would require that the whole of the triangle should be 
contained in the circle. And in the same way we may 
reduce any assertion to the expression of a coincidence, 
total or partial, between two figures. Thus, a point in a 
circle may represent an individual of one species, and a 
point in a triangle an individual of another species ; and 
we express the whole of one species as asserted to be con- 
tained or not contained in the other, by such forms as, 
* All the A is in the ; none of the A is in the ©.'" — 
De MopGAN, Formal Logic, pp. 8, 9. 

Other illustrations are given by means of black 
and white lines superimposed over each other. 

Thus, if all the black portion of A be contained 
within the black of B, the black of B being simi- 
larly contained within the black of C, the black of 
A must also be contained within that of C. 




Other illustrations of the same kind might be 
added. These, however, are sufficient for the pre- 
sent. 

(43.) 

Structure of the Syllogism, — Symbolic Representa- 
tion of Terms by mecms of Letters. 

§ The extent to which the syllogism is inde- 
pendent of the truth of the facts, or opinions. 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 PROPOSITIONS. 

exhibited in its propositions has already been 
stated; nor have the repetitions and expansions 
of the statements to this eflTect been made without 
an object. They have served to illustrate what 
may be called the formal character of the syllogism, 
by which is meant, the fact of the conclusion being 
deduced from its relation to its premises, rather 
than the accuracy as matters of &ct of the pre- 
mises themselves. 

Such being the case, we are prepared to find in 
Logic what we find in Algebra, viz. the symbolic 
representation of the parts of propositions by 
means of letters — a representation that the gene- 
rality of the processes of syllogistic reasoning 
favours and suggests. 

EXTRACT. 

*' When we say that all men will die, and that all men 
are rational beings, and thence infer that some rational 
beings will die, the logical truth of this sentence is the same, 
whether it be true or false that men are mortal and 
rational. This logical truth depends upon the structure 
of the sentence, and not upon the particular matters spoken 
of. Thus, 

Instead of, Write, 

All men will die. Every Y is X. 

All men are rational beings. Every Y is Z. 

Therefore some rational Therefore some Zs are Xs. 
beings will die. 

The second of these is the same proposition, logically con- * 
sidered, and rightly inferred from, the premises. Whether 
the premises be true or false, is not a question of logic, but 
of morals, philosophy, history, or any other sort of know- 
ledge to which their subject-matter belongs ; the question 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsinoNS. 91 

of logic is, does the conclusion certainly follow if the pre- 
mises be true?" — De Moboan, Formal Logic, pp. 1, 2. 

Should this leap from a particular instance to a 
general formula be too sudden, we may take, in- 
stead of it, the same amount of change by instal- 
ments. Thus, for men write Y ; which will give — 

Every Y is mortal. 

Every Y is a rational being, 

Therefore^ 
Some rational beings are mortal. 

Then for mortal write X : — 

Every Y is X, 
Every Y is rational, 

Therefore^ 
Some rational beings are X. 

Lastly, for rational write Z, which wiU give us 
the formula with which we began. 

EXTBACT. 

Let us examine and analyse such an example as : — 
'* *¦ Every animal that has horns on the head is ruminant ; 
the elk has horns on the head ; therefore the elk is rumi- 
nant.' It will easily be seen that the validity (or * conclu- 
siveness,* or 'soundness*) of the argument does not at all 
depend on our conviction of the truth of either of the pre- 
mises; or even on our understanding the meaning of 
them. For if we substitute for one of the things we are 
speaking about, some unmeaning symbol (such as a letter 
of the alphabet), which may stand for anything that may 
be agreed on, the reasoning remains the same. For in- 
stance, suppose we say (instead of ' animal that has boms on 
the head*), * Every X is ruminant; the elk isX; there- 
fore the elk is ruminant;* the argument is equally valid. 



Digitized by 



Google 



92 PROPOSITIONS. 

** And again, instead of the word * ruminant,' let us put 
the letter * Y : ' then the argument, * Every X is Y ; the 
elk is X ; therefore, the elk is Y ; ' would be a valid argu- 
ment as before. 

** And the same would be the case if you were to put 
* Z ' for * the elk ; * for the syllogism * Every X is Y ; Z is 
X ; therefore Z is Y,' is completely valid, whatever you 
suppose the symbols X, Y, and Z to stand for. 

" Any one may try the experiment by substituting for 
X, Y, and Z, respectively, any words he pleases, and he 
will find that, if he does but preserve the same form of 
expression, it will be impossible to admit the truth of the 
premises, without admitting abo the truth of the conclu- 
sion." — Whatelt, Jjogic, i. § 4. 

Observe how decidedly both authors insist on 
the unimportance of the accuracy or inaccuracy 
of the propositions as taken by themselves, and 
how thoroughly they admit nothing as essential to 
the conclusion but its relation to the premises, and 
their rdcUion to each other. Observe, how tho- 
roughly they make the form, rather than the sub- 
stance, of the proposition, the all-important and 
fundamontal element of the syllogism. Yet it is not 
because they, or any other writers, are indifferent to 
the actual truth of either the propositions of a 
syllogism or any other series of sentences. It is 
only because logic is essentially a science of rela- 
tions, and (as such) a formal science. 

Formal Logic is the title of Professor De Mor- 
gan's work. Open any treatise on logic, and you. 
soon find the statement that " Logic has no pro- 
vince of its own." What, then, has it ? It has 
the handling and testing of all the facts, opinions, 
and postulates of all departments of inquiry. It 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 93 

has no field of its own. It measures the growths 
of all fields. That — 

1. Some men are mortal, 

2. Socrates is a man, 

3. Socrates is a mortal, 

is a triad, or leash, of propositions, all of which 
are true in respect to the facts they declare or 
affirm. But are they true as premises and conclu- 
sion ? Are they premises and conclusions at all ? 
No. It is only some men whom the first (we 
cannot call it the majcxr) proposition affirms to 
be mortal. What if there be some who are not ? 
What if Socrates be among them? There may 
be only one in that predicament. But what if 
Socrates were he? We know that he was Tiot 
this. We know, too, that there are no exceptions 
to the first statement. We know that we might 
safely have said all instead of some. Nevertheless, 
because we failed to do so, we missed a syllogism, 
though we stated truths enough to form one fi:om. 
On the other hand, that — 

1. AH horses are six-legged, 

2. Socrates is a horse, 

3. Socrates is six-legged, 

is true as a syllogism, though false as a series of pro- 
positions, and that in respect to each and all of the 
three. However — 

To save our sense of prepositional or substantial 
truth fi*om being shocked by this indifierence on 
the part of the syllogism, let us insert — 

Before the major proposition — if, 

Before the minor proposition — and, 

Before the conclusion — then, 

In the conclusion — must be. 



Digitized by 



Google 



94 PROPOSITIONS. 

In which case our former series of false asser- 
tions runs — 

if, 
All horses are six-legged, 

and 
Socrates be a horse, 

then, 
Socrates "must he six-legged. 

The fact is, that this indifference to truth on the 
part of the syllogism is, practically, in many cases, 
an instrument in the investigation of truth. There is 
many a premiss, the accuracy or inaccuracy of which 
is doubtful, as long as it is looked at alone. See, 
however, what it leads to, and you see its truth or 
falsehood. 

Finally, it is this indifference to the matter of 
propositions that makes the symbolical expression of 
them possible. 

The symbols themselves, as we have seen, are 
certain letters of the alphabet, and, until some 
reason is given for preferring one to another, they 
are all equally convenient. In the previous ex- 
ample we wrote Y is X =man is mortal. But we 
might have written H is Y, or A is B, or B is A, 
&c. 

There are reasons, however, in favour of a certain 
selection. In X, Y, Z, the order of the alphabet 
coincides with the order of the terms "major (X), 
middle (Y), and miifhor (Z), which is an advantage. 

They are better than A, B, C, for another reason. 
A is already used for another purpose. A is one 
of four letters which are used to denote whole pro- 
positionSy rather than the terms that constitute 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 95 

them ; the other three being E, I, O, three out of 
the four remaining vowels. 

How are they used ? We are prepared to an- 
swer this by our knowledge of the division of pro- 
positions into universal or particular, and affirma- 
tive or negative. 

1. The two universals come first, A stands for 
the universal affirmative, and E for the universal 
negative — 

Every man is mortal = Every Y = X or A, 
No man is mortal = No Y = X or E. 

2. The two particulars follow : — 

Some men are mortal = Some Y = X or I, 
Some men are not mortal = Some YijfcX or O. 

We, doubtless, felt the want of a notation of this 
kind in § 35, when we wrote such formulae as uni- 
versal affirmative^ universal negative^ &c., in full — 
totidem verbis et totidem Uteris. Indeed, it forced 
us upon the abbreviations, U. A., XJ. N., P. A., or 
P. N., &c. Had we, however, used them to any 
great extent, they would have failed both in com- 
pendiousness and generality. Neither would they 
have had any value in any language where the 
equivalents to universal, particular , negative, and 
affirmative began with letters other than A., N., P., 
or U. ; as they do (for German) where Bejahende=^ 
affirmative. 

With X, Y, Z, as symbols of terTUS, the use is by 
no means constant. Several logicians use any letter 
that strikes them instead. 

With A, E, I, O, however, the writer has no 
discretion. He must apply as they have been 
applied, semper, ubique, ab om/aibus. 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 PROPOSITIONS. 

And now we may state that the same sort of 
illustration which was supplied by means of our 
As, ©s, Ds, ¦¦mizs, &c., may be supplied by 
the letters of the alphabet. 

Let the largest of the three classes, or the longest 
of the three black lines, be represented by a long 
line of Zs ; each letter denoting the individual 
objects by the aggregation of which the class is 
constituted. 

Under each Z write Y, for every object that is, 
at once and the same time, a member of both 



Repeat this with X and Y. The result will be 
lines like — 

zzzzzzzzzz. 

YYYYYYYy y y. 
XXXXXxx XX X. 

Every X that comes under Y, comes under Z also. 

The meaning of the smaller letters is clear. They 
denote the contraries to X and Y, i. e. the objects 
which are 7iot-X, and not-Y. The study of these 
relations, though important, is only suggested in 
the present section. 

(44.) 
Propositions Categoric or Hypothetic, 

The last example of the previous section suggests 
a third division of propositions. 

That they are either universal or particular has 
been seen. 

It has also been seen that they are either affi^rma' 
live or negative. 

We now see that they are either conditional 



Digitized by 



Google 



i>BOPOsinoNS. 97 

or unconditional, or, as the logicians say, hypothe- 
tical (conditional) or categorical (unconditional). 

In the example just given, the truth of the con- 
clusion as a proposition depended on the truth of 
the major ; this dependence being expressed by if. 

To speak of propositions as universal and parti- 
cular is to speak of them in respect to their 
quantity. 

To speak of propositions as negative or affirma- 
tive, is to speak of them in respect to their 
quality. 

To speak of propositions as categorical or hypo- 
thetical, is to speak of them in respect to their 
subata/nce. 

(45.) 

Mnemonics. 

§ Symbols and diagrams, abstractions and sen- 
sible representations, letters and circles, letters and 
squares, letters and triangles, black lines and letters, 
squares and white lines, — all these are matters that 
we have to take cognisance of in logic. Their rela- 
tion to the syllogism itself is that of a picture to 
the object it represents. 

They are matters connected with the illustration 
of its structure. But they are not points in the 
structure itself 

Is there anything more in this way ? We ask this, 
because, as yet, we have had nothing but detail, 
nothing but the dead members of the syllogism, 
taken separately, and destitute of the principle 
that holds them together as the constituent parts 
of an organic whole. 

We have nearly done with these — ^nearly, but 

F 



Digitized by 



Google 



98 PBOPOsmoNS. 

not quite. There are certain mnemonic wcffds that 
stiU stand over for notice. 

Suppose that I wish to remember the €»rder of 
the propositions of any particular syllogism in re- 
spect to their qucmtity and qvxility, e. g., 

A. All men are mortal, 
A. All heroes are men, 
A. AH heroes are mortal, 

I fix in my mind the sequence AAA. 

I proceed, and, as I proceed, find it necessary to 
remember another series. 

E. No man is immortal, 
A. All heroes are men, 
E. No hero is immortal. 

This is E A E ; and it is clear that my memory 
is beginning to be taxed. I must first carry AAA 
in my head, and then E A E ; and then (perhaps) 
a dozen more sudi formulas. 

Now A A A are three separate words, for they 
are three separate instances of the name of a letter. 

And E A E are the same ; except that E and A 
are the names of different letters, a feet which en- 
cumbers the memory more than it helps it. So that, 
for two syllogisms, I have six words to remember. 

Now, by certain additions, I can reduce these six 
words to two ; but then, in order to do so, I must 
manipulate and manoeuvre a little. 

Suppose that, between each of the A's in A A A, 
I write one or more letters. 

Let these letters be consonants. Let them be 6, 
r6, and r. The result is the word barba/ra. 

This is the neuter plural of the Latin adjective 
harha/rua ; but it is not on this account that the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEOPOsrrioNS. 99 

-word is useful. Ra/rbaha, or any other combina- 
tion of three A% with a sufficient number of con- 
sonants to reduce them to a single word, would 
have done as well. The identity of the word 
under notice with another word goes for nothing. 
It is a mere accident. Ba/rbara is, as &r as its 
sense goes (or rather its want of sense) immeaning. 
Yet it has a function. 

Now treat E A E as we treated AAA, vary- 
ing in some degree the consonants. In short, 
write cela/rent This happens to be a Latin word 
also, but, mutatis mutcmdis, all that has been said 
about barbara applies to celarent also. 

Cdarent like ba/rbara has its function ; and the 
function of the two words is the same. The con- 
sonants merely serve as framework ; the vowels 
alone must be att^ided to. Bead off these, and 
you have six words in two, or three in one. Bar- 
bara gives the sequence AAA, and celarent the 
sequence E A E. It is obvious that every possible 
combination of A E I O, i.e. every mood, can be 
thus treated, and it is a fact, that they have been 
thus treated. Hence, we have a certain number of 
mnemonic words ready made. Do I want to re- 
member the sequence — 

A. All tyrants are blameworthy, 

I. Some heroes are tyrants, 

I. Some heroes are blameworthy — 

I fix in my mind the word darii. For 

E. No tyrant is praiseworthy, 

I. Some heroes are tyrants, 

O. Some heroes are not praiseworthy, 

Verio is my mnemonic word. 

F 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



iOO PROPOSITIONS. 

No one need forget the mood of a syllogism for 
want of a mnemonic. There are plenty of them, 
as will be seen in the sequel. 

But what if we want the figure as well ? This 
will be answered in the sequel also. The object of 
the present section is to state the &ct, that some 
of the difficulties in the way of detail arising out 
of the combinations of A E I O are met by means 
of certain mnemonic words, or words coined for 
the assistance of the memory. The fiiller details 
of their application will constitute another notice. 

At present it is sufficient to state, that in (1 .) 
Barbara, (2.) Celarmt, (3.) Darii, and (4) Feria, 
the figure is the same, viz. : — 

Middle major, or Y Z, 
Minor middle, or X Y, 
Minor major, or^Z. 

Hence, in symbols, the previous examples run 
thus : — 



Barbara. 


Celarent. 


A. Every Y = Z. 


KNoY = Z. 


A. Every X=Y. 


A. Every X=Y. 


A. Every X = Z. 


E. NoX = Z. 


Darii. 


Ferio, 


A. Every Y = Z. 


E. NoY=Z. 


I. SomeX=Y. 


I. Some X=:=Y. 


I. SomeX = Z. 


0. Some X = Z. 



Substitute man for Y, vmmortal for X, &c., &c., 
and you have the syllogisms as they appeared 
before. 

Substitute am,y word whatever for X Y Z, and 
you have a legitimate conclusion. As a separate 
proposition, or as a statement of &ct, it may be 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSinoNS. 101 

untrue. But that will be because the premises 
were incorrect. As a deduction from those pre- 
mises it will be strictly logical. 

Extract. 
'* Logic is a formal science. It takes no consideration 
of real existence, or of its relations, but is occupied solely 
about that existence and those relations which arise through 
and are regulated by the conditions of thought itself. Of 
the truth or falsehood of propositions, in themselves, it 
knows nothing and takes no account : all in logic may be 
held true that is not conceived as contradictory. In reason- 
ing, logic guarantees neither the premises nor the con- 
clusion, but merely the consequence of the latter from 
the former ; for a syllogism is nothing more than the ex- 
plicit assertion of the truth of one proposition on the 
hypothesis of other propositions being true, in which it is 
implicitly contained. A conclusion may thus be true in 
reality (as an assertion), and yet logically false (as an infer- 
ence.)" — Sib W. Hamilton, Discussions on Philosophy, 
p. 144. 

(46.) 
Analyda cmd Syntheda. 

It is always useful (and in matters of teaching 
and learning most especially so) to have a clear 
notion, not only of the subject under notice, but 
also of the method according to which we investi- 
gate it. It is good to know in what light we see 
the picture ; at what end we take up the staff. 
For this reason, I pause to remark, that our view 
of the syllogism has been what is called analytic 
as opposed to synthetic. Analysis takes to pieces ; 
Synthesis builds up. Much may be learned from 
both processes. 

Our view, I say, has been wholly analytic. We 



'Digitized by 



Google 



102 PBOPosmoNS. 

started with the largest mass of terms we had — 
viz. the syllogism. And, of this we considered the 
propositions first ; for the syllogism contained the 
propositions, the proposition the terms. The syllo- 
gism contained the premises and conclusion; the 
premises and conclusion the majors, middles and 
minors. With these, the ultimate elements, we 
concluded. This was to take the watch to pieces. 

But we might have reversed the order of our 
operations, and have begun with the term, forming, 
out of the terms, the propositions, and, out of the 
propositions, the syllogism. Had we done this, the 
watch would have been put together ; our method 
having been synthetic. 

Neither Synthesis nor Analysis are words foreign 
to systematic works on logic, and for this reason 
they have been noticed. 

The following quotation is fi-om the opening of 
the Second Book of Whately; the Second Book 
being especially entitled the Synthetical Compen- 
dium as opposed to the First, which gave the Anxdy- 
tical Ontlvae. 

Observe, too, the two departments of inquiry to 
which it refers — Language and Mental Philosophy. 
They are separate fi'om Logic proper, but closely con- 
nected with it. Analysis leads to, Synthesis starts 

from, them. _ 

Extract. 

" There are three operations of the mind which are im- 
mediately concerned in argument : — 

" Ist Simple apprehension. 
"2nd. Judgment 
" 8rd. Discourse, or reasoning. 
" 1. Simple apprehension is the notion (or conception) of 
any object of the mind, analogous to the perception of the 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



PBOPosmoNS. 103 

senses. It is either incomplex, or complex. Incomplex 
apprehension is of one object or of several, without any 
relation being perceived between them, as of a man, a 
horsey cards; complex is of several with such a relation, as 
of a man on horsebacky a pack of cards. 

" 2. Judgment is the comparing together in the mind two 
of the notions (or ideas) which are the objects of apprehen- 
sion, whether complex or incomplex, and pronouncing that 
they agree or disagree with each other (or that one of them 
belongs or does not belong to the other). Judgment, there- 
fore, is either affirmative or negative, 

*' 3. Eeasoning (or discourse) is the act of proceeding 
from one judgment to another founded upon that one, or 
the result of it. 

** Language affords the signs by which these operations 
of the mind are expressed and communicated. 

" An act of apprehension expressed in language is called 
a term ; an act of judgment a proposition ; an act of reason- 
ing an argument'' — ^Whatelt, ii. 1. § 1, 2. 

The syllogism itself is either analytic or sjmthe- 
tic; or rather the synthetic syllogism (for the 
ordinary one with which we have hitherto dealt 
belongs to this division) is capable of being put in 
an analytic form. And this is what we have been 
led to anticipate. For has it not been said, that 
instead of beginning with our premises and ending 
with our conclusion, and writing therefore between 
the last two propositions, we might have begun 
with the conclusion, and ended with the premises, 
writing because between the first proposition and 
the second ? Has it not been said that it is only in 
accordance with custom that we write — 

All men are mortal, 
Socrates is a man. 



Digitized by 



Google 



104 PEOPOsrnoNS. 



instead of — 



Therefore, 
Socrates is mortal, 

Socrates is mortal, 

Becaua^y 
Socrates is a man. 

And, 
All men are mortal, 



or- 



Socrates is mortal. 

Because, 
All men are mortal, 

And, 
Socrates is a man. 

No-w, the latter of these syllogisms is analytic. 
How ? Because it begins by taking the whole and 
then giving the parts it is made of. Synthesis, 
on the other hand, takes the parts first, the whole 
last. 

Rationale of the Ordmary Syllogism, — Its Terms 
viewed as the Ncrnies of Classes, — The dictum 

DE OMNI ET NULLO. 

We may now look back on what we have read 
about the syllogism with a double view ; with the 
view of ascertaining what portions of it we have 
considered, and with the view of learning what 
portions of it we have either overlooked or reserved 
for fiiture or present notice. 

Doing this, we shall find that of the details of 
its structure we have seen a somewhat large amoimt, 
also a fair amount of the terminology used to ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsmoNS, 105 

press them ; along with "which we have a notice of 
some of the operations in the way of strengthening^ 
converaionj &;c. The symbolic notation, along with 
the quality and quantity of propositions has not 
been neglected ; nor yet the value of the several 
terms. The mnemonic manoeuvres for recollecting 
the differences of figure and mood have been alluded 
to. Lastly, there has been an exhibition of cer- 
tain material illustrations in the way of cii'cles, 
triangles, and squares, on one side, and black and 
white lines on the other. 

Now, these last will help us in what is now 
coming under notice ; viz. the principle, or rationale, 
of the syllogism, a question that has yet to be con- 
sidered. 

What is the leading or fundamental principle of 
the ordinary syllogism ? More especially, how is it 
iUustrated by our squares and lines ? 

The triangles, circles, and squares shall be noticed 
first. Let us consider them as filled with points — 
these points standing for individual objects; the 
figures themselves standing for classes. As long as 
the triangle lies within the circle, and the circle 
within the square, the points contained in the 
triangle are contained in the square also. Common 
sense says this. It is the kernel in the shell, with 
the embryo of the future plant in the kernel. It is 
the foot in the stocking, with the stocking in the 
boot. It is the blood in the artery, with the artery 
in the body. It is anything, in short, contained 
by anything else, which something else contains. 

It cannot but be in two things at once; for 
what is in the nut is in the nutshell that contains 
the nut. The part of a part is part of any whole 

F 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



106 PBOPosinoNs. 

that contains that part. Socrates is part of the 
class of Tnen, and men part of the class of mortals. 
What, then, must Socrates be ? What can he be but 
mortal? 

Mutatis mutandis, the same reasoning applies to 
negative propositions. If the kernel lie outside the 
shell, the embryo within the kernel must do the 
same. Hence — 

"Whatever is predicated (i.e. affirmed or denied) 
pniversally of any class of things, may be predi- 
cated in like manner (viz. affirmed or denied) of 
anything comprehended in that class.'' 

This is called the didwm de onvni et nvMo, i.e. 
the rule concerning aU cmd none. 

The writer who gives the greatest prominence to 
the dictum de om/tii et nuUo is, perhaps. Archbishop 
Whately. The writer who gives (if not the least) 
but little to it is J. S. Mill. I subjoin an extract 
from each. 

Extract. 

T. 

" In order to trace more distinctly the different steps of 
the abstracting process by which any particular argument 
may be brought into the most general form, we may first 
take a syllogism {i.e. an argument stated accurately and at 
full length), such as the example formerly given, * whatever 
exhibits marks of design, &c.,' and then somewhat gene- 
ralise the expression by substituting (as in Algebra) arbi- 
trary unmeaning symbols for the significant tertiis that 
were originally used ; the syllogism will then stand thus : 
* every B is A ; C is B ; therefore C is A.' The reasoning, 
when thus stated, is no less evidently valid, whatever terms 
A B and C, respectively, may be supposed to stand for. 
Such terms may, indeed, be inserted as to make all or some 
of the assertions /oZsd; but it will be no less impossible for 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 107 

any one who admits the trnth of the premises^ in an argu- 
ment thus constructed, to deny the conclusion ; and this it 
is that constitutes the conclusiveness of an argument. 

" Viewing, then, the syUogism thus expressed, it appears 
clearly, that ' A stands for anything whatever that is 
aflBrmed of a certain entire class' (viz, of every B), * which 
class comprehends or contains in it something else, viz, C 
(of which B is in the second premiss, aflSrmed); and 
that, consequently, the first term (A) is, in conclusion, pre- 
dicated of the third C. 

" Non to assert the validity of this process, now before 
us, is to state the very dictum we are treating of, with 
hardly even a verbal alteration, viz, : — 

" 1. Anything whatever, predicated of a whole class, 
" 2. Under which class something else is contained, 
" 3. May be predicated of that which is so contained. 
" The three members into which the maxim is here dis- 
tributed correspond : to the three propositions of the syllo- 
gism to which they are intended respectively to apply." — 
Whatelt, Logicy L § 4. 

n. 

" All ratiocination, therefore, starts from a general pro- 
position, principle, or assumption ; a proposition in which a 
predicate is affirmed or denied of an entire class. The 
other premiss asserts that something belongs to or is 
included in the class respecting which something was 
afi&rmed or denied in the nugor premiss. 

*' It follows that the attribute affirmed or denied of the 
entire class may (if there was truth in that affirmation or 
denial) be affirmed or denied of the object or objects alleged 
to be included in the class : and this is precisely the asser^ 
tion made in the conclusion. 

'« Whether or not the foregoing is an adequate account 
of the constituent parts of the syllogism will be pre- 
sently considered ; but, as £eu: as it goes, it is a true ac- 
count It has accordingly been generalised and erected 



Digitized by 



Google 



108 PBOPOsrnoNS. 

into a logical maxim. The maxim is, that whatever can be 
affirmed (or denied) of a class may be affirmed (or denied) 
of everything included in the class. This axiom, supposed 
to be the basis of the syllogistic theory, is termed by logi- 
cians the dictum de omni et nuUo" — Mill, i. p. 234. 

(48.) 

Rationale of the Ordvaa/ry Syllogism. — Its 
Middle Term viewed as a Measure. 

The As OS and ? suggest the notion ottlasses. 

The black and white lines ¦ , „ =^ 

raise the idea of a ride or measure. 

Of the two illustrations this latter is, perhaps, 
the less common; the dictum de omni et nvllo 
being considered of such importance as scarcely ever 
to be omitted in logical treatises. The other, 
however, is the illustration which we find in 
Watts's Logic as an old, and Gilbart s as a new, 
work. 

Extract. 

*' If the mere perception and comparison of two ideas 
would always show us whether they agree or dis-agree ; 
then all rational propositions would be matters of intelli- 
gence or first principles, and there would be no use of 
reasoning, or drawing any consequences. It is the narrow- 
ness of the human mind which introduces the necessity of 
reasoning. When we are unable to judge of the truth or 
falsehood of a proposition in an immediate manner, by the 
mere contemplation of its subject and predicate, we are 
then constrained to use a medium, and compare each of 
them with some third idea, that by seeing how far they 
agree or disagree with it, we may be able to judge how far 
they agree or disagree among themselves. Thus, if there are 
two lines A and B, and I know not whether they are equal 
or no, I take a third line 0, or an inch, and apply it to each 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEOPOsmoNS. 109 

of them : if it agree with them both, then I infer, that 
A and B are equal ; but if it agree with one, and not with 
the other, then I conclude A and B are unequal ; if it agree 
with neither of them, there can be no comparison. 

** So if the question be, whether God must be wor- 
shipped, we seek a third idea, suppose the idea of a Creator, 
and say : — 

" Our Creator must be worshipped, 
God is our Creator, 
Therefore, God must be worshipped. 

" The comparison of this third idea with the two dis- 
tinct parts of the questions usually requires two proposi- 
tions, which are called the premises ; the third proposition 
which is drawn from them is the conclusion." — Watts 
{Jrom GiLBABT*s Jjogic for the Million^ iv. 4). 

(49.) 

Rationale of the Ordmary SyUogism, — Its Terms 
viewed as eocpressive of the co-existence of 
certain Attributes, 

Take from Euclid the axiom that — 

** Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to 
one another." 

Instead of equal to, write co-eodsts with, so that 
the axiom run — 

"Things which co-eodst with the same thing, 
co-eodst with one another.^' 

This is the form in Mill's Logic ; a form which is 
illustrated by the rule, rather than class-wiew ; by 
^^^^^^ = rather than A O and D ? 

Nor are there wanting reasons, notwithstanding the 
historical importance of the dictum de om/ni et 
nuUo, for preferring the former to the latter. 



Digitized by 



Google 



110 PBOPOsmoNS. 

Things y then, which eo-exist with the sarnie thing, 
co-eodst with one another. Such is the principle of 
the affirmative syllogism ; that of the negative 
being that — 

A thing, which co-exists with another thing, with 
which other a third thing does not co-^adst, is not 
co-eodstent with that third thing. 

By co-existence is meant existence in the same 
object or class of objects ; by things, the aUributes 
or qualities of such object. 

In the first proposition of the syllogism — 
All men are mortal, 
All heroes are men. 
All heroes are mortal, 
the import is, that wherever there is the attrihwte 
of manhood there is the attribute of mortality also, 
the co-existence, as shown in the wording of the 
proposition, being as follows: — 

In all cases of m/inhood there is a oo-existent 
mortality. 

In soms cases of Wjoriality there is a co-existent 
ma/nhood. It may be that there is in all. The 
proposition, however, only states that it is so in SOME. 
All men are mortal objects ; conversely, some 
mxyrtal objects a/re men. 

Wherever there is either mxmhood or m/yrtality, 
there may be other attributes as well. Of these, the 
first of our three propositions takes no notice. Thus, 
with Tnanhood, there may be heroism, cowardice, 
virtue, vice, all of which, if they co-exist with some 
manhood, and if all manhood co-exist with some 
mxyrtality, must, so fer as they co-exist with that 
manhood, also co-exist with its co-existing mor- 
tality. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. Ill 

But, as has already been stated, our first propo- 
sition, the only one under immediate notice, tells us 
nothing about them. It is only the second that 
does anything for us in this respect. 

It is the second (or the rnvnor) that teUs us that — 
All heroes are me-r?., 
by which is meant, that all the attributes that con- 
stitute our idea of a hero co-exist with some marv-^ 
hood; all heroes being men, though all men are 
not heroes. 

But all manhood whatsoever, consists with mor- 
taZityy in other words, there is none of the former, 
without some of the latter. 

Hence — ^all the hero-hood that co-exists with the 
mcmhood, co-exists with the mortality y with which 
the manhood co-exists. 

And this is what the conclusion tells us cajpli- 
citly ; the premises having implied it, i, e. contained 
im-plicitly, i.e. as a thing folded up in them. 

In = m, and plicat-us =^ folded; Latin words 
both. Ex = out Implicit = wrapped up IN ; 
explicit =• with the folds done out. 

(60.) 

Rationale of the Ordinary Syllogism. — The Middle 
Term always in the Premises^ a/ad never in 
the Conclusion. 

§ Still holding to our old syllogism — 
All men are mortal. 
All heroes are men, 
AH heroes are mortal, 

{Barbara^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



112 PBOPOsmoNS. 

let us keep our attention on its middle term, i.e. 
on the word mom. 

It is, essentially, a m,e(m8 to cm end — ^nothing 
more. As the name of a class, it contains such 
contents as it has solely for the purpose of enabling 
them to be placed in some other class. As a rule, 
or measure, it is thrown aside when it has effected 
its measurement. Under such conditions how can 
it show itself in the conclusion ? The conclusion 
contains nothing but results — ^the equalities, or co- 
existences, that the rule, or survey, determined — ^the 
individuab that the smaller class gave to the larger 
one. The middle term, then, cannot but be absent 
from the conclusion. 

But this is only another way of saying (its 
necessity being supposed to be proved) that it must 
appear in the premises. And this is what it inva- 
riably does. 

It must appear in the premises not only once, 
but twice. 

It must appear in the premises Twt only twice, 
but each appearance must be made in a different 
proposition — i.e. one in the major, and one in the 
minor. 

If it wfere not so we could have none of the 
necessary comparisons. To predicate of mortal, 
that it is anything except m/ortal, requires two dif- 
ferent terms to the proposition ; moii>al is mortal, 
being a useless truism. But of these two different 
terms one must be a new one ; i.e. different from 
those of the conclusion. If not, we only get the con- 
clusion repeated with, or without, variations, e,g, : — 
Heroes {alV) are mortals. 
Mortals (some) are heroes. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsmoNS. 113 

There is nothing of much use in this. 

So much for the place of the middle term in one 
of the premises. How does it show itself in the 
other ? The minor term {heroes) we have ready to 
our hand. But this we cannot repeat. That 
were to construct a truism ; e, g. 
Heroes are heroes. 

Nor yet can we attach the major {morta^ to it. 
That were to repeat the conclusion. 

Nor yet can we bring in a wholly fresh word. 
That were to abolish the comparison altogether. 
Man = mortal^ 
Hero = (Migdy 
what can follow from this ? Nothing. 

The only second term that we can introduce is 
the middle term ; which we may now say has been 
shown to be — 

1. Repeated; 

2. Appearing, each time, in a different proposi- 
tion; 

3. Neither of those propositions being the con- 
clusion; but (on the contrary) the premises, and 
nothing but the premises. 

If this exposition appear somewhat mechanical 
(as it really is), let it be suggested that the positions 
for the middle term which it illustrates are of great 
importance, and that it is to give these positions 
(simply as details of structure) fiiU prominence, 
rather than to exhibit the disposition of the terms 
of a syllogism in a general and scientific manner, 
that the previous notices have been made. 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 PBOPOsrnoNS. 

(51.) 

The Place of the Middle Term m the several Figures. 
— The Figures four in Number. 

§ Let us still keep the middle term in our minds ; 
even though at the commencement of our forth- 
coming notices, it occupies no very prominent 
position. It will appear towards the end of 
them. 

The order of the terms of a syllogism has been 
already considered (§ 36). 

It has also been stated that a difference in the 
arrangement constitutes a difference of figure. 

How many of these arrangements^ i. e. how many 
syllogistic figures, are there ? That depends upon 
what we mean by figure. The number of combi- 
nations and permutations capable of being effected 
by ringing changes on the one major, (me mi/nor, 
and two middles, the terms of the premises of a 
syllogism, is a matter of arithmetia They are 
limited, and definite, and can be ascertained d priori. 
The number of combinations and permutations that 
are available for the purposes of syllogistic reason- 
ing is a special matter of l<^c One is one thing, 
the other another. They may or may not agree. 
AU the combinations of major and mAddle, middle 
and minor, may be l<^cal ; or only some of them 
may be so. Hence, figure may mean all the com- 
binations of major, mAddle, &c., that can be effected, 
or it may mean only those that contribute to the 
formation of conclusions. The former gives us the 
possible, or arithmetical, the latter the OjCtudl, or 
logical, forms. 

Such is the preliminary distinction. How does it 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEOPOsmoNS. 115 

apply ? At the present moment it is no distinction 
at all. At the present moment, and ever since the 
time of Gralen, all the arithmetical combinations, 
are also, one and all, logical. Between, however, 
the time of Qalen and Aristotle, there was one of 
them which seemed to lead to no conclusion at all, 
i.e, to be extra-logical. That this was only appa- 
rent, and that it was a real logical figure^ is said 
to have been discovered by the philosophers just 
named. 

The distinction, then, in question between the 
logical and arithmetical combination of the terms of 
a syllogism is historical rather than scientific. As 
such we have noticed it. We have noticed it also 
for a reason which wiU appear in the sequel. 

To proceed, however, to our present details — ^the 
number of figures is four, the full arithmetical 
number. We can ascertain them d, priori. There 
are two possible changes for the major proposition, 
and two for the mi/nor — ^two for each, and no more 
than two. 

1. 
Major term, middle term, 
Middle term, major term. 

2. 

Minor term, middle term. 
Middle term, minor term. 

These give — 

FIRST FIGURE. 

All men are mortal, 
All heroes are men. 
All heroes are mortal; 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 PROPOSITIONS. 



or, 

Middle, major, \ (^ ^^ 

Minor, middle, > or < X Y, 

Minor, major ; } (^ Y Z. 



(Ba/rba/ra,) 

SECOND FIGUEE. 

All true patriots are fidends to religion, 

Some great statesmen are not friends to religion. 

Some great statesmen are not true patriots ; 

or, 

Major, middle, \ T Z Y, 

Minor, middle, > or < X Y, 

Minor, major ; J ( X Z. 

(Baroko.) 

THIBD FIGUEE. 

All men are mortal, 

All men are rational, 

Some rational beings will die ; 

or. 
Middle, major, "I fY Z, 

Middle, minor, > or < Y X, 
Minor, major; J (^X Z. 

(JDarapti.) 

FOURTH FIGURE. 

Whatever is expedient is conformable to nature. 

Nothing conformable to nature is hurtful to society, 

Whatever is hurtful to society is not expedient ; 

or, 

Major, middle, 1 (ZY, 

Middle, minor, > or k Y Z, 

Minor, major; J (^X Y. 

(Camenea,) 
All the figures are equally true ; a fact which 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPosmoNS. 117 

follows from the formal character of the science of 
logic. Its truths arise from relations. As such they 
are necessary ; and in necessary truths there are no 



But are they all equally clear ? 

The answer to this has been already suggested. 
The first three are said to have been discovered 
some three hundred years before the fourth ; which, 
certainly, looks as if they were not. 

Are they aU equally direct, i.e. do they all come 
under the immediate application of the dictv/m de 
omni et nullo, or its equivalents ? The extent to 
which they do this has, doubtless, something to do 
with their clearness ; but it is a question which 
may stand over for a while. 

What now claims our attention is the fact that — 

The four figures are only so many names for so 
many places for the middle term. 

1. In the first — ^The middle term is subject in 
the major, and predicate in the minor premiss. 

2. In the second. — ^Predicate in both. 

3. In the third. — Subject in both. 

4. In the fourth. — Predicate in the major, sub- 
ject in the minor. 

Should it be easier for us to remember numbers 
than names, we may say that — 

In the first figure, the middle term is in 1 and 4, 
i.e. that it is in the first and third places of the 
syllogism. Or, we say that it is 1 by 4. 

In the second it is 2 and 4, or 2 by 4. 

In the third, 1 and 3, or 1 by 3. 

In the fourth, 2 and 3, or 2 by 3. 

In the other places we have, of course, one of the 
other two terms — the major in the major, the minor 



Digitized by 



Google 



118 PROPOSITIONS. 

in the minor premiss. Henoe, in knowing the 
place of the middle term, we also know that of the 
other two. Thus — 

1. If the middle term he in 1 and 4, the major 
must he in 2, and the minor in 3. 

2. If the middle be in 2 and 4, the major is in 
1, and the minor in 3. 

3. If the middle be in 1 and 3, the major mudt 
be in 2, and the minor in 4. 

4. If the middle be in 2 and 3, the major must 
be in 1, and the minor in 4. 

(52.) 

The Moods, — Mood and Figure. — A Real and 
Rational Relation of the Middle Term essen- 
tial to the Perfection of the Syllogism. 

Let us stiU keep the middle term in our minds, 
&c. 

The order of the propositions of a syllogism has 
been already considered (§ 35). 

It has also been stated that a differenee in the 
arrangement constitutes a difference of mood. 

How many of these arrangements, i.e. how many 
syllogistic moods, are there ? 

That depends on what we mean by Tnood. 

All this (and more might be added) is what we 
read at the opening of the preceding section. It is 
repeated, however, because, m/atatis m^uta/ndis, the 
main part of what applies to figures applies to 
moods also. 

There is, however, this difference. All the com- 
binations of middle, minor, and m^ijor (of Y X Z) 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 119 

in arithmetic were logical combinations also, i,e. 
they were all used in syllogism. Of the moods, i, e, 
the combinations of universal or particular, afc- 
mative or negative (A E I 0), only eleven are 
logical. 

Can each of these eleven moods appear in each 
of the four figures ? If they can, the number of 
syllogisms isll x4=z44. But they cannot. Their 
distribution amongst the figures is as follows : — 

1. In the first figure the moods are, A A A — 
EAE-AII-EIO. 

2. In the second, E A E-A E E-E I O- 
AOO. 

3. Inthethird, AAI-IAI-AII-EAO 
-0 AO-EI 0. 

4. In the fourth, A A I-A E E-I AI- 
E AO-EIO. 

Written out, symbolically, and in fiiU the moods 
and figures run as follows : — 

FIRST FIGURE. 

Barbara, DariL 

A. Every Y is Z. A. Every Y is Z. 

A. Every X is Y. I. Some X's are Y's. 

A. Every X is Z. I. Some X's are Y's. 

Celaremt. Ferio. 

E. No Y is Z. E. No Y is Z. 

A. Every X is Y. I. Some X's are Y's. 

E. No X is Y. 0. Some X's are not Y's. 

SECOND FIGURE. 

Gemre. Festino. 

E. No Z is Y. E. No Z is Y. 

A. Every X is Y. I. some X's are Y's. 

E. No X is Z. 0. Some X's axe not Z's. 



Digitized by 



Google 



120 



PROPOSmOKS. 



Ca/mestTea, 
A. Every Z is Y. 
E. No X is Y. 
E. No X is Z. 

THIRD 

Barapti. 
A. Every Y is Z. 
A. Every Y is X. 
I. Some X's are Z. 

Diaamvis. 
I. Some Y's are Z's. 
A. Every Y is X. 
I. Some X's are Z's. 

Datiai, 
A. Every Y is Z. 
I. Some Y's are Z's. 
I. Some X's are Z's. 



Baroko. 
A. Every Z is Y. 
O. Some X's are not Y's. 
O. Some X's are not Z's. 

FIGURE. 

Felapton. 
E. No Y is Z. 
A. Every Y is X. 
O. Some X's are not Z's. 

Bokardo, 
O. Some Y's are not Z's. 
A. Every Y is X. 

0. Some X's are not Z's. 

Ferison. 
E. No Y is Z. 

1. Some Y's are Z's. 

O. Some X's are not Z's. 



FOURTH FIGURE. 

SraTnantip, Diinaris. 



A. Every Z is Y. 
A. Every Y is X. 
I. Some X s are Z's. 

Camenes, 
A. Every Z is Y. 
E. No Y is X. 
isZ. 



NoX 



I. Some Z s are Y's. 
A. Every Y is X. 
I. Some Z's are X's. 

Feaapo, 
E. No Z is Y. 
A. Every Y is X. 
O. Some X's are not Z's. 



Fresison. 
E. No Z is Y. 
I. Some Y's are X's. 
O. Some X's are not Y's. 
Each and all of these can be treated like AAA, 
E A E, &c., above. Indeed, they have so been 
treated, their mnemomics running — 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 121 

First figure— bArbArA, cElArEnt, dArll, fErlO. 

Second figure — cEsArE, cAmEstrEs, fEstInO, 
bArOkO. 

Third figure — dArAptI, dIsAmIs, dAtlsI, fE- 
lAptOn, bOkArdO, fErlsOn. 

Fourth figure — ^brAmAntlp, cAmEnEs, dImArls, 
f EsApO, fi-EsIsOn. 

Such are the mnemonics for the syllogisms in 
mood and figure. The form, however, in which 
they are best remembered is that of the four Latin 
hexameters which will be given in the next sec- 
tion. At present, observe that — 

In the fourth figure (the last discovered, and, as 
such, apparently the least dear) all the conclusions 
but one are particular, and that one negative; that — 

In the third, aU are particular ; three negative, 
three affirmative ; that — 

In the second, all are negative ; two universal, 
two particular. 

It is in the first only that we have all four kinds 
— ^negative, particular, universal, and affirmative. It 
is in the first only that we have any wniveraal 
affirmative conclusion at all. It is in the first only 
that we have (as aforesaid) the direct application of 
the dictum de orrmi et nulla. The first figure, in 
short, is, at once, the clearest and the most com- 
prehensive. In the first, we have the perfection of 
the syllogism ; the syllogisms belonging to it being 
actually called perfect as opposed to the vmperfect 
ones of the other three. No one reduces a syllo- 
gism of the first figure to any of the others. Many 
reductions are made fi:om figures II., III., and IV., 
to figure I. 

So much then, in the way of honour and glory 

G 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 PROPOSITIONS. 

to figure I., with its banrbara, cda/rmt, da/riiy and 
ferio. 

If we examine the reasons of this perfection, we 
shall find that they lie, to a great extent, in the 
place taken by the middle term. 

(53.) 

The Mnemonics, — WJvcvb is mecmt by thei/r Conso- 
Tiants, — Reduction. 

§ The metrical form of the mnemonic lines of the 
last section is now due ; along with which a further 
explanation of their contents will be given. The 
lines themselves are as follows: — 

Barbara, celarent, dani, ferioque, prioris. 

Cesare, camestres, festino, baroko secundse. 

Tertia darapti, disamis, datisi, felapton. 

Bokardo, ferison, habet ; quarta insuper addit. 

Bramantip, camenes, dimaris, fesapo, fi:esison. 
These, are Latin hexameters — ^at least, they pass 
for such. And this we should remember: other- 
wise there wiU be more than one of our coinages of 
doubtful quantity. It is only by the metre, that 
we are taught to pronounce baroko instead of barSko, 
dis^lmis instead of disamis, datisi instead of 
datlsi, ferison instead of ferison, cam^es instead of 
camenes, dim&ris Instead of dimaris, fesapo and 
fresison instead of fes&po and £re^(son. 

That the vowels denote the moods has ah-eady 
been stated, and there is not a vowel in the whole 
list that is superfluous. 

The vowels denote the mood, and nothing else. 
What tells us the figure ? This we learn firom the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PEOPOSinoNS. 123 

context, and it is all that the context, consisting of 
but few truly Latin words, does tell us. With 
priaris {the first), aecundce (the second), tertia (the 
third), and quarta (the fowrth), we must understand 
or supply ^ura (or fi^v/rce) =z figure. 

But the consonants — ^what is their function? 
Have they any ? May they not be merely arbitrary ? 

Let us first ask what there is that they ccm 
teach, us, i.e. what there is beyond the two fiw5ts of 
mood and figure which we have already been 
taught. De Morgan calls the mnemonics under 
notice, " magic words — ^words which I take to be 
more full of meaning than any that were ever 
made/' — (Formal Logic, p. 130.) Now words of 
this kind should speak through their every letter — 
consonants as well as vowels. And so they do. 
They speak to the phenomena of conversion and 
reduction, telling us what sort of conversions are 
effected, i.e. whether they are simple or accompa- 
nied by weakening or strengthening. They tell us, 
too, to what forms others are reduced. It is not 
for nothing that cesare begins with the same letter 
as celarent, and da/iryi and dara/pti with D. Ob- 
serve, too, how ba/roko, &c., begins like barbara, and 
felapton like ferio. 

Whatever may be the case with the remainder, 
none of the consonants at the hegi/n/wmg of the 
words are arbitrary. On the contrary, they con- 
nect the words to which they stand as initials 
with each other, e.g. cesa/re with celarent ; and that 
for the purposes of reduction. Cesare, when reduced, 
is reduced to celarent. 

With the exception of the initials, however, all 
the other consonants of the first line a/re arbitrary ; 

g2 



Digitized by 



Google 



124 PBOPOsrnoNS. 

these being 6 (when in the middle of a word as the 
second b in bar&ara), r, as in barba/r^ oelarent, 
darii, and ferio, and I, n, and ^ as in celanrent Add 
to these from the fourth line the d in bokardo ; which 
(unlike the d in darii, dimaris, dcUid, &c., fiiU of 
meaning) has no special signification. The only 
use, then, of b and d, when not initial, as weU as 
of I, Thy and t, is to improve the shape and sound 
of the words in which they occur. They gene- 
rally improve the sound, and sometimes help the 
metre. 

The remaining four — m, s, p, and h are never 
used indifferently. Hence, in disamia and fesapo 
every letter has not only its use but its meaning 
also. In disarms we learn from 

D, that the syllogism is reducible to darU ; from 

I A I, that its premises are particular affirmative 
and universal affirmative followed by a particular 
affirmative conclusion ; from 

S, that the major premiss, denoted by I, requires, 
in order to effect its reduction, that its terms should 
be transposed ; from 

M, that the minor premiss expressed by A, and 
the conclusion expressed by I must be transposed ; 
and, finally, from the second 

S, that the terms of the conclusion must be 
transposed. 

In like manner, /esapo says that the conversion 
must be to /erio ; and that the major premiss must 
have its terms transposed. But what is the mean- 
ing o{ p ? It is a new letter, and requires expla- 
nation. It means as much as s, and something 
more. It means not only, that the terms of the 
proposition expressed by a are to be transposed, but 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSITIONS. 125 

tHat their signs are to be changed as well. It 
means, for instance, that such a proposition as all 
men are mortal, is to be be converted, not into 

All mortals are men, 

which is illegitimate, but into 

Some mortals are men. 

K still remains to be explained. It means that 
BaroKo and BoKardo must be reduced by a pecu- 
Kar process ; a process which, in a sketch like the 
present, finds no place. 

All the significant non-initial consonants, then, 
express conversion and reduction. 

S expresses conversion in its simplest form, and, 
doubtless, stands for siTnplex, simplex conversion 
or conversio simplex. 

P, which denotes conversion accompanied by 
either strengthening or weakening is the first letter 
of per acddeTis, the technical name for conversions 
of this kind. 

M, as I imagine, = mutatio = change, and denotes 
the conversion, or transposition, of propositions — 
not merely of terms, but of whole combinations of 
terms, premises, and, even, conclusions. . 

K, perhaps (I have not the knowledge that enables 
me to speak with confidence), is used for the ex- 
ceptional cases of BaroKo and BoKardo, fi:om the 
fact of its being but half a Latin letter — an ex- 
ceptional element in the Latin alphabet. 

The greatest amount of conversion occurs in the 
several reductions of the syllogisms of the fourth 
figure. For this reason the two forthcoming ex- 
amples are taken therefirom. The first gives us a 



Digitized by 



Google 



126 PBOPOsmoNS. 

process which, in practical logic, never occurs, viz. 
the reduction (if so it may be called) of a syllogism 
in figure I. to a gyUogism in figure lY. ; the change 
being, always, in the other direction, i,e. from IV. 
to I. The present section, however, is meant to 
anticipate one in the sequel ; and for this reason, a 
secondary object is aimed at. The relation between 
the first and last of the four figures is so important, 
that I shall exhibit them by effecting a to-and-fio 
conversion ; i.e. b, conversion from the perfect into 
the imperfect, as well as one from the imperfect to 
the perfect. 

1. 

OPERATIONS ON BARBARA. 

Write— 

A. All men are mortal, 

A. All heroes are men, 

A. AU heroes are mortal, 

remembering that the mnemonic of it is BARBARA 
Eviscerate Barbara ; i.e. take out its middle 
consonants, leaving spaces between the vowels, to 
be filled up as occasion requires — ^BA.A.A. 

Operate on the syllogism, beginning with the 
conclusion, by transposing its terms. But this can- 
not be done without weakening the subject, the 
converse of all men are mortal being some 
mortals are men. However, as this weakening can 
be effected, our syllogism now runs — 

A. All men are mortal, 
A. All heroes are men, 
I. Some mortals are heroes ; 

a change having been made which we must now 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsmoNS. 127 

express by acting on the BA.A.A, — the skeleton 
of the eviscerated Barba/ra, — and changing the 
third Ainto I, adding P. This will give BA. A.IP; 
a form which shows that a universally affirmative 
conclusion has been weakened by conversion into a 
particvla/r one, the conversion, with its concomitant 
change of cJZ into some being denoted by P. 

Proceed, moving from the conclusion to the minor 
premiss, moving upvxirds^ so to say. Proceed, and 
change. Transpose the premises. This wiU give — 
A. All heroes are men, 
A. All men are mortal, 
I. Some mortals are heroes. 

Express this change in the order of the propo- 
sitions by its proper letter, M, which must be 
written between the first two A's in the now 
metamorphosed Barbara, — BAMAIP,— every letter 
of which word is significant. 

Finish, however, with improving its form by 
means of the letters r, n, t, n, d, or 6 — say 
by means of the first three. In short, write 
BBAMANTIP, or (with the nonnsignificant letters 
in itaUcs) BRAKANTIP. 

2. 

OPERATIONS ON CAHENES. 

The mnemonic for the second syllogism of the 
fourth figure is CAMENES, every letter of which 
tells a tale. 

To begin with C. This informs us that Celarent 
is the form to which it is reducible. 

A. E. E. These denote that the major premiss is 
universally affirmative, but that the minor and the 



Digitized by 



Google 



128 PROPOSITIONS. 

conclusion are universally negative. But this order 
(A E E) is not that of Celarmt (which is E A E). 
And now — 

M brings its quota of information. It says that 
the two premises between which it stands must 
change places — a transposition which actually gives 
usEAE. 

N, as aforesaid, says nothing, but — 

S bids us effect a si/mple conversion (i,e, a con- 
version without either weakening or strengthening) 
of the terms of the conclusion — ^a simple conver- 
sion. Had it been accompanied by any i further 
change, we must have written jp; i-e. CAMEnEP, 
instead of (which we have now) CAMEnES. 

Follow the directions thus given, and out of the 
following in Gamienes — 

A. Whatever-is-expedient is conformable to Na- 
ture, 

E. Whatever-is-conformable-to-Nature, is-not 
hurtful to society, 

E. Nothing-hurtful-to-society is ever expedient, 
you get 

E. Whatever-is-conformable-to-Nature is-not 
hurtful to society, 

A. Whatever-is-expedientisconformable-to-Nature, 
therefore 

E. Whatever-is-expedient is^not hmiiul-to-society, 
in Oelarent : i, e, in figure I. 

These are fair samples of the amount of opera- 
tions required in order to reduce either I. to IV., 
or IV. to I. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSinoNS. 129 

(54.) 

The Middle Term, as Contained and Containing. 
— Perfection of the First Figure. 

§. The figure most in use is the First. 
Wherever conversion is effected, it is always fi:om 
one of the last three figures to the first— never 
vice versd. 

No wonder. The first figure id the clearest and 
the most comprehensive. It contains Barbara, the 
only syllogism that gives a universally affirmative 
conclusion. Now, 

In the first figure the middle term is eminently 
what its name denotes — middle. 
In the two propositions 

AH men are mortal, 
AH heroes are men, 
what is the value or magnitude of the middle term, 
mam, ? What does it mean ? It means more than 
hero, less than mortal. 

All heroes are Tnen, but, as all men are not 
heroes, the class of men is the larger of the two. 
There are some m£n who are not heroes. 
All heroes are men, 

but only 
Som£ men are heroes. 
Mutatis mutandis : when we say all m^n are 
Tnortals we state that the collection of men is 
smaller than, and contained in, the collection of 
mortals. 

All men are mortal, 

but only 
Some mortals are men. 

G 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



130 PROPOSITIONS. 

Here — 
Mortals = the major ^ which contams 
Men, or the middle, which, though contained by- 
Mortals, corvtaviis 
Heroes, or the mmor, contained by both. 

Viewed in respect to the collection of m^ortaZa, 
the collection of men is corUavned. 

Viewed in respect to the collection of heroes, the 
collection of m£n is containing. 

Such are the relations of the middle term, as the 
name of a class; contained and containing being 
the words that express them. 

When the middle term is containing and con- 
tained it is both really middle, and rationally 
middle ; i.e. it is what its name denotes, and that 
without disturbing the names of either of its two 
associated terms — major and minor. 

How far this is the case with the other three 
figures remains to be seen. How far the dictum 
de omni et nullo applies directly to the other figures 
remains to be seen also. That it applies directly 
enough to figure I. is obvious. 

But, before we see the indirect character of its 
other applications, the section upon the Quantity 
of the Predicate (§39) must be brought back to 
our memories. 

(56.) 

Contained a/ad Containing capadtiea of the 
Middle Term. — Predicates Containvng, Subjects 
Contained, Tei^ms. 

§. In a universally affirmative proposition the 
predicate is particular. All rnen are mxyrtal, but 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 131 

only some mortals are m&n. This has been stated 
more than once before, and that explicitly. But 
certain deductions from it have not been so ex- 
plicitly stated. Some and aU have different mag- 
nitudes according to the term to which they are 
attached. With a predicate they mean one thing, 
-with a subject another. 

To say all men are mortal is to say some men 
are mortal — ^this and something more. It is to 
say that, if all m^n are Tnortal, some men are so 
d fortiori. The greater includes the smaller, the 
whole the parts. But these powers of all and 
some are only found when they apply to the same 
word. When we come to such expressions as 
ma/n is mortal, their import changes. 

When one thing is affirmed of another, the predi- 
cate gives the larger, the subject the smaller class of 
objects. A collection, consisting of all the men in 
the world, makes but a part of the collection of all 
its mOTtals, or mortal beings. 

Hence, particular predicates contain universal 
subjects ; this being but another way of say- 
ing that the whole of a smaller class is no more 
than the part of a larger one; in other words, sub- 
jects, as such, are contained in predicates as such. 
Hence, when a middle term is a predicate, it ccm- 
ixbi/as ; when a subject, it is contai/ned. 

Such is the case when the proposition is, at one 
and the same time, universal and affirmative. When 
the proposition is, at one and the same time, uni- 
versal and affirmative, the predicate is necessarily 
larger than the subject. From this it follows that 
wherever the middle term is a predicate, it is, ipso 
facto, larger than the subject and contains the sub- 



Digitized by 



Google 



132 PBOPOsrnoNS. 

ject. On the other hand, wherever it is a subject, 
it is smaller than the predicate and contained by- 
it. 

Now, in Barbara^ the middle term is not only a 
subject, but the subject of the major proposition. 
What would it be if it were the subject of the 
minor one ? It would be something awkward, or, 
at any rate, something that would bring in limita- 
tions or complications of some kind, inasmuch as it 
would be in its wrong place. It would be subject, 
and small, where it ought to be predicate, and large. 
As a middle term, it ought to contain the minor ; 
as a subject, it would be contained by it. 

(56.) 

Imperfection of the Second Figure. — The Middle 
Term not really Middle, 

If the predicates and subjects in universally 
aflSrmative propositions be essentially, and, as pre- 
dicates and subjectSy of different capacities, it is 
obvious that a middle term, which is only a pre- 
dicate, is below its functions ; i. e, that it is incom- 
petent to perform the double duty of containing 
and being contained. 

Nevertheless, aU the middle terms of the Second 
figure are predicates, and predicates only. They 
all, in universally aflirmative propositions, contain ; 
they none of them are contained. If this be the 
case, where are our majors ? Nowhere. They are 
minors. 

It is obvious that complications or limitations of 
some sort must come out of this imperfection in the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsrnoNS. 133 

function of the middle term of the second figure. 
And come they do. There is no such a thing (as 
has already been stated) throughout the figure as a 
universally affirmative conclusion. There is no 
affirmative conclusion at aU. The conclusions are, 
one and all, negative. 

(57.) 

Imperfection of the Third Figure. — The Middle 
Term not really Middle, 

§ If predicates and subjects in universally affir- 
mative propositions be, essentially, and as predicates 
a/ad subjects, of different capacities, a middle term, 
that is only a subject, must be below its functions, 
•i. e. incompetent to do the double duty of contain- 
ing and being contained. 

Nevertheless, all the middle terms of the Third 
figure are subjects, and subjects only. They all, in 
universally affirmative propositions, are contained. 
None contain. K this be the case, where are our 
minors ? They are all majors. 

We foresee what is to come of this. In the third 
figure, where the middle term is only the subject, 
we expect only negative or particular conclusions. 
And this is all that we shall find. 

(58.) 

Imperfection of the Fourth Figure. — The Middle 
Term not rationally Middle. 

The reasons for the Second and Third figures 
being imperfect fail when applied to the Fourth. 



Digitized by 



Google 



134 PBOPOSinoNS. 

Tet the Fourth is, if anything, the most imperfect 
figure of all. That it was the longest in being 
discovered has already been stated. It has also 
been suggested that it was no very valuable disco- 
very, when made. The fourth figure is the one 
which is most generally, either avoided or re- 
duced. Yet it has one of the characteristics of 
the first — the model first, the perfect first. Its 
middle term is truly middle. It stands between 
its major and its minor. What is this but mediety 
or middlehood ? It stands between two other classes, 
and it contains intermediate quantities — more than 
one, less than the other. Is not this enough ? It 
is enough, perhaps, to make a middle, if we look 
for mediety, or middlehood, alone. But we look for 
more than this. We must get not only an inter- 
mediate midcUe, but a greater major, and a smaller 
mmor. But this the fourth figure denies us. 

In the fourth figure the middle term is the pre- 
dicate of the major proposition, the major term 
being, of course, the subject. Now, term for term, 
the predicate, as opposed to the subject, gives the 
larger, or containing, class. Here, however, this 
larger, or containing, dass is represented by the 
middle, or smaller, term ; whilst, vice versa, the 
major, or nominally larger term, is the subject, or 
contained, term. 

Mutatis mvia/ndis, this contradiction repeats 
itself in the minor proposition. There, the middle 
term, being the subject, is smaller than, and con- 
tained in, the minor ; which it ought, nominally, to 
contain. 

It is not, then, too much to say, that middles of 
this kind are irrational middles. As middles alone 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 136 

they stand fairly enough ; but they terribly dislo- 
cate their neighbouring majors and minors. .In 
fiswt, they convert the one into the other. 

In figure IV. all the conclusions are either parti- 
cular or negative. This is what we expect ; and 
that a great deal of manoeuvring in the way of 
conversion and reduction is necessary, in order to 
transfer its syllogisms into figure I., has been seen. 
In fiu3t, figure IV. is figure I. inverted. 

If we now inquire as to the amount of dis- 
turbance manifested in the imperfect figures, we 
shall find that it is as follows : — 

For Figure II — a contained instead of a contain- 
ing majoTy and a containing instead of a contained 
middle. 

For Figure III — ^a containing instead of a con- 
tained minor, and a contained instead of a contain- 
ing middle. 

For Figure IV — ^a containing minor and a con- 
tained m/ijor. 

It is obvious that) wherever there is an abnormal 
middle term, there are limitations and complica- 
tions to match. 



(59.) 
Reca/pitvlation. 

We may now recapitulate our statements upon 
the place and fimction of the middle term. 

Its place is in the premises, as opposed to the con- 
clusion ; in which last its presence was impossible. 
The conclusion gave the results of a measurement or 
classification, the premises the act of measuring or 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 PROPOSITIONS. 

dassifying. The result being obtained, the means 
by which it is brought about are kept back. 

In the premises it had to appear twice ; there 
being two things to which it served as a means of 
measurement or classification. It had to deter- 
mine that (for instance) man was Tnortal, and, also, 
that heroes were men. 

It had not only to appear twice, but each appear- 
ance had to be made in a different premiss. Were 
it not so, it must have appeared twice in the same, 
and that would have given us nothing but a truism 
— men are men. 

Thus far its place was a matter of absolute 
necessity; inasmuch as, unless the previous con- 
ditions were complied with, there would have been 
no syllogism at all. The following were necessary 
for a perfect one. 

The middle term should be really middle, i.e. it 
should contain one of the remaining terms and be, * 
itself, contained by the other. 

But, to make it this, a simple place in two dif- 
ferent propositions was not enough. For the 
middle term to be really middle it was necessary for 
it to be a subject in one of its places and a predi- 
cate in the other. 

Nor was it enough for it to be really middle. It 
must be really and rationally so. For though a 
place between a major and a minor may make a 
middle, the majors and minors themselves may 
be unreal — the major being smaller, instead of 
larger, than the middle ; the minor, larger instead 
of smaller. 

Hence, for middles to be really and rationally 
middle, their majors and minors must be real and 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSITIONS. 137 

rational also ; and this can only occur where the 
major contains, and the Tnmor is contained. 

But the former of these conditions (or the major 
containing the middle) can only be found where the 
major is predicate and the middle subject ; the pre- 
dicate being, essentially, the larger or containing 
term, the subject the smaller or contained. 

And the latter (or the middle containing the minor) 
can only be found where the minor is subject, i.e. 
the smaller term. 

But, ex vi termini, it is only in major proposi- 
tions that we find major terms ; and vice verad. 
Hence it is only where the middle term is subject 
in the major and predicate in the minor, that it is 
really and rationally, at one and the same time, 
a contained and containing term. 



(60.) 
Rules. 

§ 1 . The middle term must enter universally iq, 
at least, one of the premises. 

This means, that if neither premiss contain a 
middle term universally, it is no premiss at aU. 

2. From two negative premises no conclusion can 
be drawn. 

This means, that if both premises are negative, 
they are no premises at aU. 

3. From two particular premises no conclusion 
can be drawn. 

This means, that if both premises are particular, 
they are no premises at aU. 



Digitized by 



Google 



138 PROPOSITIONS. 

4. No term in ihe oonclusioii can be more 
general than it was in the premises. 

This means, that conclusions which give out 
more than the premises supplied are no conclusions 
atalL 

5. K one premiss be particular the condudon 
must be particular. 

6. K one premiss be negative the conclusion 
must be negative. 

(61.) 
Th& Ordmoi/ry Syllogism caUed AristoteUcm. 

The syllogism, when it is jfiramed in obedience to 
the rules just laid down, and when it takes the 
form just exhibited, is conveniently called the Aria- 
toteUcm syllogism. And it is called so by numerous 
important writers. The term is, by no means, 
unexceptionable; neither is it open to any very 
grave objections. It is intelligible and convenient^ 
and not more incorrect than the generality of terms 
of the same kind. 

The reason for the name is scarcely to be found 
in the fact of Aristotle being answerable for its 
present form ; inasmuch as the ordinary syllogism 
is framed according to a series of hints and infer- 
ences miscellaneously distributed over his writings, 
but put into form and developed by his commen- 
tators rather than according to anything sytema- 
tically exhibited by the master himself. 

Again, the fourth figure is attributed to Galen. 
This, alone, subtracts a certain number of formulaB 
from the Aristotelian list of moods and figures — 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 189 

supposing, even, that all the others are due to 
Aristotle. The accuracy or inaccuracy of the cur- 
rent doctrine respecting Galen's share in the deve- 
lopment of the syllogism as it stands at present is 
not very important. The common view, even if 
incorrect, is, to a certain extent, against the state- 
ment that the syllogism called Aristotelia/n took 
its name from the fact of Aristotle's having given 
it its shape, and sent it forth into the world under 
the sanction of his great and influential name. 

The truer reason for the use of the word lies in the 
extent to which, during the prevalence of the Aris- 
totelian philosophy, the syllogism in, as near as can 
be, its present form was the great instrument of 
reasoning with the schoolmen and philosophers 
akin to them. It was according to the rules of the 
syllogism that the vast majority of theological, 
moral, and other questions were investigated. 
Meanwhile, the authority of Aristotle was all-pow- 
erfiil ; and it was in accordance with his formulae, 
either expressed or implied, that men either actually 
reasoned, or imagined that they did. 

The name Aristotdicm, then, as applied to the 
ordinary syllogism, is convenient. It is also current. 
Whether, however, the rules upon which the syllo- 
gism is framed are, each and all, actually of 
Aristotelian origin, is another question. 

Are they exceptionable or unexceptionable, suf- 
ficient or insufficient, capable or incapable of im- 
provement ? Is anything admitted that ought to 
be excluded ? Is anything excluded that ought to 
be admitted ? This is to be seen. 



Digitized by 



Google 



140 PROPOSITIONS. 

(62.) 
Certain Ariatotelicm Syllogisms over-strong. 
In propositions like 



I. Some men are heroes, 
A. John is a man, 
A. John is a hero, 

the conclusion is too strong for the premises ; or 
rather the premises are too weak for the conclusion. 
In other words, there is a violation of the fourth 
rule of the 60th section ; the conclusion being more 
general than the premises; the conclusion being 
universal, the premises being partly universal, and 
partly particular. In consequence of this the three 
sentences under notice are neither more nor less 
than three separate and unconnected propositions. 
They are anything but a syllogism. They only 
take the guise of one. 

Upon combinations of this kind enough, and, 
perhaps, more than enough, has been said. There 
is something, however, to be said concerning their 
contraries. What is the result when the premises 
are too strong for the conclusion, or rather the con- 
clusion is too weak for the premises ? In other 
words, what takes place when the limitations of 
our fourth rule are not only observed, but observed 
too strictly ? What takes place when the last of 
three propositions is a conclusion, and something 
more? 

This is, by no means, an irrelevant question. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 14X 

Whether the reader have observed it or not, more 
than one instance of these over-strong conckisions 
has been laid before him. Have not the examples 
in Darapti been of this kind ? When we wrote— 

• A. All men are mortal, 

A. All m£n are rational bemgs, 
I. Some rational heimga are mortal^ 

there was an unnecessary expenditure of strength 
in the major proposition. If we had simply said — 

I. SoWjC men a/re mxyrtal, 

we should have said enough for our conclusion. 
Everything beyond this was a superfluity. It 
proved the case, but it proved it something more. 

It may be said, however, that in this there is 
neither harm nor inconvenience, that a conclusion 
which is true concerning a whole is true concerning 
a part of that whole. It may be said, in short, 
that superfluities do no mischief — BV/perflua non 
nocent On the other hand, however, formulae ought 
not to be midtiplied unnecessarily, and what is 
Darapti but an unnecessary appendage to Disamis 
and Datisi ? which is 



or- 



I. Some men are mortal. 

A. All men are rational beings. 

I. Som£ rational beings are mortal. » 

A. All men are vnortal. 

I, Sows men are rational beings. 

I. Some rational beings are mortal. 

The inference is the same, whatever be the order 
of the premises. Of these, oTie, provided it be 



Digitized by 



Google 



142 PROPOSITIONS. 

universal^ will give a particular conclusion. Two 
will do no more. 

It is clear, then, that there are such things in 
Logic as over-strong conclusions, conclusions which 
a smaller amount of premiss would have given 
equally weD. 

Extract. 

** Several of the usual syllogisms are more strong than 
need be in the premises, in order to produce the conclusion. 
Thus,"*" Y) X and Y) Z being admitted as premises, the 
necessary conclusion is X Z. But if Y) X be weakened 
into Y X, the same conclusion follows. If we call a 
syllogism fundamental^ when neither of its premises are 
stronger than is necessary to produce the conclusion, it is 
obvious that every fundamental syllogism which has a 
particular premise, gives at least as strong a conclusion 
when that particular is strengthened into a universal. But, 
except when strengthening the premise also enables us to 
strengthen the conclusion, in which case we have a new 
and different syllogism, it seems hardly systematic to mix 
up with fundamental arguments, syllogisms which have 
quantity or quality more than is necessary for the conclu- 
sion.*' — De Morgan, Formal Logic, p. 77. 

Admit the truth of the last sentence in this ex- 
tract, and you admit that an exception lies againBt 
one, at least, of the formulae of the ordinary syllo- 
gism. 

An exception lies against it on the score of its 
being over-strong. 

* According to the notation of the work here quoted Y) X, 
hc's^every Y, whilst Y X s= wm^ Y is X 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOsrnoNS. 143 



(63.) 

CeHava AristoteUan Syllogisms over-strong. — 
Conclusions A fobtioki. 

With a clear notion of the difference between 
sufficiency and ove^-st^^ngth, we may now consider 
the import and suggestions of the following imagi- 
nary 

DIALOGUE. 

Examiner. — ^What is the predicate in the major proposi- 
tion of this syllogism ? 

Elephants are stronger than horses ; 
Horses are stronger than men ; 
Elephants are stronger than men. 

Hasty student (at once). — Horses. 

Cautious student {after a pause). — Stronger than horses. 

Examiner, — ^The latter answer is the right, the former 
the wrong, one. Horses is the subject of the minor, 
stronger than horses the predicate of the major, proposi- 
tion. What follows from this? 

Hasty student. — That the conclusion is true. 

Cautious student. — That there is no middle term. 

Examiner. — As a matter of fsust each answer is correct 
The latter, however, is correct as a point of logic. In 
syllogisms like the one in question thebb is no middle 

TEBM. 

Students. — Is it right, then, to call such combinations as 
the one in question syllogisms? 
Examiner. — ^We can scarcely deny them the name. 

Neither can we. The conclusion that they give 
is true^ and over true ; it is also deduced from the 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 PROPOSITIONS. 

premises. What more is wanted ? Hear what Pro- 
fessor De Morgan says. 

EXTBACT. 

" A is greater than B, B is greater than C, therefore A 
is greater than G. There is no middle term here : the 
predicate of the first proposition is ' a thing greater than 
B,* the subject of the second proposition is * B.' 

** Admitting fully that the quality of the premises — that 
which entitles the conclusion to be made is, as it is said, 
a fortiori — marks this argument out as, if anything, 
stronger, clearer (and could such a thing be), truer than a 
simple syllogism ; yet it is plain, that the very additional 
circumstance on which this additional clearness depends, 
takes the argument out of a syllogism, as defined by all 
writers." — Formal Logic, p. 77. 



(64.) 

Syllogisms in which both the Premises are 
Particular. 

It has been stated in § 60, that firom two parti- 
cular premises no conclusion can be drawn. Is 
this a rule for all, or is it a rule for only the Aristo- 
telian, syllogisms ? 

It is Tiot a rule for all syllogisms. It is only a 
rule for the Aristotelian. 

This may be seen by the following operations 
on — 

A. All men are mortal ; 

A. All men are rational beings ; 

I. Some rational beings are mortal. 

(Darapti,) 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 145 

Weaken either of the two premises into — 
A. All men are mortal ; 
I. Some men are rational beings ; 
I. Some rational beings are mortal. 

(Datid,) 

We have seen what comes of this. The fact 
of the premises in Darapti being over-strong has 
already been stated. The rule, however, in question 
has been adhered to. 

To have written, — 

Some men are mortal ; 

Some men are rational beings ; 

Some rational beings are mortal, 

•would have been to have written three unconnected 
propositions, looking as if they formed a syllogism, 
but not doing so in reality. 

But what if, instead of the word some, we had 
written in the premises, the words Toore than half ? 
In that case our sentences would have run thus : — 

More thorn, half the men in the universe are mortal ; 
More than half are rational beings ; 

therefore. 
Some rational beings are mortal. 

Is this a true conclusion ? It is. Why, then, do 
we deny that the proposition in which it is em- 
bodied fonns a syllogism ? Because the Aristotelian 
rules exclude such expressions as more than half 
limiting our quantities to the terms, ally some, and 
none. 

More wiU be said in the sequel concerning the 
questions suggested by this and the two preceding 
questions. At present, it is considered that the 



Digitized by 



Google 



146 PROPOSITIONS. 

exposition of the rules and structure of the Aris- 
totelian syllogism, followed by a sketchy suggestion 
of the chief points on which it is susceptible of 
modification, is enough. 

65. 

Two, or more, Propositions disguised as one. 

§ No proposition has more than two terms, viz. 
one subject and one predicate. Where there is 
more than one of either, there is more than one 
proposition. Nevertheless, we may have two or 
more propositions conveyed by a single sentence. The 
commonest instances of this are the cases where, 
with two difierent subjects, we have the same pre- 
dicate, or, with two diflferent predicates, the same 
subject. Thus : — 

1. The sun and the moon shine. 

2. The sun shines and dazzles. 

In each of these sentences we have, in reality, 
two propositions, viz. : — 

1. 

a. The sun shines. 
6. The moon shines. 

2. 
a. The sun shines. 
6. The sun dazzles. 
This is because sun and moon, shines and daz- 
zles, are separate and independent terms. 
Had we, however, said — 

1 . The sun, along with the moon, shines ; 

2. The sun shines so as to dazzle, 

the condition of the two latter words would have 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOPOSITIONS. 147 

been different. They would have been subordi- 
nated to 8un and sM-ne, so as to constitute only a 
single proposition. This single proposition, how- 
ever, would have been many- worded in respect to 
one of its terms. 

This difference between two separate terms and 
one compound is shown in the grammar of the 
following sentences : — 

1. The sun and moon shine. 

2. The sun shines. 

3. The moon shines. 

4. The sun shines and dazzles. 

5. The sun shines so as to dazzle. 

Such are the examples of two propositions dis- 
guised as one, 

66. 
Propositions as Parts of Terms. 

§ A pair of simple propositions is one thing. A 
single proposition consisting of a multiplicity of 
subordinate terms is another. 

I have now to remark that terms may be so very 
many-worded as to embrace not only other terms, 
like themselves, but even whole propositions. 

1. The man (is) returning. 

2. Who (was) sent to market. 

Combine these (omitting the words is and return- 
i/ngy which serve as copula and predicate), and they 
form but a single subject. Thus : the man who 
was sent to mxirket {is) returning. The words 
man who was sent to market form but a single 

H 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



148 PROPOSITIONS. 

term ; a many-worded one, doubtless, yet still but 
a single term. 

In the opening of the Paradise Lost, the lines, 

" The fruit 

Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste 
Brought death into the world, and all our woe, 
With loss of Edeo, till one greater Man 
Eestore us, and regain the blissful seat,*' 

form in the estimation of the logician but one 
name; a many-worded one, no doubt; a very 
many-worded one, but not more so than many 
others. 

67. 

Extent to which Language consists of Proposi- 
tions, — Eoctracts. 

We are like the universally famous and immortal 
Monsieur Jourdain of Molifere, who, beginning the 
study of grammar and rhetoric somewhat late, and 
beginning it with a definition of the difference be- 
tween poetry and prose, was surprised to find that 
he had talked prose all his lifetime without knowing 
it. Instead ot prose write proposition, and Mon- 
sieur Jourdain's case is our own. We have uttered 
propositions ever since we knew how to speak, 
uttering them unconsciously. We have never stated 
either a truth or a truism without forming a propo- 
sition. We have never misstated, or heard mis- 
stated, a fact or a pretension to a fact without 
either delivering, or listening to, or writing, or read- 
ing a propositioD. We have never asked a ques- 
tion that was not a proposition ; never effected a 
command that was not one. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 149 

Consider all this carefully, and you will have 
found one way of measuring the great proportion 
which propositions bear to the rest of our conver- 
sation. 

Or you may get at the same result by consider- 
ing what words do not enter into the structure of 
propositions, and by observing how few they are. 
They are just the words like ah ! oh ! pish ! 

They will not combine with other words so as to 
form sense. They will neither make a proposition 
by themselves nor help to make one in conjunction 
with other words. The person who uses them, 
uses them as he would use a gesture, to express 
surprise, pain, or contempt ; but, although he uses 
them thus, he makes no affirmation. He no more 
affirms that he is surprised, or that he is in pain, 
or that he is scornful, than if he started back, or 
laid his hand upon a tender part of his body, or 
curled his lip contemptuously ; and in like manner 
the hearer understands his meaning. But he would 
have understood a gesture as well. Nothing is 
affirmed or denied by the words. Neither do they 
enter into propositions wherein anything is affirmed 
or denied. They are wholly independent of pro- 
positions ; as much so as the hiss of a snake, or the 
groan of a wounded animal — expressions of which 
we infer the meaning, but expressions as to the 
meaning whereof we are not informed in the way 
that we are informed by propositions. 

Save and except such words as these, there are 
none in the whole universe of language that exist 
independently of propositions. 

That they are words which exist out of, or be- 
yond, the limits of propositions has been shown, 



Digitized by 



Google 



150 PROPOSITIONS, 

but an existence beyond the Irniits of a propositioTi 
is by no means the same as an existence ind&- 
pendent of a proposition. Though words like 
therefore, because, if &c., form no part of any one 
proposition at all, they connect several. 

Hence, by observing that there are but two 
classes of words that do not enter into the structure 
of propositions, that neither class is numerous, and 
that the words of one of them, though belonging 
to no single proposition, imply the existence of 
t%vo, we find additional proofe of the great extent 
to which propositions are the staple and foundation 
of language. 

We may find them, too, by looking in another 
direction. Mathematicians, who rarely write upon 
language without supplying valuable suggestions to 
even the professed philologues, have, oftener than 
once, attempted an expression of its laws, by means 
of signs and symbols, algebraic in either detail 
or principle. The following extracts are from the 
Laws of Thought by Professor Boole. They show 
that by means of literal symbols we may express all 
terms, and by means of four signs all the relations 
between them. Now every one of these terms 
implies the existence of a proposition. With the ex- 
ception, however, of the class of words like oA ! ah ! 
&c., they represent all that is represented by lan- 
guage. 

Extract. 

Proposition I. 

" All the operations of language, as an instrument oj 
reasoning, may be conducted by a system of signs composed 
of the following elements. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 151 

•* 1st. Literal symbols, as x y, dc, representing things as 
subjects of our conceptions. 

** ilnd. Signs of operation, as -f, — , x , standing for 
those operations of the mind by which the conceptions of 
things are combined, or resolved, so as to form new concep- 
tions involving the same elements. 

** 3rd. The sign of identity =. 

*n •n *F *l^ *n *n 

" Class I. 
** Appellative or Descriptive Signs, expressing either the Name 
of a Thing, or some quality or circumstance belonging 
to it. 
" Let us agree to represent the class of individuals to 
which a particular name, or description, is applicable by a 
single letter, as «. 

" If the name is * men,' for instance, let x represent * all 
men,* or the class * men.* By a class is usually meant a 
collection of individuals to each of which a particular 
name or description may be applied. Again, if an adjective, 
as * good,* is employed as a term of description, let us re- 
present by a letter, as y, all things to which the description 
of * good,' is applicable, i. e. * all good things,* or the class 

* good things.* Let it further be agreed, that by the 
combination x y, shall be represented that class of things 
to which the names or descriptions represented by x and 
y are simultaneously applicable. Thus, if x alone stand 
for * white things,* and y for * sheep,* let x y stand for 

* white sheep,* and, in like manner, if z stand for * homed 
things,* and x and y retain their previous interpretations, 
let zxy represent * horned white sheep,' i.e. that collec- 
tion of things to which the name * sheep,* and the de- 
scriptions * white* and * homed* are together applicable. 

" Class XL 
" Signs of those Mental Operations whereby we collect Parts 
into a Whole, or separate a Whole into its Parts. 
" We are not only capable of entertaining the concep- 



Digitized by 



Google 



152 PROPOSITIONS. 

tions, as characterised by names, qualities, or circum- 
stances, applicable to each individual of the group under 
consideration, but also of forming the aggregate conception 
of a group of objects, consisting of partial groups, each of 
which is separately named and described. For this pur- 
pose we use conjunctions, * and,' * or,' &c. In this and in all 
other respects, the words *and,' *or,' are analogous with the 
sign -f in algebra. Let x represent * men,' y * women ; ' 
and let -f stand for * and' and * or,' then we have — 

^ + y = y + iP. 
Let the symbol ;? stand for the adjective * European;' then, 
since it is, in effect, the same thing to say * European men 
and European women,' we may have — 

z{x + y)=.zx -\-zy. 
The above are the laws which govern the use of the sign +, 
here used to denote the positive operation of aggregating 
parts into a whole. But the very idea of an operation 
effecting some positive change seems to suggest to us the 
idea of an opposite or negative operation, having the effect 
of undoing what the former one has done. Thus we 
cannot conceive it possible to collect parts into a whole. 
This operation we express in common language by the sign 
except^ as, * All men except Asiatics.' * All States except 
those which are monarchial.' Here it is implied that the 
things excepted form a part of the things from which they 
are excepted. As we have expressed the operation of 
aggregation by the sign -f ,so we may express the negative 
operation above described by — (minus). Thus if x be taken 
to represent men, and y Asiatics, i.e. Asiatic men, then 
the conception of * All men except Asiatics ' will be ex- 
pressed by a? — y. And if we represent by x States, and 
by y the descriptive property * having a monarchial form,' 
then the conception of * all States except those which are 
monarchial,' will be expressed by a?— a? y. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 153 

"Class III. 
** Signs by which Belation is expressed y and hy which we 
form Propositions. 
" Though all verbs may with propriety be referred to this 
class, it is sufficient for the purposes of Logic to consider 
it as including only the substantive verb is and are, since 
every other verb may be resolved into this element, and 
one of the signs included in Class I. The above sign, is 
or arcy may be expressed by the symbol = * The stars 
are the suns and the planets/ Let us represent stars by 
a?, suns by y, and planet^ by z : we have then — 
x=:y -\-z. 
** Now, if it be true, that the stars are the suns and the 
planets, it will follow that the stars, except the planets, are 
suns. This would give the equation — 

a? — ;? = y. 
Thus a term z has been removed from one side of an 
equation to another." — Laws of Thought y chap. 3. 

68. 

§ An objection has now to be anticipated. It 
turns upon the element thvng in the compound word 
sometkmg, a word that has played its part some- 
what conspicuously. 

Let us take two birds, a crow, and a hen black- 
bird. 

What are their respective characters ? The crow 
is unequivocally black, the hen blackbird (for it is 
of the hen that we most especially speak) is brown, 
rather than black. Both are birds ; the crow 
being a black bird so-called from its colour, the 
other being no black bird at all, but a brown black- 

H 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 PROPOSITIONS. 

bird. Hence — ^we may say (as many have said) 
that all black birds are not blaekbi/rda (crows are 
not), and all bloMirds are not black birds (a hen 
blackbird is not). This is a convenient and common 
illustration of the difference between tvx> words 
and a compound word. 

When the combination consists of two words, 
there is an accent on each of them, as in hl&ck 
bird. 

When the combination results in a compound, 
the accent is on only one, i.e. the first of them, 
e,g. bl^kbird. Hence, we pronounce (and often 
write) as follows : — 

AU black birds are not bldckbirdSy and all 
blackbirds are not black birds. 

Now the same kind of difference that exists be- 
tween bldck bird and blackbird exists between some 
thing and sSmething ; a difference which is of 
no small importance. What have we written about 
propositions ? That they are sentences, consisting 
of certain members, elements, or constituents called 
Subject, Copula, and Predicate, and that they either 
assert or deny something concerning something. 
The something here spoken of is evidently a com- 
pound word, spelt as such, and accented as such — 
sSinething, not sdme thing. 

The s6mething^ then, that is spoken of in the 
definition of a proposition is a word like blackbird 
and not a word Uke bldck bird. 

We shall see the reason for this distinction if we 
ask what would have been the case if it had been 
otherwise; i.e. if the definition of a proposition 
had been that it was a sentence wherein and 
whereby some thing was affirmed or denied of 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 156 

aSme thing. What, with such a definition as 
this, would be the case of such a statement as 

John is a hero? 

Woidd it be right to say, that human beings 
like John are things ; that heroes are things ? As- 
suredly, this is not the language either of common 
life, or the common law, in both of which we 
draw a clear distinction between persons, on one 
side, and thi/ngs on the other. A person is not a 
thing ; neither is a thvng a person. Nevertheless, 
the statement that John is a hero is a proposition. 
Neither is the ordinary definition inaccurate. All 
that is wanted to reconcile the two apparent con- 
tradictions is, a clear remembrance of the feet that 
sSmething has a wider meaning than s67ne thing. 
The former includes persons and things properly so 
(jailed. The latter excludes persons. 

Persons are not the only somethings that are 
opposed to things. Jmmaterial beings, essences, 
existences, entities, or whatever else they may be 
called, are in the same predicament. We can make 
such jM*opositions as the following : — 

Hope is a blessing. 

Patience is a virtue. 

Fear is unworthy of a soldier. 

Conscience is a good guide. 

All that remains is hope. 

There is no remedy but patience. 

Health is the greatest worldly good. 

Here is an instance of perfect disinterestedness. 

Whiteness is the essence of snow. 

All these are good • propositions ; yet few will 



Digitized by 



Google 



156 PROPOSITIONS. 

call Hope, Patience, Fear, Conscience, Health, Dis- 
interestedness, Whiteness, things. 

Are words like whitey &c., somethings ? We have 
assuredly predicated them of certaiu subjects, e.g. 
snow is white. This speaks of snow, and says 
something about it. Is white then a n/ime of some- 
thing ? There is only one way in which the word 
white is a true and universally-admitted name. It 
is a true and universally-admitted name, when we 
speak of the word as the word itself. It is a 
true and universally-admitted name, when we say — 

White is an English word. 

White is a word of five letters. 

White is a word beginning with w and ending 
with e. 

White is a word of common occurrence. 

White is often used for white thing. 

White is sometimes used for whiteness. 
In this case it is something that strikes our 
senses — Shearing or sight. It does the former, when 
it is uttered by some one with whom we speak ; 
the latter when written, or printed, by some one 
whose writing, or printing, we peruse. In the 
former case, it is the name of a particular combina- 
tion of sounds ; in the latter, it is a collection of 
written characters, or (if we chose to express our- 
selves more generally) of certain points and lines 
endowed with the property of expressing certain 
sounds. 

In any other sense but this, we cannot intro- 
duce such a word as white into the subject of a 
proposition, unless in combination with other 
words, or parts of words, with a change of power, 
e.g. :— 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROPOSITIONS. 157 

A white crow is a rare bird. 
White-ness is the chief property of snow. 
White is my colour. 
White, then, in strict language, is a thing only 
so far as it is a word ; and it is, in strict lan- 
guage, a name of something only so far as it is the 
name of a word. 

Nevertheless we use it as a name. This is be- 
cause, though no true name itself, it suggests what 
is, actually, a true name, viz. whiteness, the name 
of the attribute or quality suggested by white. 

Of this more will be said, both in Part II. and 
Paxt III. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PART 11. 

NAMES. 



69. 

IfameSy Individual or Common, 

Evert name is the name of something, real or 
imaginary. 

Is the converse of this true ? Has every some- 
thing, real or imaginary, a name? 

There are more than a million persons in London, 
and each of these has one. 

There are more than ten thousand towns and 
villages in England, and each of these has one also. 

There are more than fifty race-horses at New- 
market, no one of which is without its name. 

Of the personSy then, in London, of tovms and 
villages in England, and of the race-horses at New- 
market, every individual has its own individual 
designation : John — Hammersmith — Eclipse, &c., 
fee. And as the number of other persons, other 
towns and villages, and other race-horses, is great, 
the number of names, in England only, becomes 
enormous. There is more than a million for the 
Londoners only. Yet London and Newmarket are 
only parts of England, and England only a part of 
the world in general. Persons, too, and towns, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 159 

villages, and raoe-horses are mere fractions of the 
whole collection of the innumerable somethings, real 
or imaginary, of the universe. Have all these 
names? 

They have not, that is to say, they have not 
names in the way that the persons of London, the 
towns and villages of England, and the race-horses 
of Newmarket have. They have not names like 
ThoTncbSy Hammersmithy or Eclipse. Nevertheless, 
they have all names. 

The million oi Johns, Thomases, Janes, and Marys, 
that occupy London are all persons, men, women, 
boys, girls, children, as the case may be. 

The ten thousand (and more) Ham/mersmiths, 
Londons, Newmarkets, &c., are all places, towns, 
villages, hamlets, &c., as the case may be. 

The fifty Eclipses, &c., at Newmarket are all 
horses, mares, &c., as the case may be. 

This shows that the Johns and Thomases, the 
Janes and Marys of London, constitute a part of 
an indefinite collection of individuals, each of which 
is a person, human being, rrvom, &a, the word 
person, &c., being the name of the class constituted 
by this indefinite collection. 

The Hammersmiths, &c., constitute part of an 
indefinite collection of individual places, towns, or 
viQages ; the word place, town, village, being names 
for the class or collection thus constituted. 

The Eclipses, &c., of Newmarket constitute part 
of an indefinite collection of individual horses, the 
word horse being a name for the class to which 
these Eclipses, &c., belong ; all which leads us to 
a great two-fold division of all names whatsoever. 

Names are either Individual or Common. 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 NAMES. 

An individual name is one which denotes a 
single object and no more. 

A coramon name is one which denotes a whole 
class of objects. 

Thomas is a single and particular individual of 
the class called man : Julius Ccesar, a single or 
particular individual of the class called conquerors. 
Or it may be that we look upon him rather as 
a hero. In that case he is an individual of the 
class of heroes. Whether, however, he be a con/- 
queror, a hero, or a man, he is still Julius Coesar ; 
for this is what he is as an individual, irrespective 
of the particular class under which it may please 
the speaker to place him, and independent of any 
dass at all. 

The word letter is the name of a class ; of a class 
to which a, bee, cee, and some twenty or thirty others 
belong. A, Bee, and Cee are the names of certain 
individual letters. 

The word London is the name of an individual 
town ; the word town the name of a class contain- 
ing (along with others) London. 



70. 

Individual Names, Singular. 

. § Examples of this sort may be given ad in- 
Jmitum. The main point, however, to be remarked, 
remembered, and reflected on is the following : — 

Common names apply to thiugs of which there 
may be more than one. Individual names apply to 
things of which there is one and no more. There 
are many towns, but there is only one London ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 161 

many men, but only one Thomas; many con- 
querors, but only one Julius Ccesar, 

Individual names, therefore, are also singular 
names, and there are many good writers who habi- 
tually call them so, preferring the term singular to 
individvxiL 

The opposite to singular is plural — " London is 
a large town- — London and Boston are large towns 
— Msecserias was a patron of literature — ^Virgilius 
Maro was a poet, &c. — Maecsenas and Virgil were 
Romans." 

Singulus is the Latin for each, and from sin- 
gulus we get the word single, meaning one, 

Plur-es is the Latin for more, and from plures 
we get the word plural, meaning more than one. 

Father, horse, stone, &c., are singular. We use 
them in speaking of one object, and no more than 
one. 

Fathers, horses, stones, &c., are plural. We use 
them in speaking of two or more objects. 

71. 

Individual Names, Proper. 

§ Individual names are also proper names, and 
there are many good writers who habitually call 
them so — preferring the term proper to either sin- 
gular or individual. 

The reason for this lies in the fact of individual 
names being appropriated, or made proper to 
certain single individual objects to which they are 
exclusively attached. 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 NAMES. 

72. 

Com/mxm Names also called Oeneral. 

§ CoTnmon names are also called general ; and 
there is no objection to the term. It is possible, in- 
deed, that it may be the better one of the two. 

73. 

Collective Karnes. 

Common (or general) names as well as plurals, 
plurals as well as common (or general) names must 
be distinguished from a class of words to wliich 
they are allied, but from wliich they notably differ. 

John Davies of the ii2nd is an individual or 
proper name. 

Soldier is a common, or general one. 

John Davies and Henry Smith, soldiers of the 
62nd, give us a plural. 

The 62nd is an individual name. 

Begimenty however, is a common one. 

And it is something more. As opposed to re- 
giments, which is plural, it is singular ; and — 

As opposed to John Davies, it is common ;— - 
and^ 

As opposed to soldier (which is common, or 
general, also), it is collective. 

The following words are collective — battalion, 
army, navy, parliament, multitude, collection, mob. 

Collection, itself, as may be inferred from the 
name, is collective; and so are its equivalents, assem- 
blage, group, class, &c. 

Collective names are the names classes, groups, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 163 

assemblageSy coUediona of individuals dealt with as 
individual objects. 

74. 
Individual Names essentially Singular, 

Individual names are essentially si/ngulaT, and it 
is a common, as well as true statement, that no m- 
dividual Tiame can he "plural, A grammarian 
would say that no 'proper n/ime can he plural. 

How, then, can we use such expressions as both 
the Bostons are important seorports, or,, as long as 
Mceccenases abound Maros will be plentiful? 

" Sint MsBcaena^es non deerunt, Flacce, 'h/Ls^rones/' 
Again — when it was stated that " there were many 
Tnerif but only one Thomas,'^ was the assertion lite- 
rally true ? It is hoped that even the readers of 
this very sentence, whose name is Thomas, may 
be numerous. If so, the dictum, under notice is 
inaccurate. It is inaccurate, however, only in ap- 
pearance. 

More men than one may bear the same name. 
TItomas k Kempis is one person ; St. .Thomas, the 
Apostle of India, another ; Thomas the Rhymer a 
third ; Thomas Aquinas a fourth — and so on ad 
infinitum. 

Again — the Boston in Lincolnshire is a different 
town from the Boston in Massachusetts, so that 
though the same combination of sounds or letters 
— the same word — applies to both, it cannot be said 
that the same name is so applied. The same name 
is one thing. The same word applied to different 
objects is another. A name is only so far indivi- 
dual as it applies to some individual object. The 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 NAMES. 

two Bostons, however, are different individuals ; 
and so were the four Thomases, and so would be 
any amount of Thomases or Bostons or the like. 

The case of Mceccenas and Virgil is different. 

Here there are but two individuals — one Maa- 
esenas and one Virgil. Maecsenas, however, is some- 
thing more than the particular patron of Virgil. 
He is the sample, type, or representative o{ patrons 
in general, Virgil, in like manner, is something 
more than the particular poet patronised by Msa- 
csenas. He stands for poets in general. Hence, 
the meaning of the Latin line, and of the English 
sentence that preceded it, is this : — 

As long as there are men like Mceccenas, there 
will also he men like Virgil, 

But a man like Maecsenas is a patron, and a man 
like Virgil a poet. Hence — 

As long as there are patrons tJiere will be poets 
also. 

75. 

Individual and Common Names, --^ Names of 
Persons and Places. 

§ A little consideration, suggested by the ordi- 
nary names of common life, by the names of our- 
selves and friends, by the names of our dwelling- 
places, by the names of our domestic animals, by 
the names, in short, of the kind just exhibited, 
will tell us that, as a general rule, individual names 
are the names of persons, the names of animals, the 
names of places, personal names, or geographical 
names. 

The illustrations of this are infinite ; e,g, — 



Digitized by 



Google 



NA3IES. 165 

Names of persons. 

Indimdual — ^Adam, Eve, Julius, Caesar, Julius 
Caesar, Thomas, John, George, George the Fourth, 
George Barnwell, &c. 

contrasted with, 

Common — Man, woman, husband, wife, son, 
daughter, boy, girl, child, &c. 

(2.) 

Names of places. 

Individual — Rome, Damascus, London, Troy, 
&c. 

contrasted with, 

Com/mon — Mountain, hill, town, village, rock, 
promontory, &c. 

(3.) 

Names of animals. 

IndividuoH — Bucephalus, Eclipse, &c. 
contrasted with, 

Commxm — Horse, cow, &c. 

Nevertheless, there are many others. Names like 
Fortuna the goddess of Fortune, and Victoria the 
goddess of Victory, in the Pagan mythology, are 
individual names. Perhaps, they may be called the 
names of persons. At any rate, they are the names 
of personified ideas. 

Closely akin to these are words like Prudence, 
Wisdom, Faith, Hope, Charity, We call these, 
abstract names — a term concerning which much 
will be said hereafter. But it is clear, that they 
are closely allied to personifications. Indeed, in a 
language like the Latin, and under a mythology 
like that of the Romans and Greeks, they actually 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 NAMES. 

come out as the names of personal beings. How 
slight is the diflFerence between Victory, the English 
abstract, and Victoria, the Latin personification, a 
goddess. Upon the extent, however, to which 
abstract names are individual, more will be said in 
the sequel. 

Collective names are, more or less, individual; 
as are the names belonging to the class considered 
in § 93, i.e. the convertible (or variable^, and the 
inconvertible (or invariable). 

76. 

Individual and Common Names. — Necessity and 
Usefulness of Common Ones, — Extract, 

Where the number of individual objects is in- 
finite, it is clearly impossible to give a name to 
each. This compels us to make one name serve for 
many. In this compulsion, we finJ the origin of 
common terms. 

Such is the view that is suggested to the reader ; 
and such, I believe, on the whole to be, not only 
the true one, but the one universally admitted ; pro- 
vided always, that we discriminate between, what 
is commonly called the eflScient and the final causes 
of general names. The final cause (the word being 
used in its curreut but exceptionable sense) of 
general names, is their function as terms in all pro- 
positions of any value whatever. Without them, 
it is reasonably iargued that we should be unable to 
state the result of a single comparison between two 
different objects. We should have nothing but 
truisms, e.g. John is John, &c. We should be 
well nigh as badly off" as if we had no names at 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 167 

all. Be it so. Nevertheless, we have no reason 
to believe, because the possession of them is of the 
highest value and the greatest importance, that it 
is also the cause of their having been invented. 
On the contrary, they may have grown up for uses 
never contemplated by those who first used them. 
Such I believe to have been the case ; and, so be- 
lieving, unwillingly take exceptions to the following 
extract from Mills' Logic : — 

Extract. 
" And here I cannot omit to notice an oversight com- 
mitted by some eminent metaphysicians; who have said that 
the cause of our using general names is the infinite multi- 
tude of individual objects, which, making it impossible to 
have a name for each, compels us to make one name serve 
for many. This is a very limited use of the function " 
(the italics are the present writer's) " of general names. 
Even if there were a name for every individual object, we 
should require general names as much as we do now. 
Without tbem, we could not express the result of a single 
comparison, nor record one of the uniformities existing in 
nature ; and should be hardly better off in respect to in- 
duction, than if we had no names at all. With none but 
names of individuals (or, in other words, proper names), 
we might, by pronouncing the name, suggest the idea of 
the object, but we could not assert a single proposition, ex- 
cept the unmeaning ones formed by predicating two proper 
names one of another. It is only by means of general 
names that we can convey any information or predicate any 
attribute, even of an individual, much more of a clsiss." — 
System of Logic, book iv. chap. 3, § 4. 

In this extract the word function has had atten- 
tion drawn to it by being printed in italics. This 
is because it is the term to which the chief exception 
is taken. It is not a question of a function that is 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 NAMES. 

before us ; but a question of origin. How common 
names originated, is one matter. How, after their 
origin, they were applied, is another. 



77. 

CommoUy Oeneral (Oeneric), and Suhaltem 
TerTos. 

§ It was stated in § 72 that common terms were 
also called General. The word General, however, 
is not entirely free from ambiguity. 

The best illustration of this is to be foimd by a 
reference to the language of the naturalists, zoolo- 
gists, and botanists. 

Genua is a Latin word, signifying hind or sort. 
Its plural is genera. 

Species is also a Latin word, signifying kind or 
sort. Its plural is the same as its singular, i.e. 
species, * 

Genus = a Icvad or sort ; genera = hinds or sorts. 
Derivatives ; general, generality, generally — gencn 
ric, generically — generalise. 

Species =i a kind or sort; species = kinds or 
sorts. Derivatives ; special, specific, specify, &c. 

Both genus and species denote classes. We may 
call them, if we choose, class names. 

Question, — Of the two classes which is the 
larger ? Of the two class-names which is the more 
comprehensive? Does the genus comprehend the 
species, or the species the genus ? 

Aoiswer, The genus is the larger and more com- 
prehensive. A genus may contain a species, but no 
species contains a genus. If this rule be neglected 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 169 

, in the language of common life, it is never neglected 
by that class of investigators who have most to do 
with these two terms, viz. the naturalists, be they 
botanists or zoologists. 

Let us look at some of the classes upon which 
the naturalist employs himself. The objects of his 
science, iu its widest sense, comprise men, the lower 
(and even the lowest) animals, trees, plants, mine- 
rals, even the fluids of the ocean and its rivers, and 
the gases of the atmosphere. How vast a difier- 
ence between the two extremes of this wide field of 
inquiry ! The objects, however, are capable of 
arrangement; an arrangement which has, by no 
means, been overlooked. First comes the great 
division between the organic and inorganic worlds ; 
the former containing all objects that grow, and are 
endowed with either animsd or vegetable life, the 
latter such as have neither life nor growth. 

Say that the mineral world is inorganic ; and it 
is dear that organisms fall into two great kingdoms 
(as they are called), the names of which we already 
anticipate. There is the animal kingdom, with its 
birds, beasts, and fishes ; the vegetable, with its 
trees and plants, its flowers and weeds, its forests 
and meadows. 

Each of these falls into divisions and subdivi 
sions. How wide the difference in the vegetable 
world between the fern and the rose, the moss and 
the oak ! Amongst animals, what can stand fur- 
ther apart fi:om each other than our horses, oxen, 
and sheep, fi'om the sponges and corals of the sea ? 
Yet there are more sorts of sheep, horses, and oxen, 
than one ; whilst of sponges, corals, and the like, 
there are vast and unnumbered classes. 



Digitized by 



Google 



170 NAMES. 

Of animals that so fex agree with ourselves as 
to have an internal skeleton^ external organs of 
sense, and other conjoint attributes — of animals that 
the naturalist calls veirtebrcUa, how clear and de- 
finite, to even the commonest observation, is the 
difference between a quadruped, a bird, a frog (or 
snake), and a fish ! How truly does each of these 
animals not only differ fit)m the rest, but agree with 
a whole group of others ! Say that every bird 
agrees with all other birds more than with any fish, 
and we get a notion of the import of the word 
bird as a class-name. Different, however, as are 
birds and fishes, they are more alike than fishes 
and insects, birds and shell-fish. 

Of birds, the birds of prey belong to one class ; 
the poultry-kind to another, &c. ; each falling into 
divisions and sub-divisions. There are eagles, and 
hawks, and vultures on one side ; turkeys, and 
chickens, and peafowl, &c., on the other. The same 
process may be applied to the objects of the vege- 
table kingdom. The kingdom itself comprises the 
oak and the moss, the sea-weed and the mould on 
the damp wall, the violet and the lily. But the 
mosses and sea-weeds, though belonging to different 
classes, are still included in a group which excludes 
the lily and the oak ; themselves belonging to dif- 
ferent groups, and, themselves, constituting groups 
that fall in (Kvisions and sub-divisions, sections and 
sub-sections. 

Such is the sketch of the classes of the zoologist 
and botanist as they present themselves, if we pass 
from the larger to the smaller ones; from the 
organic world to the vegetable kingdom, from the 
vegetable kingdom to the dass of flowering plants, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 171 

from the class of flowering plants to the family, or 
tribe, of violets. 

But we may reverse the process ; we may begin 
with the violet, and end with the organic world. 

The dog-violet and the sweet violet belong to 
different divisions of the violet class ; a class which 
excludes the rose, the oak, the lily, &c. 

Yet the rose, the oak, and the lily belong to a 
division of the vegetable kingdom that excludes the 
moss, the fern, and the sea-weed — plants with no 
flower. 

All, however, are vegetables as opposed to 
animals. 

Mutatis mutandis, we say may the same of horses, 
eagles, snakes, shell-fish, flies, &c. 

The horse and ass belong to one dass ; a dass 
included in that of 

Beasts as opposed to birds and fishes. 
Yet beasts, birds, and fishes belong to the class of 
vertebrate animals, i.e. animals with an internal 
skeleton, to which shell-fish, fiies^ worms, micros- 
copic animals, &c., do mot belong. 

Yet they are all animals ; the animal and vege- 
table kingdoms making up the organic world. 

The classes under notice are like those Chinese 
curiosities where a large hollow ball contains a 
smaller one, which contains a smaller one still, 
which contains one still smaller, which contains, 
&c., &c., till we get to the smallest of all, which 
contains nothing ; but which is itself contained by 
the smallest but one. In this, there are two ex- 
tremes, the largest and the smallest ; all the other 
sizes being intermediate. 

Of these extremes we may begin with either. 

I 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



172 NAMES. 

To begin with the largest and end with the 
smallest is to descend. 

To begin with the smallest and end with the 
largest is to ascend. 

The class that comprehends all the others is the 
highest ; and, as sv/numvmh is the Latin for highest, 
a class of this kind is called svmiTnuni genus. Our 
words sum and su/mvuxry are derived from this 
summrum. 

The class that comprehends no other (but only 
so many individuals) is the lowest; and, as inJlmuTa 
is the Latin for lowest, a class of this kind is called 
infimum genus. 

So much for the extremes. What, however, is 
the logical name for the intermediate classes, the 
dasses smaller, or lower, than the summwm, larger, 
or higher, than the i/riji7num, genus ? We call them 
by a name which a thought upon the constitution 
of the British army will explain. In the British 
army a certain class of officers are called subalterTis. 
They are above the private soldier, below the com- 
missioned officers. Think of the subalterns of an 
army, and you will remember that the intermediate 
genera of the logician are called genera svhaltema. 

The relations suggested by this word subaltern are 
found everywhere in the domain of thought and lan- 
guage. These are found wherever there is a change 
of import coinciding with a change u .relation. 

What is the word men in such a series of pro- 
positions as — 

All men are mortal beings, 
All heroes are men ; 
Therefore 
All heroes are mortal beings, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 173 

but the name of a class, larger than that of heroes 
and smaller than that of mortals ? As such it is 
the name of a subaltern genus. ' ' ^ 

Extract. 

" A species, then, it is plain, when predicated of indivi- 
duals, stands in the same relation to them, as the genus to 
the species ; and when predicated of other (lower) species, 
it is, then, in respect of these, a genus, whilst it is a 
species in respect of a higher genus : as ' quadruped ' 
which is a species of * animal,' is a genus in respect of 
* horse ; ' which latter, again, may be predicated of * Bu- 
cephalus ' and other individuals. Such a term is called a 
subaltern species or genus ; being each, in respect of dif- 
ferent other terms, respectively. 

** A genus that is not considered a species of anything, 
is called summum (the highest) genus ; a species that is not 
considered a genus of anything, i.e, is regarded as contain- 
ing under it only individuals, is called infima (the lowest) 
species'' — Whately, hook ii. supplement to chapter 1. § 4. 

78. 

Individual and Common Names, — Degrees of 
Generality, — Generic, 

§ A genus is said to be general, in proportion 
as it contains, or has under it, other genera. Thus, 
orga/nized being is a more general term than ani- 
maZ, ani/mal than quadruped, and quadruped than 
horse ; and vice versa. 

Londoner is a less general term than English- 
man, Unglishmxm than Tnan, mxin than cmimal, 
ani/mal than organized being, &c. 

Hence, there are degrees in the generality of 
terms ; some being nearer to the summiun genus, 
and (as such) more general, and some being nearer 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 NAMES. 

to the infima species, and (as such) more specific 
(or special) thaa others. 

More thaa this — ^the names themselves of genus 
and species change their application according to 
the changes of relation between the classes to which 
they apply. There is no such thing as a name 
exdusively applicable to a genus ; no such thing as 
a name exclusively applicable to a species. On the 
contrary, the name which, on one occasion, is a 
genus, is, on another, a species and vice versd. 
Talk of heroes, and Tncm is a genus. Talk of 
animals, and mam, is a species. 

Genera are at different distamxses from each other. 
In all heroes a/re men, all men are a/nimals, all 
animals are orga/aized beings, the class of mer^ 
immediately includes that of heroes, and (so doing) 
is called its nearest (proximum) genus ; whilst that 
of a/ni/mals constitutes a remote {remotvm) genus. 
The longer the series of subalterns between the 
sfu/m/rmim and the vafima, the more numemus the 
degrees of nearness and remoteness. 

Observe — It has been stated, that some writers, 
instead of the word common use general, so that the 
opposite to an vruUvidual is a general name. When 
this is the case, it is convenient to denote the ap* 
proach of a subaltern to a summum genus by the 
word generic. This is, merely, saying " that anvnud 
is a more generic term than man, m/in than Eng- 
lishma/n,'' &c. 

79. 

Individual and Common Nam£s. — Tlie Extremes. 
— Infima Species and Individuals. 

§ The lowest species contains a certain number 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 175 

of individual objects. Say that it contains a 
hundred. It can, of course, be divided into so 
many parts. When this, however, has been done, 
the process of division ceases. 

The individual is (as the term denotes) in- 
capable of further division. The class of men con- 
sists of so many Johns, Peters, &c. ; John, however, 
and Peter, consist of nothing but their own attri- 
butes. 

In passing from the species to the individual we 
descend, and when the individual is reached we are 
as low as we can get. 

80. 

Individual and Common Ka/mea. — The Extremes. 
— Summa Genera and the Universe. 

§ From the species, we desoend. From the sum- 
mum genus, we cwcend. Before, however, we con- 
sider the nature of our ascent, it is necessarj^ to 
notice certain limitations on the word aummum. 

What term was general — what dass was large — 
enough to comprehend the two great classes of the 
animal and the vegetable kingdoms, kingdoms con- 
cerning which we have spoken somewhat finely and 
ftdly ? Did we not say that they were divisions of 
the great organic world ; and was not this great 
organic world their summum, genua ? It was so. 
It was so, inasmuch as we made it so. Yet it might 
have been something else. It might have been 
nothing at all, or it might have been a mere sub- 
altern. 

Had the question been one of birds, beasts, 
fishes, reptiles, insects, shell-fish, &c. — had it been a 



Digitized by 



Google 



176 NAMES. 

question of cmimals only — ^there would have been 
no mention of the vegetable kingdom at all ; and^ 
vice versd, had it been a mere question of roses, 
lilies, oaks, mosses, or lichens — ^a question of vege- 
tables and nought else — the animal kingdom would 
have lain so entirely out of the pale of our dis- 
course as to have no existence at all ; none, at least, 
for the purposes under notice. In other words, we 
might have applied to them the axiom thttt " things 
non-apparent were no better than things non-ex- 
istent'' (de non appareniibus et Tion existeTvtibua 
eadem ItabeTida eat ratio), and have ignored them 
altogether. In such a case, the summuTn genus 
would have been the animal or vegetable kingdom, 
alone — ^as the case might have been ; the organic 
world being no-where and nothing. 

But what if, instead of the special details of 
either the zoologist or the botanist, we had had a 
comparison between the phenomena exhibited by 
plants and animals on the one side, and rocks, soils, 
waters, winds, &c., on the other? What if the 
inorganic world were compared with the organic ? 
In such a case, a summum genus would, perhaps, 
be wanted in order to comprise the two. Could 
such a one be found ? Certainly. There is always 
one summum genus wide enough for everything. 
This is the Universe. The Universe is the name 
of a class from which no two genera are so remote 
as to be excluded. Whether it may not be too 
wide to be of any practical use, is another ques- 
tion. 

The Universe = Everything; and Every- 
thing is the name of a class from which nothing is 
excluded — ^nothing, whether real or imaginary ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 177 

for the Universe . means, not merely the world of 
real objects, but the world of Thought, or con- 
ceivable existence. 



81. 

The Universe — Positive amd Negative Names — 
Ncynreffedive Negative Names. 

The Universe ^ means Everything. Everything 
means All things. All things mean an incalcu- 
lable, and inconceivable number of real or imaginary 
Somethings. 

Of these real . or imaginary Somethings, let us 
take the largest number that the largest-minded 
arithmetician can conceive. Let us. double, treble, 
or quadruple it. Let us multiply this till the 
figures become too numerous to deal witL Let us 
do all this, and more, so as to swell and magnify 
it, indefinitely, infinitely. And having done all 
this, let us reverse the process by subtracting 
from it the smallest fraction of a single, humble, 
and scarcely appreciable unit. What shall we have 
got by our trouble ? We shall have got two things 
instead of one. We shall have got, instead of a 
single sum, a difference and a remainder, each of 
which has its name, no matter how small, or how 
large, it may be. 

Let the single solitary unit thus subtracted from 
the unnumbered and innumerable, tangible and in- 
tangible, visible and invisible, sensible and supra- 
sensual, real and imaginary Somethings of our Uni- 
verse, be a single grain of sand. The result is, on 
one side, the rest of the world mi/aus the grain of 

I 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



1 78 NAMES. 

sand ; on the other, the grain of sand mmitd the 
rest of the world. 

The difference =:The grain of sand. 
The remainders Everything else. 
The sum =The Universe. 

But what is a grain of sand amongst so many 
other objects ? It is something. Small as it is, 
we have succeeded in separating it from the mass 
at large, and giving it a separate existence. Small 
as it is, we succeed in giving it a certain amount of 
attention. We have done more ; we have given it 
a very great deal of attention. We have put the 
Universe in one scale, and it in another ; and we 
have looked at each. Indeed, it is very possible 
that we may have thought quite as much upon the 
grain of sand minvs everything else, as upon the 
Universe w/i/nua the grain of sand. 

The name of tiis grain of sand, has been the 
name of an individual, i. e. of some single, par- 
ticular grain. 

Let us, howevei', leave out the word the^ and say 
graims of aomd, in general, or (more simply) acmd, 
and we get a species. 

We do not, however, get any notable addition to 
our difference. We get, however, the statement — 
the universe consists of scundy and objects oiJier 
than ecmd, or notscmd. 

And now, instead of aand, write horae, Tnan, 
glass, sword, &c., &c., &c. — no matter what. 
Mutatis mutamdiSy the statement will remain the 
same. The Universe will =z horse and not-horse, 
ma/a and not-ma/n; and so on. 

Can we express this in language ? Have we not 
already done it? Take any word you like, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 179 

prefix not'y and you have the name for one of the 
two classes which constitute the Universe. 

You have also the division of names into Nega- 
tive and Positive. 

A little consideration will show that, for the 
most part, negative names of the kind in question 
are of no great use ; also, that when words ai'e of 
no great use, they rarely find their way into lan- 
guage. It is, of course, possible to have, for every 
positive name, a negative to match. Yet no lan- 
guage has it. No language has anything like it. 
No wonder. A negative name is the name of a class ; 
but who learns anything fi-om a class that contains 
such heterogeneous elements as spirits, ghosts, ele- 
phants, pens, mountains, leaves, &c., &c., simply on 
the score of their being other than sand, other than 
mct^, other than Jwrae, i, e, Tio^sand, 'm>^man, Tiot- 
horse, &c. ? 

The opposite to Negative is Positive. All 
names are either one or the other. The extent to 
which the latter preponderate over the former has 
been seen. Nor is this wonderful. In all the 
cases before us, and in innumerable others like 
them, the positive dass is so very limited, and the 
negative so inordinately wide, that the latter con- 
tains objects upon objects that have nothing in 
common with one another, except the mere fact 
of their being different firom something else — a 
difference (in most cases) insufficient to give the 
grounds of a useful classification. 

Let us, then, lay aside these negatives as ineffec- 
tive, and (as such) unimportant, in language, remem- 
bering only the two terms, and preparing ourselves 
for learning that some negatives (though not the 



Digitized by 



Google 



180 NAMES. 

ones which we have just noticed) are actually, not 
only part and parcel of Language, but useful ele- 
ments of it. 

82. 
The Universe — Its Limitations, 

§ It has been suggested by the remarks of § 77 
upon the extent to which such a name as Animal 
Kingdom might, under certain, conditions, be a 
summum genus, that there were ^tw universes. 

The remarks upon the extent to which objects 
which have no existence in nature may still enter 
into the universe of the fiincy or imagination, indi- 
cate a third. 

1. There is the Universe as it exists in nature, 
containing men and horses, &c. ; but not containing 
hippogriffs and centaurs. 

2. There is a Universe of the imagination, con- 
taining all that Nature contains, and much more 
besides, e, g. hippogriflFs and centaurs, as aforesaid,, 
goblins, heathen deities, and the like. 

3. There is a Universe that contains all the ob- 
jects that the'speaker, writer, or thinker is consider- 
ing ; and nothing beyond. What more do two men 
in argument, what more does the solitary thinker, 
want than this ? What more than the ideas, objects, 
entities, names, or terms which belong to the subject 
under treatment or consideration ? These are his 
Universe ; no matter how much there may be besides 
for other people and for other purposes. Out of 
sight, out of mind. Out of mind, out of existence. 
QuoB supra nos nihil ad nos — ^not, at least, for the 
time being. De non apparentibus et non existent- 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 181 

ibu8 eadem luxb&nda est ratio. This has been said 
akeady. I repeat it in order to give prominence 
to the exclusion of all things beyond the pale of 
the immediate argument. The universe of the 
thinker is bounded by the horizon of his thoughts. 
He may extend this horizon by changing his ground. 
As long, however, as he is upon the same point of 
tiie same question, the horizon is his limit. 

83. 

The Universe — Negative Ka/mes effective when it is 
limited — Contraries. 

The universe of the thinker is a temporary 
universe. He changes it for another when he 
changes the range of his ideas. 

It is temporary and limited — a universe (as it 
may be called) of a Discourse, or train of reasoning. 
And this is what it has been called. 

In a universe limited to the ideas of a given 
train of reasoning, negative names take a different 
character. They become effective. 

All the . men in existence are either British 
citizens, or they are not. Those who are not we 
call aliens. The first of these classes excludes 
the second ; the second excludes the first. The two 
together make the class man. Yet alien is nothing 
more than not-Briton ; and there are certain cases 
where Briton may be merely nAynr alien. 

Extract. 

"Alien is strictly non-Briton; but suppose a man taken 
in arms against the Crown on some spot within its domi- 
nions, and claiming to be a prisoner of war. The answer 
that he is a British subject is a negation; to establish his 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 NAMES. 

positive claim, he must first prove himself an alien, and 
moreover, that he is in another positive predicament, 
namely, that he is the suhject of a Power at war with 
Great Britain. Accordingly, of two contraries, neither 
must he considered as only the negation of the other. In 
the matter of property, personal and real are contraries, 
and a definition of either is a definition of the other. But 
though each he a negative term as compared with the 
other, no one will say that the idea conveyed hy either is 
that of a mere negation. Money is not land ; hut it is 
something." — Dk Morgan, Formal LogiCj chap. 2. 

The importance of the class of contraries, in 
Logic, will be indicated in Part III. 

84. 
Negativt Ifa/mea — Oppoaites — Privatives, 

§ Words like alien and Briton are simply con- 
traries. They make up by themselves the whole of 
the dass Tnan. All that is not alien is BHton ; 
and all that is not Briton is alien. No third term 
comes between them. This is not the case with 
words like cheap and cfecw, Jiot and cold, scarce and 
ahundant, &c., which are oppoaites. 

The aflSrmation of one involves the denial of 
another. 

Bread is dearzzbread is not cheap. 
It does this as the ordinary contraries did ; but it 
does something more. It declares that one attri- 
bute of bread (deamess) is the very opposite of the 
other (cheapness). 

The wealher is hot = the weather is not cold. 
It does this, and it does something more. It de- 
clares that the one attribute of the weather Qieat) 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 183 

is the very opposite of the other {coldness or 
cold). 

The real words to which cold and Jtot^ cheap and 
deaVy are simply negative, are temperate and mode- 
rate (or average)^ as we may easily imagine by 
thinking of a scale of jirices, or a thermometer. 

Different, again, are words like blind, &c. 
Blind means unahle to see. But it also means 
something more. Chairs and tahles are imable to 
see. So are aU objects destitute of an optic nerve 
— ^by far the larger portion of creation. Yet these 
are not the objects we call blvnd. The objects we 
call blind are those members of a class naturally 
endxywed with sight which are unable to see. Such 
are sightless men and women amongst human beings, 
and moles amongst quadrupeds. Hence, blind 
means wnahle to see when sight is expected. A 
blmd object is not merely an object without sight, 
but an object deprived of it ; or at any rate, an 
object which is exceptional to the dass to which it 
belongs. 

Now the eodreme character of words like hot 
and cold, &c., and the exceptional character of 
words like blind, &c., have the effect of giving a 
positive character to a negative name. And this is 
the case with many other words, for different rea- 
sons. Unrpleasomt means something more than 
the mere negation of pleasantness ; inconvenience 
is a stronger term than not convenient. 

Words like blind, &c., are called privative — 
priAHttuszzderpriv-ed. They suggest the idea of 
something naturally possessed, but, in a particular 
case, lost. Now loss is a great deal more than 
mere non-possession. 



Digitized by 



Google 



184 KAMES. 

(85.) ¦:; 

/ arid Not'I — Ego and N(yn/-Ego. 

§ Of the three views that can be taken of the 
universe, or, to speak more conciseljj of the three 
universes, it is the third with which the logician 
has the most to do ; and it is with the first that he 
has the least. The proper student of the imiverse, 
as it exists in Nature, is the natural philosopher, 
whose logic is not syllogistic but inductive. The 
universe of the Imagination is the imiverse of Lan- 
guage. Language has names for many pbjects that 
have no real existence whatever. 

The universe of discourse is generally narrower 
than either of the other two. But it is not so 
necessarily. Nothing prevents a thinker or speaker 
from making either nature in general, or the world 
of the imagination, the subject of his discourse. 
Nothing prevents him from taking from it, on one 
side, a fraction of infinitesimal smaUness, and com- 
paring that with the remainder ; in which case the 
relation of the difference would be that of the grain 
of sand of a previous section, or even less. Oc- 
casions for doing this are rare, very rare. Still they 
are possible. When they occur, the universe of 
the discourse coincides with those of either nature 
or the imagination. It is, still, however, the 
universe of our discourse, its increase of magni- 
tude being an accident. 

I say that it is not often that these coincidences 
occur ; neither does it always happen that, when 
they do occur, they act upon language. There is 
nothing, perhaps, that more disposes the mind to 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



NAMES. 185 

effect a separation of this kind than the contempla- 
tion of the stars, attended by a knowledge of their 
magnitude and distance, and the feeling, thereby 
engendered, of the insignificance of him who views 
them. The sens^ of self — of self in its smaUness 
— comes upon him. How vast the universe ! How 
small man ! How insignificant, amongst men, I ! 

In thoughts of this kind the separation of the 
universe into two parts, of utterly disproportionate 
magnitudes, is made. On one side is a single indi- 
vidual of a single species ; on the other, countless 
collections. Yet no inclination arises on the part 
of the maker of this division to create a name for 
the two classes, though he might do so by merely 
joining the words not and /; by / denoting him- 
self, by not-I, everything else. 

He might do this, though he does not. He 
might do it as far as language is concerned, inas- 
much as not-I is as good a word as not-hxyrae^ or 
not-man, &c. Yet he does not do it; and the 
reason why he does not is, because the feeling of 
separation that throws his thoughts upon himself is 
accompanied by a feeling of weakness, littleness, 
insignificance, nullity. What is he, that he should 
weigh himself against everything else, and be one 
in a dualism ? Egotist as his contemplations have 
made him, they have made him a humble one. 

Yet the words I and not-I (or at least their Latin 
equivalents, Ego* and Non-ego,) have an existence in 
language, and this existence is due to a division of 
the kind under notice — a single thinker on one 
side, the external world on the other. I have 

* Also the German Ich and Nicht-Ich. 



Digitized by 



Google 



186 NAMES. 

before me, at the present moment, a work in which 
Ego and Non-ego occur upwards of twenty times in 
a single page,^ and they do not do this for nothing* 

It is well known that more than one profound 
metaphysician has taken excepti^is to the general 
belief in the existence of an external material 
world, arguing that the only things concerning 
which the mind of a sentient being can be sure, are 
its own states of consciousness. Whether there 
are corresponding objects beyond 4he mind of the 
thinker is doubtful. 

The only certain fact in the eyes of an idealist 
philosopher of this kind is his own mental existence. 
Of this he is sure ; of everything else doubtful. 
In such a frame of mind the difference between 
himself and everything else is not only real, but in 
favour of the thinker. The I (or if he find the 
Latin expression more convenient), the ego, is the one 
fundamental truth ; the noirl (or npnregd) has a 
far inferior degree of certainty. 

Of the following extracts, the former refers to the 
idealism of Berkely, the latter to that of Fichte. 

EXTRACTS. 

I. 

<' A profound and judicious thinker, animated by a spirit 
of genuine benevolence, and venerable for his personal 
character, was shocked by the evil consequences which the 
prevailing theory of experimentalism had produced. He 
was led to imagine that the fruitful source of all such 
aberrations was the unfounded belief in the reality 
and existence of the world, and adopted a system of 

? Tennbman's Manual of the History of Philosophy (English 
Translation), p. 249. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 187 

absolute idealism as the only means of correctiDg such 
hallucinations. Berkely has evinced no little sagacity in 
the arguments he adduces to show the difficulties attendant 
on the ordinary belief, and the obscurity of our ideas of 
substance, accident, and extension ; maintaining that our 
senses convey to us none but sensible impressions, and do 
not afford us any proof of the existence or substantiality 
of their objects, and that consequently the existence of an 
external world, independent of our sensations, may be 
nothing more than a chimaera." — Tenneman's Manual 
of the History of Philosophy (English Translation), 
p. 344. 

II. 

*• First principle, A = A X, represents the systematic 
dependency of the whole. A and X being supposed to 
exist in egOy may be signified by this formulary, ego sum 
ego. This is the self-evident principle of moral philosophy 
and knowledge in general, expressing the necessary form 
and substance of consciousness. In virtue of this prin- 
ciple we form judgments ; to judge being an act and opera- 
tipn of ego. Ego then establishes, absolutely and inde- 
pendently, its own existence, being at once the agent and 
the result of the action, in which combination consists the 
essence of consciousness. The first operation of ego is 
that of reflection on itself, which is occasioned by an im- 
pediment to its hitherto unrestrained energies. Ego places 
itself in the position of the subject, inasmuch as it opposes 
itself as subject to the obstacle contemplated. The second 
principle (involved in the former) is this — that ego is not 
non-ego. There remains yet a third principle, conditional 
as far as relates to its form, but not as respects its value. 
To exemplify this, an action of ego is required, which may 
illustrate the opposition of ego and non-ego in ego without 
destroying ego,'' — Ibid. pp. 427, 428. 



Digitized by 



Google 



188 NAH£S. 

86. 
Substa/nce omd Attribute. — Abstract arid Concrete. 

We now come to four new terms, that mutually 
illustrate each other. They run in pairs, ( 1 and 2) 
Subatcmce and Attribute, (3 and 4) Abstract and 
Concrete. They do not take us away from the con- 
sideration of the important divisions that we have 
just been considering altogether, though they do so 
for a while. 

Substomce is from svh {= under) and ^staTis, 
sta/nt-is (=i8tcmdmg). It is the same word, in 
respect to its etymology, as hypostasis, which is 
from hypo = (under\ and stasis ( = sta/advng). The 
diflference between the two words consists in the 
former being of Latin, the latter of Greek, origin. 

Attribute is from ad {=^to) and tributum (=a 
thing paid) ; an attribute being that which we 
ascribe, give to, lay to the account of, or connect 
with anything. To pay a man the compliment of 
being honest is to attribute honesty to him. 

Concrete — Con, is the Latin word cv/m ( = with) ; 
cretum is the participle of cemo. Cemo, in the 
Latin, is, usually, translated see, ox perceive. It is, 
however, the same as the Greek word crino (jcplvm) = 
/ judge ; so that the truer and Mler import of the 
word is to denote observation with judgment. 
Where we not only see an object, but see it in such a 
manner as to take cognizance of either the differences 
between its constituent parts, or the difference be- 
tween the object itself and others, we get the com- 
pounds diS'Cemy and dis-crete {dis=^ difference = 
separation). Where we not only see, but take 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 189 

cognizance of points of likeness rather than differ- 
ence, we use con (=swith=union=unity), and get 
words like con-cem and con-crete. Wherever we 
have anything concrete, we have an union or con- 
junction of (]^ualities or properties. 

Abstract is the opposite to concrete both in 
meaning and in derivation, Abs = from, whilst 
tractum = drawn. Hence, abstract = that which is 
drawn off, and this is as different from concrete as 
subtrcLction is from addition. 

87. 
Substance and Attribute, 

§ Take (for instance) an orange. It strikes our 
senses. 

We see, with our eyes that it is more or less 
round, i,e, that it is endowed with the property or 
quality of roumd/aess. 

We see, too, that it is more or less yellow, i, e, 
that it is endowed with the property or quality 
of yellowness. 

We see that it is more or less smooth, i-c, en- 
dowed with the property or quality of smooth- 
ness. 

Our eyes tell us all this, the eyes being the 
sense by which our belief as to the properties in 
question is conveyed to us. They tell a great deal 
more, but this it is unnecessary to enlarge on. 

Then comes the evidence of our other senses. 

By our ears, we detect a sound if we rub the 
skin with our fingers. We also do so if we squeeze 
it so as to let the juice flow from one compartment 
to another. 



Digitized by 



Google 



190 NAMES. 

We smdl it and find a peculiar and not un- 
pleasant aroma. 

We taste and are gratified by a not unpleasant 
flavour. 

We fed that it is elastic, or endowed with the 
property of elasticity. We feel, too (even as we 
saw), that it has a certain figure and size. We feel, 
too, that it has a certain weight. 

On the strength of all this we say (and we might 
say much more) that 

An orange is round, yellow, smooth, capable 
(wnder certain conditions) of exciting sounds, 
fragrcmt, sapid, elastic, &c. 

When we say that an orange is this, we oMrir- 
bute to it certain properties, or qualities. 

What are they ? The qualities, or properties, 
of rov/adness, yellowness, smoothness, sonorousness, 
fragram^cy, sapidity. 

And how do we speak when we say that we do 
so ? It is convenient to begin with saying how we 
do not speak. 

We do not say that an orange has the property 
of rov/nd, yellow, smooth, &c. On the contrary, 
we say that it has the property of roundr^rvess, 
yellow^ness, smooth-ness, &c. To say 
An orange is round. 

An orange has the property of roundness, 
An orange has roundness, 
is accurate. To say 

An orange has round. 
An orange is the property of roundness, 
An orange is roundness, 
is exceptionable. 

So much for the attributes of an orange; at 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 191 

least for some of them. The attributes of a guinea, 
a loaf, a man, a fish, or anything else may be con^ 
sidered in the same way. They are, of course, 
when taken altogether, different from those of an 
orange. The principle, however, of considering 
them is the same. 

Let us now suppose that all these attributes 
are, one by one, taken away, and replaced by 
others; that instead of an orange striking our eyes 
and sense of touch as roimd, it strikes them as 
square, or rhomboid ; that it loses ite fragrance and 
becomes fetid ; that it sounds like a bell, and tastes 
like a loaf of bread. Would the object still be an 
orange ? Would it not be something else ? This 
leads to the question of the essential attributes, or 
essences of things. Never mind them for the present ; 
but put your thoughts in a somewhat different 
direction. 

Divest the orange of all its attributes without 
supplyi/ng it with new ones. What will it be then ? 
Take away its original colour without replacing it 
by any fresh one. Let it lose its softness without 
becoming hard, its roundness without becoming of 
any other form. Annihilate its weight, taste, and 
smell. Let it have no means of appealing to eye, 
ear, taste, smell, or touch, so that it become, at one 
and the same time, impalpable, invisible, impercep- 
tible. What will it be then ? Will it be anything 
ataU? 

What becomes of the attributes ? We have seen 
that they were taken away. What was done with 
them ? They were taken away separately, and it 
is separately that they are put aside. Roundness 
and yellowness no longer go together. Each is in 



Digitized by 



Google 



192 NAMES. 

its own place ; and that is a place by itself. No 
link now unites them ; the orange in which they 
met being no more. 

But we may unite them afresh — ^say in the idea 
of a golden ball, a guinea, a full moon, &c. 

And we may, also, separate them, again and again. 

United, they give the idea of an object clear, 
palpable, sensible. Separated, or abstracted from 
those objects, they do nothing of the kind. 

Yet the mind takes cognizance of them. The 
idea of the particular attribute of yellowness, ab- 
stracted from an orange, is not much more difficult 
than the idea of the orange Tninua the attribute of 
yellowness. It is merely a case of difference and 
remainder; the additions and subtractions being 
made unconsciously and instinctively. 

What becomes of the orange ? Is it annihilated 
by the abstraction of its attributes, one and all ? 
Few are prepared to say yea to this question. Few 
divest themselves of the notion that sensible, and 
material, objects are nothing more than the combi- 
nation of certain properties, qualities, and attributes, 
each and all of which may be removed in such a 
way as to leave an absolute nothing. We rather ima- 
gine that, where there are certain attributes in union, 
there is a certain link which connects them ; a basis, 
or foundation, which supports them ; a basis or foun- 
dation different from the attributes themselves, — 
something, which they are not, but upon which they 
rest. 

This aomethiTig stfpports them. This something 
stands under them. This something is the aiib-ataTice, 
or wnder-atanding, of objects, as opposed to, and 
contrasted with, their attrihutea. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 193 



88. 



Concrete Names the NaTnsa of Substances, — 
Abstract, the Names of Attributes, 

Concrete terms are the names of Substances. 

Abstract terms are the names of Attributes; 
e.g.— 
Abstbact. Concretk 

¦?r^^^^'/ Attributes of the Sub-\'?J^^- 
Heat, > , <Fire, 

Light, &c. ; {Spark 

Mortality, ) Attributes of the Sub- ji^*^' 
Vitamy, { , <Man, 

^ ^ stances ^ 



.i 



Animality, ) ( Horse, 

Solidity, ] Attributes of the ( Wood, 

Mesistcmce, Sue,] Substances [Stone, 

Fluidity, &a Attributes of the Substance — Water. 

Vice versd. 

Concrete. Abstract. 

The Sun,) o u x -xi. xi. ax {Brightness, 

T, , ' f Substances with the At- \ „ ± 

Moon, > + 'h f sUeat, 

Stars, &c. 3 ( Warmth, 

Man, 1 Substances with the \ -p-. . ,. ^* 

Horse, &c.J Attributes ) . . j,. 

^ lAmmamy, 

It is, perhaps, unnecessary to say that substance 
as used by logicians, has by no means the sense 
which so often attaches to it in common conversa- 
tion, viz. that of matter or body. On the con- 
trary, it means anything that can be looked upon 
as the basis of an attribute. A ghost is a sub- 

K 



Digitized by 



Google 



194 NAMES. 

stance of which the most important attribute is its 
i/mmateriality or incorporeity. 

On the other hand, it is an undoubted fact, and 
one of which the -explanation readily suggests itself, 
that the abstraction of attributes is easy in propor- 
tion as the concrete substance is a sensible object, 
i.e, an object capable of being seen, heard, tasted, 
smelt, or felt. Terms like roundnesSy roughness, 
smoothness, yellowness, sweetness, &c., are much 
more readily suggested by halls, gumeas, sugar, &c.,' 
than terms Uke virtue, vice, goodness, badness, &c., 
by deeds and characters which have to be got at 
by means of the observation and comparison of 
numerous different actions, performed at different 
times, by different agents. Of these, the substance 
itself is more or less of an abstraction. 



89. 

Abstract Names of different Degrees of Generality. 

§ Some abstract names are more general than 
others ; e,g. — 

Whiteness, \ 

Redness, \ are species of the genus . Colour^ 

Tellowness, &c. ) 

T m &r \ ^P^^^^*^ ^^ ^^ genus . , . Size 

Lightness, &c,, species of the genus . . . Weight 
Each of the cardinal virtues, prudence, charity, 
&c., is a species of the genus virtue. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 195 

90. 
Abstrdct Na/rnes, how far Individuul. 

§ Each of the cardinal virtues is a species of the 
genus virtue. 

If so, their names are common, rather than 
individual terms. At any rate virtue is a common 
name ; and, not only that, but a common term of 
some generality, since it comprises prudence and 
charity, just as colour comprises redness and white- 
ness. 

But what if these special virtues be personified, 
as they were in the creeds of antiquity, and as 
they are in the imagination of artists ? They, then, 
become individuals. So does Virtue itself — general 
(or generic) though it (or she) be. Or, what if we 
look upon the group with the eyes with which we 
view the soldiers of a regiment— the soldiers being 
so many individuals, the regiment being the collec- 
tion which they constitute ? 

Whichever view we take, we ought to be led to 
a question of some interest, viz. the extent to which 
abstract names are common or individual. 

Extract. 
" Do abstract names belong to the class of general or 
to that of singular names ? Some of them are certainly 
general. I mean those which are names not of one single 
and definite attribute, but of a class of attributes. Such is 
the word colouTy which is a name common to whiteness, 
redness, &c. Such is even the word whiteness itself, in 
respect of the different shades of whiteness to which it is 
applied in common ; the word magnitude, in respect of the 
various degrees of magnitude and the various dimensions 
of space ; the word weight, in respect of the various degrees 

K 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 NAMES. 

of weight. Such also is the word attribute itself, the common 
name of all particular attributes. But when only one attri- 
bute, neither yariable in degree nor in kind, is designated by 
the name; as yisibleness; tangibleness; equality; square- 
ness; milkwhiteness ; then the name can hardly be con- 
sidered general; for though it denotes an attribute of 
many different objects, the attribute itseK is always con- 
ceived as one, not many. — ^Mill's Logic, b. i. c. 2, § 4. 

In this extract singular means individual, and 
general means, common. The view embodied in it 
is by no means unexceptionable. Colour is, doubt- 
less, a more general name than redness, if by general 
we mean belonging to a higher genus (generic). See 
§89. 

The fact is, that colour is more general than 
redness, just as army is more general than regiment, 
both words being collective, and both, as such, more 
or less, individual. 

Without being individual to the extent that such 
names as John, Julius Ccesar, and the so-called 
proper names, are individual, abstract names, whether 
general or specific, are, at least, on the confines of 
Individuality. 

91. 

Attribute — why a better Term than Quality — 
Attribute of a Quantity, 

§ This is the place for a question concerning the 
word Attribute and its relation to the word Quality. 

The former is a somewhat rare word ; a word 
that may almost be called technical. The latter is 
current, common, and intelligible. It is the word, 
too, which when we spoke of the whiteness of snow, 
&c., we used pretty freely. At any rate, we called 
whiteness a quality of snow quite as often as we 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 197 

called It an attribute. Why, then, not have done 
so always ? Why use two terms when one would 
have sufficed ? Why take up such a word as attri- 
bute at all, when quality would have served instead ? 

Again, why not asLj property instead of even 
quality ? It is, perhaps, the commoner word. At 
any rate, it is equally intelligible. It is a word, 
too, of which the cognate derivative proper has 
already been in use. We spoke of proper names ; 
why not of the properties of individuals or classes ? 
Whiteness is a property of snow. It belongs to 
snow. It is something that snow, if it could speak, 
might call its own. 

Quality is derived bom qualis ; which is a word 
somewhat difficult to translate. It answers^ nearly, 
to our word such; and more still to our word 
such-like. A Roman, however, would not trans- 
late either such or such-like by qualis. The Latin 
for sv^h or such-like is talis ; a word evidently in 
a certain relation to qualis, as we infer from the 
similarity of form. 

The nearest English translation of the word 
qualis is the somewhat awkward compound, whal- 
like. 

" Question. What, and what-like, were his reasons for 
acting as he did? 

" Answer. Oh ! they were such and such-like. He gave 
a long list of them." 

A quality y then, is the what^ike-ness of an 
object. 

White-ness is a quality of snow, because, by 
possessing that property, snow is like some other 
white object — which it is like or which-like it is. 

Wherever there is a quality there is likeness. 



Digitized by 



Google 



198 NAMES. 

Of the same origin with qu-al-ity are the words 
qvridd-ity^ and qu-omt-ity. They are each deriva- 
tives from the root qw-, so that as far as the first two 
letters go, the three words agree — gu-aKty,g't^-iddity, 
gtt-antity. The three last letters agree as well. 
All three end in -Uy ; all three being derived from 
the Latin words in -taa (tai-is), viz. gu-ali-fos, qu- 

idd'itaa, and qu-ani-itas tas (or -tat) being, in 

Latin, the sign of abstraction. 

Conceming quiddity there is little, or nothing, to 
be said. It is obsolete. Nor need much, at pre- 
sent, be said about quantity. The only object of 
the present section is to give a reason for the use 
of the word Attribute, when, apparently. Quality 
would do as well. This lies in the fiict of aU 
qualities bemg attributes though all attributes are 
not qualities. 

In other words^ quality is a species of the genus 
attribute; attribute being, of course, the wider and 
more general term. 

Another species of the same genus, another term 
subordinate to attribute, is quantity ; the quaTi- 
tity of any substance being as much one of its 
attributes as its colour, taste, or any ordinary 
quality. 

This distinction is neither more nor less than 
a distinction of the common language of conversa- 
tion. The fact of a couple of men being two (their 
two-nesSj so to say), though allied to the fact of 
their being mortal (or their mortality), belongs to a 
difierent class of phenomena. The one is a matter 
of quantity, the other of quality. Both, however, 
are attributes. 

It is, then, the greater generality of the word 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 199 

Attribute which brings it into use. It includes 
quantities as well as qualities. 

The logical difference between Quality and Pro- 
perty, a difference not made in common language, 
need not, here, be explained. 



92. 
Attribute of Relation. 

There are, then, two kinds of Attributes, viz. 
Qualities and Quantities. 

Are there any others ? There is, certainly, one 
more ; and that, in the history of language, a most 
important one, one to which Quantity itself is sub- 
ordinate, the attribute of Kelation. 

The ordinary qualities of objects are more or 
less permanent and inherent to their several sub- 
stances. If an object be white, it cannot become 
black or red without an absolute change in its 
nature or characteristics. It may not, indeed, 
always (or even generally) be converted into some- 
thing else, inasmuch as the change may not go &r 
enough to affect what are called its essential quali- 
ties. Nevertheless, the change may be considerable, 
and it may be of a permanent kind. It is, certainly, 
intemal; i. e. it applies to something contained 
v^ithin the range of attributes that belong to the 
substance in which they occur. 

But what are we to say to changes that, leaving 
all the ordinary qualities of an object exactly as 
they were, still are changes ? 

What are we to say to changes that, in some 
sense, are no changes at all? Do we not, in the 
first place, ask whether they actually exist ? Can 



Digitized by 



Google 



200 NAMES. 

one man be converted into another at all ? Can he 
be so converted without any alteration whatever of 
any one of his qualities ? He can. A man may, 
for the purposes of language, take the name of 
another man, of a horse, of an inanimate object, 
or of anything else m rerwm Tiaturd ; and that 
truly, and without losing any one of his original 
qualities, or gaining any fresh ones. 

He may do this by a change of relation. We 
saw our way to sometiiing in this way in the sec- 
tion upon genera. The subaltern classes were 
greater or smaller according to the point from 
which they were viewed. They were this without 
any change whatever in the way of actual mag- 
nitude. 

Words like father sttid son, master and servant, 
ruler and subject^ are of the same kind. The 
father of John may be the son of Thomas. Yet 
father and son are, essentially, diflFerent (not to say 
opposite) names. 

It is the point of view from which we contem- 
plate the relation between such objects, or ideas, 
as these that determines the application of the 
names. Different as they are, they may yet apply 
to the same object. More than this, they may be 
changed and shifted from one object to another. 
The father of one moment may be the son of 
another, and vice versa, 

A stone in a certain relation to the speaker (i. e. 
in his hand) is named this. The same stone, when 
thrown to a distance, is named that. 

Again — the word this, immediately after doing 
duty as the name of a stoTie, may st^nd for a father, 
a son, a pen, &c., &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 201 

Nevertheless, the stones, fathers, sons, pens, &c., 
that are named this (or these) are, in all matters of 
ordinary quality, the same as the fathers, sons, pens, 
&c., named that (or those) ; the change of attribute 
that justifies the change of name being simply that 
of relation to either the speaker or some other 
object. 

It may be said that words like this and that are 
not names. That they are not permanent, un- 
changeable, and irremovable names is true. But 
why should permanence, &c., be considered essential 
to the idea of a name ? The words in question are 
terms, and they denote objects. It would be diffi- 
cult to show that more than this is necessary to 
constitute a name. 

The fact is that words of the sort in question 
are not only names, but names of a very important 
kind. 



93. 

Convertible Nam£s. 

The difference between individual and common 
terms has long commanded the attention of both 
logicians and grammarians. 

Not so, however, the difference between the two 
classes of names which form the subject of the pre- 
sent section — the difference between the Incon- 
vertible and Convertible. In the Natural History of 
Language, no distinction is more important than 
this. Neither is it useless, but (on the contrary) 
very useful in ordinary grammar. 

In order to understand it, a clear notion of the 

K 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



202 NAMES. 

attribute of relation, as opposed to that of quality, 
is aU-important. 

Compare the word / with the word writer. The 
latter is a name which can be applied to a certain 
class of objects only. A writer, for instance, must 
be a person. Probably, he will be a person of 
a certain age, or one who has arrived at years of 
discretion ; he will also be more or less civilised. 
Finally, he will write. A child is no writer, 
a savage no writer ; consequently, to neither 
children nor savages does the word writer apply. 
To apply it to a person who ndther will nor can 
write, who neither has written nor is about to 
write, is to misapply it. It is a word that can 
only refer to a certain class of objects ; and, as 
such, is mvariable. 

But what is the case with / ? A child may say 
/ am not a ma/a, and a man may say, / aTn not a 
child ; and yet the word / retain its proper power. 
When WUliam says /, it means William ; when 
Thomas says /, it means Thomas. If a mother 
says /, it means a mother and a female; if a 
father says /, it means a father and a male. Even 
if an inanimate object be personified and be sup- 
posed to speak about itself and to say /, it means 
that inanimate object. It denotes the speaker, 
whoever it may be. 

The same applies to you; which denotes the 
person spoken to, whoever he may be. If / speak 
to you and you are named Williamy you means 
William; but if your name be Thomas, then 
Thomas is what is meant by you. Any object that 
is capable of being spoken to is capable of being 
called you; even as any object capable of speaking 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 203 

may be I. The generality of objects that are named 
/ and you are, of course, persons, men, women, or 
children. But they need not necessarily be so. 
Animals, as we find in fables, may be supposed to 
speak. So may inanimate objects. They do not do 
so in nature. They do so, however, and that not 
unfrequently, in the imagination of the men and 
women who use and make language; and that is 
enough. 

The word he may denote any male person con- 
cerning whom any one else chooses to speak. It may 
even denote a female. Suppose that I am speaking 
of a person seen at a great distance, a person that 
is actually a woman, but whom I imagine to be a 
man, I may say, he is now m sight ; or I may say 
the same of a person in woman's clothes. Julius 
Caesar, William the Conqueror, Julius Caesar's dog, 
William the Conqueror's horse, are all equally he ; 
but they, by no means, are all equally Tnen, dogs, or 
horses, Julius Caesar and William the Conqueror 
only are men. Their domestic animals were horses 
or dogs, as the case might be. 

She may denote any female, real or supposed, 
just as he might denote any male — Queen Eliza- 
beth, Cleopatra, Queen Elizabeth's mare, &c., &c. 

It denotes inanimate, just as he and she denote 
animate, objects. There is nothing in the universe 
that may not be called it 

This and that have been noticed already. 

It is obvious, then, that words like /, you, he, 
this, that, &c., are what may be called convertible, 
whilst words like writer, man, woman, child, stone, 
&c., are inconvertible. The former can be applied 
to any (or, at any rate, to several) objects, no matter 



Digitized by 



Google 



204l NAMES. 

how dissimilar. The latter applies to one class of 
objects, and no more. 

Instead of saying convertible and inconvertible, 
we may say variable and invariable. 

All convertible names are individual. This is trans- 
parently visible with words like 7, thou, this, &c. ; 
nor is it difficult to see that the same must be the 
case with we, ye, these, &c. Plural as these words 
are in form, they are, really, collectives. 



94. 

Notation (or De-notation) and Conrnotation — Inr- 
dividual NaTnes not Gonnotative. 

Convertible names simply note or denote the 
objects to which they apply. 

To simply note, or denote, an object is to point 
it out, to mark it out, to set a mark on it, by 
which it shall be distinguished from all other ob- 
jects ; this distinguishing mark being its name. 
For names are nothing more than certain marks. 
The Latin for a mark is nota ; the Latin for I 
mark being noto ; the Latin for marking being 
nx)tatio. 

A mark in its narrowest application has very 
little meaning — ^properly speaking, writes Mill, it 
has not any. It has only a purpose. He proceeds 
to explain this distinction. The robber in the story 
of the Forty Thieves marks the house in which 
Haji Baba lives. Why ? In order that he may dis- 
tinguish it from the others in the same street. He 
marks it with chalk, and what does the chalk-mark 
do ? It says, " this is the particular house that I 



Digitized by 



Google 



KAMES. 205 

wish to know again/' It says this, and nothing 
more. The house itself, however, was a great deal 
more than this. It was the house of a wealthy 
owner. It was the house in which much gold lay. 
It was a cottage, a mansion, a messuage, a first- 
class residence, a tenement, &c., as the case might 
be. But the chalk-mark told us nothing of this. 
It merely told us what it was not. Hence, when 
Morgiana marked all the other houses in the same 
manner, she defeated the scheme ; not (be it ob- 
served) by rubbing off the chalk on Haji Baba's 
door, but by annihilating its value as a distinctive 
mark, by placing the rest of the street in the 
same predicament. 

If Haji Baba had lived in London, instead of 
Bagdad, no chalk would have been needed. There 
would have been the number on the door — say 
No. 2. And this would have been the mark 
of the house ; the mark by which it was dis- 
tinguished from Nos. 3, 4, 5, &c. ; all, perhaps, 
alike in external appearance. That this would 
have been sufficient for the purposes of the robber 
is clear ; provided only he could read the number 
and remember it as No. 2. 

The chalk-mark and No. 2 then are the names of 
the houses in question. 

Let them be used as such in a conversation with 
some second person. What purpose will they 
serve ? It is certain that, whatever else they may 
supply, they will not supply a description of any 
kind. They will not tell anything positive at all. 
They may be used in conversation, but if the per- 
son addressed have no key to their meaning they 
will be all but meaningless. They will merely 



Digitized by 



Google 



206 NAMES. 

signify something different from No. 1, No. 3, &c., 
and something different from all things whereon no 
chalk-mark is to be seen. 

But substitute house for No, 2, &c., and you wiU 
find that you are using a word of a different kind 
altogether, a word that not only de-notes something, 
but which ccm-notes something as weU. A house, 
08 such, has certain attributes. It serves certain 
purposes. It contains certain apartments. It is 
bounded by walls, covered by a roo£ All this is 
the case with No. 1, or the ohjed marked with 
chalk — ^when we know it to be a house, but not 
before. Until we have learned that it means a 
house, we only know that it is not something des- 
titute of a chalkmark, or that it is something 
either not nimibered at all, or nimibered differently. 
In other words, whilst house implies the existence 
of certain attributes. No, 2, or the object marked 
with chalky implies nothing of the kind, except so 
far as the number or mark itself is one. 

To pass to another illustration. 

At first sight it seems much more definite, in 
speaking of pictures, to say a Flora by Rubens, 
than a painting by an artist; inasmuch as the 
former expression teUs us, not only that it is 
a painting of which we speak, but that the sub- 
ject of it is a heathen goddess, and the artist 
the great Flemish master. And so it is — ^under 
one proviso, but not otherwise. This proviso is, 
that we must know, from other sources, that it is 
Art and artists that we are speaking about. It is 
only with this knowledge that words like Flora 
and Rubens have any practical meaning at all. So 
little do they, of themselves, tell us anything. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 207 

that, unless there be. a context to explain them. 
Flora may mean a blood mare and Rubens her 
sire ; as has actually been the case. It is a current 
story in one of the sporting counties, that an artist 
having called to see a famous Flora by Rubens, was 
shown into the stable ; the owner of which might, 
perhaps, have been equally surprised if an artist, 
who had heard of his fondness for such things, had 
shown him into a picture-gallery. 

This illustrates the extent to which individual 
names, unless explained by a context^ are useless for 
the purpose of supplying information concerning the 
nature of the objects to which they apply. They 
only give us what we may awkwardly denomi- 
nate their socalled-ness — i.e. the feet of their 
bearing a given name. Flora differs from Rubens 
and Rubens from Flora in having different names 
— the name in each, as long as it is the only fact 
known concerning them, being their one solitary 
property, or characteristic. This, single and solitary 
as it is, is still sufficient for one important pur- 
pose, that of denoting them, or marking them as 
separate from everything else. The name Flora, for 
instance, separates even the unknown object that 
bears it not only from Rubens, but from all other 
objects not named Flora. 

Individual names, of the kind in question, then, 
require a context to explain them; i.e. to tell us the 
class of objects to which they apply. Unless they are 
thus accompanied, they are in the condition of the 
words of a foreign language. This is pre-eminently 
the case with the so-called proper names. 

It is also the case with words like J, this, that, 
&c., or the whole class of convertibles. No one 
knows what this or that means from the bare use of 



Digitized by 



Google 



208 NAMES. 

the words themselves. Every one knows what they 
mean when the object to which they apply is either 
pointed out, or indicated by the rest of the con- 
versation. 

This, too, is the case with the class of abstracts ; 
although their application as individual terms is 
peculiar. Abstract naipes are essentially the names 
of intellectual, and internal, rather than of material 
and external, objects. They are, pre-eminently, the 
names of ideas. Now yellowness is as much an 
individual idea as the painter Rubens is an indi- 
vidual human being. It is, also, equally a sub- 
stance, i, e, equally the basis of an attribute. It is 
a name that we can apply to many objects ; but so 
we can the words, J, thoUy Flora, &c., which are, 
nevertheless, the names of individuals rather than 
of classes. Like 7, Rubens, No. 2, or the chalk- 
mark of our first illustration, it serves only for the 
purposes of separation ; dividing ydlow from 7u>^- 
yeUow, This it does, and it does no more. It 
connotes nothing. It simply notes or denotes. 

The reason why individual names are thus non- 
connotative lies in the fact, already suggested, of their 
conveying nothing beyond the mere so-called-ness, 
or naTYied-ness of their objects. "Whether this be 
an attribute will be considered in the sequel. 

In J, this, &;c., the attribute is that of the parti- 
cular relation, for the time being, of the object to 
which the words apply to some other object, to the 
speaker, or to both. 

In abstracts, the individual character of the name 
yellowness lies in the singleness of the idea which 
it expresses ; the idea being based upon the peculiar 
character of certain sensations created by yellow 
objects in general. 



Digitized by 



Google 



KAMES. 209 

There is nothing, however, that is so necessarily 
connected with yellowness as to make the word 
suggest anything like a class. The objects connected 
by the fact of their all being yellow are of the same 
heterogeneous character as the objects connected by 
certain negative names, e, g. norirhorse, &c. (see §§ 
8 1 — 8 5). Indeed, abstract and negative names have 
much in common. The former give but one at- 
tribute ; the latter something even less than this ; 
viz,, the bare fact of the objects to which they 
apply not being something else. 

All individual names are notative, die-notative, or 
Tiowrconnotative. 

95. . 

Notation, &c. — Common Names connotative,--^ 
CharacteristicSy or essential Attributes. 

§ All Common names are Connotative. 

They all apply to classes of objects. 

Classes of objects consist, of certain individuals 
endowed with certain attributes ; and these attri- 
butes, in order for the objects to which they belong 
to form a class, must be numerous. They must, at 
any rate, be mxyre than one. 

It is by having a certain number of attributes 
alike, that objects belong to the same class. It is 
by having a certain number unlike that they belong 
to diflFerent divisions of it. 

It is evident that all the attributes of an object 
are not of equal importance. Whilst some cannot 
be changed without changing its character, some 
can be withdrawn and replaced by others, the 
character of the substance to which they appertain 



Digitized by 



Google 



210 NAMES. 

remaining unaltered. In other words, some attri- 
butes are characteristic, others not ; some essential, 
or necessary to make the object what it is {esse = to 
be), others imessential or indifferent. 

The ink with which these lines were written, was 
black and fluid. The ink with which they were 
printed was black, but scarcely fluid. The ink 
with which they were written, however, might 
have been red or blue. Nay, there is such a thing 
as purple ink. The Imperial signatures of the 
Byzantine Caesars were made in it. Indian inJc is 
a solid, capable, however, of being made fluid. 
Then there are several sorts of invisible ink ; car- 
pable, however, of being made visible. 

There is no ink, however, which cannot be used 
for writing, limning, shading, Tnarhi/ng, or some 
similar application to which its fluidity and colour 
are subservient ; and it is probably safe to say, 
that the essential character is its use for the above- 
named purposes. Fluidity and colour of some kind 
are also of great importance. The particular de- 
gree, however, of fluidity and the particular tint 
are matters of indifference. They may be changed 
without making the ink into not-ink. 

The same applies to every object in either Natm^ 
or Art, to which a common, or class, name can be 
attached, except in the cases of absolute identity. 

In order for objects of the same class to differ 
from each other, they must exMbit their difference 
in some unessential attributes. To differ in an essen- 
tial one is to belong to a different class. This 
implies that there must not only be, at least, two 
attributes to the object, but that there must be 
two sorts of them — essential and unessential 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 211 



96. 



DiffercTice of view respedvng the characteristics of 
Classes. 

§ It is not every one that takes the same view 
of the essentiality of an attribute. In the eyes of 
a grazier, dover is a gra^ ; so, at least, he would 
caU it if he were speaking of the difference between 
the natural and artificial grasses. Wheat, on the 
other hand, and oats, and barley, are no grasses in 
his eyes, but so many kinds of com. Still less is 
the sugar-cane a grass. Yet this is what they are 
in the eyes of the botanist ; who withholds the term 
from clover. 

Whence the difference ? 

The grazier considers one set of attributes essen- 
tial, the botanist another. 

In the eyes of the same farmer the bulb of an 
onion is a root, inasmuch as it has, in his eyes, the 
essential attributes of one. It lies, more or less, 
below the surface of the soil. It appears to feed 
the leaves, flowers, and seeds. It comports itself, 
in short, except in certain apparently unessentigJ. 
points, like the root of ordinary plants. 

In the eyes of the botanist, however,^ it may do 
all this and much more, and yet be no root. It 
grows upwards like a stem, instead of downwards 
like a true root. The true root is the bunch of 
fibres that grow at the bottom of it. The bulb it- 
self is an underground bud. AH this difference of 
view arises out of the fact of the ordinary observer 
making one set of attributes essential, the botanist 
another. 



Digitized by 



Google 



212 NAMES. 

97. 

Relation between Ncmiea a/nd Classes. — The Class 
growing out of the Name. 

§ The manner in which common names come 
into existence belongs to the Natural History of 
Language rather than Logic. It is convenient, 
however, to notice the relation between the employ- 
ment of them and Classification. 

As soon as two or more persons agree in apply- 
ing the same combination of sounds to the same 
combination of essential attributes a name has 
come into existence ; the objects to which it applies 
being indefinite in number, and, to a great extent, 
unknown to the persons who first used the term. 
They may be infinite- They may be few. They 
may be single. They may be non-existent in 
nature, i. e. creatures of the imagination only. 
They may be words like animal; or words like 
planet ; or words like universe ; or words like 
dragon, Centaur, or Hippogriff", &c. They may be 
words of any extent, or no actual extent at all. 
All that they have to do is to apply to such and 
such objects, as often as they exhibit such and such 
attributes, objects which may appear often, or rare- 
ly, or never — objects which we may see every hour 
in our life, or objects that we can only contemplate 
in the most excited stat« of our fencies. It is no 
matter whether we do it firom our experience, or 
our hallucinations ; but so long as we group to- 
gether certain attributes, and designate the collec- 
tion by a certain combination of articulate sounds, 
we create names; and so far as the other individuals 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 213 

with -whom we have conversed agree in understand- 
ing such names in the same way, we introduce our 
creations into language. 

In this way common terms become current amongst 
considerable masses of men ; the objects to which 
they apply being either alike or diflFerent in unes- 
sential attributes only. It often happens that at 
first the number of such objects is but small ; com- 
mensurate with the limited experience of the first 
authors of the term. As time, however, goes on, as 
the number of speakers increases, and as experience 
enlarges, new objects are continually brought under 
the same denomination ; so that the magnitude of 
the class increases in respect to the number of in-^ 
dividuals that it contains. 

Nor is this all. The larger the number of such 
individuals the greater the chance of differences 
between them. Hence, the number of UDessen- 
tial attributes increases, and doubts arise as to 
whether some of them may not be essential. The 
name that began with the object A, and was ex- 
tended to B (between which and A there was no 
notable difference), may lose some of its intelligi- 
bility when it has arrived through C, D, E, &c., to 
X, Y, or Z. Nevertheless, so long as it applies to a 
certain number of objects, it is a common (or class) 
name, against which the worst that can be said is 
that the dass to which it is attached is not a very 
natural one. 

Such is the case when the name precedes the 
class, or (in other words) where the class grows out 
of the name, as is the case in ninety-nine hundredths 
of the ordinary language of common life. 



Digitized by 



Google 



214 NAMES. 



98. 



Relations, &c. — The Name growing out of the 
Glass. 

§ There are cases, however, where the process is 
reversed, and where the name grows out of the class. 
Such are the scientific terms of the chemists, bo- 
tanists, zoologists, &c., where, after a full and suffi- 
cient knowledge of certain groups of individuals, 
and the determination of their essential attributes, 
we find that our class is one for which the rougher, 
looser, uncertain, and empirical phraseology of the 
current language, supplies no term sufficiently exact ; 
a fact which forces upon us the invention of a new 
one. 

EXTRACT. 

"We have adverted much less than is usual with 
logicians to the ideas of a class and classification. — ^We 
have considered names as having a meaning quite inde- 
pendent of their being the names of classes. — ^As soon 
as we employ a name to connote attributes, the things, be 
they more or fewer, which happen to possess those attri- 
butes, are constituted, ipso facto, a class. — By every 
general name which we introduce, we create a class, if 
there be any existing things to compose it. — Classes, 
therefore, mostly owe their existence to general language. 
But general language also, though that is not the most 
common case, sometimes owes its existence to classes." — 
Mill, b. i. c. 7, § 1. 

99. 

Classification. 

§ Whether the class originate in the name, or 
the name in the dass, it always happens that, as 



Digitized by 



Google 



KAMES* 215 

time goes on, names show a tendency to change 
their signification. If it were not so, language 
would be greatly more uniform than it is. 

Let a name originally apply to a few individuals, 
and let the difference between those individuals be 
slight. Let aU the birds, for instance, to which the 
name swan applies be either white or whitish. At 
any rate let none of them be of a colour opposite 
to white. Let whiteness pass for an essential at- 
tribute of 8wan-8hip (or swcm-hood). What hap- 
pens when a bird, black in hue, but in all other 
respects like a swan, presents itself? Are we to 
abandon the essentiality of the attribute white- 
ness ? Or are we to deny to the new bird the 
name swan ? It is not necessary to decide. All 
that it is, at the present time, necessary to notice is 
the undoubted fact, that there is hereby introduced 
into the question of names and classes a disturbing 
force of no slight importance. 

"We get a certain amount of disturbance from a 
swan that is simply hlach But this is not much. 
There are other attributes that create greater com- 
plications. Let the swan that serves for our illus- 
tration be not merely a swan with certain wn- 
swarir-liJce attributes, but let it have some of the 
characteristics of the goose. Let these be either 
actually essential, or considered to be so. What 
follows ? Not only doubts as to whether the bird 
be a swan or not, but doubts as to whether it may 
not be a goose. Or it may be something interme- 
diate, to the two — neither swan nor goose, but 
some third sort of bird, anonymous, but capable of 
being named. 



Digitized by 



Google 



216 NAMES. 

From birds let us go to bows — rain-bows. Ob- 
serve the hues thereof! There is a decided red, a 
decided yellow, a decided blue, and a decided green. 
But this decidedness is not general. Where the blue 
and green join, the colours pass one into the other. 
So they do where the red becomes yellow, or the 
yellow red. So they do on all the confines of all 
the colours. "When are we to say that that blue or 
red end, and green and yellow begin ; and vice . 
versa ? Where is the line of demarcation, the 
boundary ; the line which, lying between the con- 
fines, may be said to rfe-fine them ? Mark this last 
word, this compound ot de {= from), and finis 
(= end, limit, boundary). Mark it, for it will 
appear in the sequel. 

Some such line is evidently wanted. 

Some such line is evidently wanted ; but it is 
by no means as evidently attainable. It is only 
attainable where the transitions, though in many re- 
spects gradual, are still capable of being distinguished. 
When all the gradations are imperceptible, the 
name that served well enough for the central, 
typic, normal, or standard forms of a class becomes 
uncertain and indefinite on its confines. 

In many of the complications thus engendered, 
the essential attribute steps in and helps us. But 
it is far firom doing so in all, inasmuch as it is 
itself, in a vast number of cases, a matter of doubt. 
It is not every two or three speakers that agree as 
to what constitutes a swan as opposed to goose, 
or any other bird. Just as little is it every one 
who would fix upon the same point in a rainbow 
for the red to become orange, or the orange yellow. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES* 217 

Let us say, however, that, in certain cases, 
this can be done, and we come to the considera- 
tion of — 

100. 

Definitions. 

§ "We have seen from what the word Definition 
is derived ; and we anticipate its meaning. A de- 
finition is a boundary — a boundary by which all 
the individuals of a given class are included. So 
inchided, they are separated from everything else ; 
everything else being eaxjluded from them. 

Wherever there is a definition there is a name ; 
but it is not all names that either are susceptible 
of definition, or require to be defined. Definitions 
are wanted where the import of a name becomes 
doubtful ; the import of names becoming doubtful 
whenever the essential character is obscure, over- 
looked, or controverted. 

The Name indicates the Class. 

The Definition explains the Name. 

Hence, whilst a Name constitutes a term, a 
Definition constitutes a Proposition ; a Definition 
being 

A Proposition explanatory of a Term ; in all of 
which the Term to be explained is the Subject, the 
Term by which the explanation is made, the Predi- 
cate — 
Subject, Predicate, 

S ^ V 



A Definition is a Proposition declaratory of the meaning of a term. 
Such is a definition of a Definition. — {^ee Mill, 
b. i. c. 8, § 2). 



Digitized by 



Google 



218 HAMES. 

All definitions denote the objects of the class to 
which they apply. Nevertheless, it is not every 
denotation that is a definition. To point at a man 
crossing the street is to denote him. To lay your 
hand on him and to say this is he, ia also to denote 
him. Nevertheless, pointed fingers and the use of 
words like this and he ai-e not considered to be 
modes of definition. That they partake of its nature 
is dear. Still, it is not the habit of language to 
identify them. 

"Words susceptible of definition must connote, as 
well as de-note, something; this being only another 
way of saying that they must be common (or class) 
names. 

Dialogue. 

A. John is a man. 

B, But what is a man ? 

A. Man is everything to which the combination M x\ N 
applies — this being the name of a class. 
J5. What constitutes that class ? 

A. Certain attributes, such as animality, rationality, and 
others of either less importance or involved in these. 

B. The definition, then, of M A N is that it is a name 
connoting certain attributes. 

A, Yes ; or a name which, when predicated of any sub- 
ject, impUes that that subject possesses them. In such 
a sentence as John is a man, the word M A N is the 
predicate. In Man is a rational animal, it is the sub- 
ject. 

It is not always that we can define a class, or (to 
speak more accurately) the meaning of a class-name. 
How can we do so when it runs into another by 
imperceptible gradations ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. 219 

Extract. 

" A name ought to be like a boundary, which clearly and 
undeniably either shuts in or shuts out every idea that can 
be suggested. It is the imperfection of our minds, our 
language, and our knowledge of external things, that this 
clear or undeniable inclusion or exclusion is seldom attain- 
able, except as to ideas which are well tidthin the boundary. 
At and near the boundary itself all is vague. There are 
decided greens, and there are decided blues ; but between 
the two colours there are shades of which it must be un- 
settled by universal agreement to which of the two colours 
they belong. To the eye, green passes into blue by imper- 
ceptible gradations. Our senses will suggest no 'plan, on 
which all agree, at which one is to end and the other to 
begin. 

** But the advance of knowledge has a tendency to supply 
means of precise definition. ThuSj in the instance above 
cited, Wollaston and Fraunhofer have discovered black 
lines which always exist in the spectrum of solar colours 
given by a glass prism in the same relative places. There 
are definite places in the spectrum, by the help of which 
the shade of any colour therein existing may be ascertained, 
and the means of definition given." — Formal Logic, p. 35. 



101. 

Classification by Type. 

§ It is only, then, as knowledge advances, that 
certain definitions become possible. What are we 
to do in the mean time ? The answer to this was 
found in the fact that, although some of the mem- 
bers of a given group may be on the debateable 
land between two classes, there are others which 
lie well within the boundary. 

Say that some lie in the very centre of the in- 

L 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



220 NAMES. 

closure, equally distant from the confines of any of 
the classes with which its frontiers may come in 
contact ; as is the case with centres of each of the 
coloured bands of the rainbow ; as is the case with 
the red where it is equidistant from the purple on 
one side and the orange on the other. We can, in 
such cases, take such members of the class in ques- 
tion as standards, samples, or types, of the group 
to which they belong, and, so doing, arrange the 
remainder around them ; the nearest being the most 
unequivocal members of the class, the next nearest 
being somewhat less, the more remote intermediate 
to some other class, or (possibly) of doubtful po- 
sition. 

To do this is to classify by types, as opposed to 
the classification by means of definitiona. 

In the former we take a central object and group 
others round it, without much caring whether the 
outsiders (so to say) belong to the same class as 
those of the interior. 

In the latter we draw a line round a certain 
number of objects, without much cariDg whereabout, 
within the iQclosure, they lie, provided only that 
they do lie within it. 

102. 

Equivocal Names, 

§ The same combination of sounds does not al- 
ways make the same word. Where there is a 
difference of meaning there is also a difference of 
name. 

In the following propositions there is but one 
combination of sounds, viz. L, I, G, H, T. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NAMES. ' 221 

Yet the number of names is two. 

LigM is contrary to darkness ; 

Feathers are light; 

Feathers are contrary to darkness. 

Change the language, and the equivoque becomes 
transparently manifest. 

Lux est contraria tenebris ; 

PlumsB sunt l^es ; 

Plumae sunt contrarisB tenebris. 

Words of this kind are called equivocal^ having 
one form, but two meanings. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PART III. 

PAETS OF SPEECH. 



103. 

Parts of Speech. 

§ What is meant by a Part of Speech.? In one 
sense every word that exists in language is a part 
of speech, inasmuch as it is by means of words that 
the speech by which man communicates with man 
is constituted ; human speech being made of words. 
But these words are, again, made up of syllables ; 
the syllables being, again, made up of certain ele- 
mentary sounds. If so, every syllable is a part of 
speech, and so is every elementary sound. 

But this is not what the grammarian means 
when he talks of a Part of Speech; as he often 
does. Sometimes, indeed, he talks or writes about 
the Parts of Speech, as if there were something 
special and particular, requiring the use of the defi- 
nite article to denote them. Open any ordinary 
grammar, and it is an even chance that the first 
sentence runs thus — "The parts of speech are 
eight'' (or "nine'' as the case may be), "Noun, 
pronoun, verb," &c. 

Sometimes the opening sentence of grammar is 



Digitized by 



Google 



PABTS OF SPEECH. 223 

to the effect that " Grammar is the art of speaking 
and writing correctly/' but the ordinary opening is 
the one just given. 

Such is the importance of the parts of speech 
— noun, pronoun, verb, participle, &c. 

10*. 

Parts of Speech, — Number, Criteria, &c. 

§ Nouns, pronouns, verbs, participles, adverbs, 
conjunctions, prepositions, interjections, and the 
like, are the parts of speech now under notice ; and 
there is something beyond what is found in the 
ordinary grammars to be said concerning them. 

There is something to be said concerning the 
nuTober of them : 

Something also concerning the criteria by which 
they are separated from each other. 

105. 

Parts of Speech. — Number of them. 

§ And first concerning the number of the parts 
of speech. Sometimes it is said that the parts of 
speech are eight, sometimes that they ai*e nine, 
sometimes that they are no more than three. In 
Latin, where the article is wanting, the list runs 
— ^noun, pronoun, verb, participle, adverb, preposi- 
tion, conjunction, interjection. Total, eight. 

In English we have an article (an and the), which 
makes our parts of speech, from a Latin point of 
view, nine. 



Digitized by 



Google 



224 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

But some writers, instead of speaking of nouns, 
speak of substantives and adjectives, by which they 
make two parts of speech out of one ; in which case 
their list runs — substantive, adjective, pronoun, &c. 

Finally, there are many who limit the parts of 
speech to the noim, the verb, and the particle ; 
referring to the first, the substantive, the adjective, 
and the pronoun (including the article), to the second 
the participle, to the third the remainder. 

All, however, agree in this, viz. the recognition of 
the terms noun, substantive, adjective, pronoun, 
article, verb, participle, adverb, preposition, conjunc- 
tion, interjection, particle, along with other names 
less general, such as numeral, cardinal, ordinal, 
relative pronoun, personal pronoun, &c. 

106. 
Parts of Speech, — Criteria, 

§ So much concerning the extent to which gram- 
marians difier in respect to the number of the parts 
of speech, and so much concerning the extent to 
which they agree in admitting, that in some sense or 
other, nouns, verbs, fee, are parts of speech. How 
do we account for their agreement, how for their 
difference ? 

The reason for their agreement lies in the fitct of 
certain fundamental principles lying at the bottom 
of all forms of speech, however different jfrom each 
other in detail. 

The reason for their difference is not so simple. 
Sometimes it arises out of the actual difference of 
language, one language wanting something that the 
other has ; this being the case with the Latin as 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAKTS OP SPEECH. 225 

compared with the English in respect to the article. 
An Englishman can say — 

The son of the father ; 
The son of a fether ; 
A son of the father ; 
A son of a father. 

The Roman could only say filiua patris. 

Generally, however, there is a difference between 
the views taken concerning the marks, signs, cha- 
racters, tests, or criteria by which one part of speech 
is separated from another. " Why,"' says one 
writer, " make the two classes of substantives and 
adjectives when the single class of nouns would 
suffice V " Why,"" writes another, " make a class 
of nouns in the first instance, when the moment you 
come to the practical details of your grammar, you 
have to divide it into substantive and adjective ? " 

107. 

Parts of Speech. — Criterion, the Place of a Word 
in a Proposition. — Categorematicy Syncatego- 
rematic arid Hypercategorerfiatic Words, 

§ The reader may easily see beforehand what will 
be the criterion by which the place of a 'word as a 
part of speech will be determined. It will be a 
noun, pronoun, verb, participle, &c., according to 
the part it takes in the structure of a proposition. 

For further preliminaries see §§ 21 — 25. 

These will lead us to the notice of three new 
terms — compounds of the word category. 

Categoria is, in the first instance, an accusation, 
the language from which it is derived being the 

L 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



226 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

Greek. To accuse is to charge with — to impute to 
— to attach a certain character, or even a charac- 
teristic — to mark — to define — to place in a dasa. 
Hence, category conies to mean dass, there or 
thereabouts. 

A word which can, by itself, form a term is called 
categorematic, 

A word which cannot, by itself, form a term, but 
can, by itself, form a part of one, is called syncate- 
gorematic — 8yn = with, and implying imion or con- 
junction with other words. 

A word which, by itself, cau form a term and 
something more (a predicate, for instance, and a 
copula) is hypercategorematic — hyper =:^ over and 
implying excess. 

The words in §§ 21, 22, and 23 are categore- 
mxitic. 

The words in § 24 hypercategorematic. 

The words in § 25 syncategorematic, 

108. 
Categorematics, &c. 

§ Categorematic words are either nouns or pro- 
nouns, and if a word belong to neither of th^se 
classes it is other than categorematic, i. e, it is some- 
thing either less than categorematic or more than 
categorematic. 

Categorematic words by themselves and single- 
handed, can form terms, i. e. either subjects or 
predicates or both. 

Hypercategorematic words are verbs. They can 
form, by themselves and single-handed, predicates 
and copulas at once. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 227 

S3aicategorematic words are adverbs and prepo- 
sitions ; to which add articles. 

The position of the article is peculiar, as will 
soon be shown. At present, however, it stands in 
the same group with adverbs and prepositions. 

Participles, conjunctions, and interjections also 
require a separate notice. 

109. 

Categorematics. 

Categorematic words fall into two divisions, ac- 
cording to the kind of term they are capable of 
forming. Every word that can form a subject, can 
form a predicate also. The converse, however, is 
not the case. There is a large class of words which 
can form predicates, but cannot form subjects. A 
word that forms both subject and predicate is either 
a substantive or a pronoun. A word that can form 
predicates only is an adjective. 

110. 

Categorematic Words Svhjective or Predicative. 

§ This is the way we express ourselves when we 
adopt the language of the ^ammarian, taking it as 
we find it, and treating the wonis substantive, ad- 
jective, and the like, as if they were ordinary terms 
of common life, the meaning whereof is generally 
known — as, indeed, it actually is. I have already 
stated that no one is likely to investigate subjects, 
predicates, and the like, who has not made a previous 
acquaintance with noims and verbs. This is not as 



Digitized by 



Google 



228 PAETS OF SPEECH. 

matters ought to be, but as they are. The logical 
terms might, much more advantageously, be learned 
before those of the grammarian, the import of which 
they most especially explain. 

To proceed : the categorematic words which can 
form predicates only may, if necessary, be called 
predicative ; those that form subjects and predicates 
as well, being called subjective. No more com- 
plex word than this is wanted. No such word as 
subjectivo-predicative, or the like, need be coined. 
Whatever can be a subject, can be a predicate also; 
and the simple term subjective does as well as a 
longer and more compound word. 

The subjective categorematics, then, coincide with 
substantives ; the predicative with adjectives, to a 
certain extent. 

111. 

Categorematic Words Nominal (Subjective) and 
Quad-Nominal (Predicative). 

§ The word subjective and substantive, predica- 
tive and adjective, coincide to a certain extent — ^to 
a certain extent, but not altogether. There is 
a considerable class of subjective terms which a 
grammarian would hesitate to call substantives ; in 
other words, it is only some of the subjectives that 
are substantive. In order to understand this, we 
must look upon our subjects and predicates in a 
fresh light. How far are subjective and predicative 
words names ? Something upon this question has 
already been written in § 68 ; where it is stated, 
that although such a word as whiteness is a name, 
such a word as white is not. Whiteness is the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 229 

name of an attribute. White is no true name at 
all. It is only a word which suggests one. Many- 
doubt this ; many deny it. Many say that white 
is a name. Many say that white is the name of 
white thing ; also that white is the name of the 
attribute whiteness. But a little consideration will 
show that white the adjective, and white the sub- 
stantive (i.6. the equivalent to white thing, white 
person, &c.), are in different classes. And a little 
consideration will show that the name of the cha- 
racteristic attribute of white things is white-ness, 
(not white,) 

That words like white are neither the names for 
white objects nor the names for the^ attribute of 
whiteness becomes plain and clear after a very little 
consideration. The question whether they are 
Thames at all, is somewhat more complicated. It is 
possible, and not diflScult, to define the word nam^ 
in such a manner as to include not only adjectives, 
but a great many other words besides. Hobbes' 
definition (for instance) does this, which is to the 
effect that a name is an arbitrary word, serving for 
a mark, and raising in our mind a thought like 
some thought we had before, and which when pro- 
nounced to others may serve as a sign of the 
thoughts of the speaker. 

A definition of this latitude would convert not 
only adjectives, but interjections, into names. 

A definition of this latitude, even if it suit the 
logician, is unfit for the grammarian, who finds it 
convenient, if not necessary, to limit the word 
nam^ to substances. Common language does the 
same. It is difficult to imagine a name without 
some object named. And what can this be but a 



Digitized by 



Google 



230 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

substance? At the same time adjectives so in- 
variably suggest a name, that though they are not 
names themselves, they are nearly so — ^very nearly 
so. They are names within a little. They are aU 
but names. They are so near to names that if we 
caU the subjective categorematics nominal, we may 
call the predicative quasi-nominal, words. 

Let Subjectives, then, be called ncmiinal, from 
nomen = rvame. 

Let Predicatives be called qv/isi-nominal, from 
quadras if , as it were. 

Instead of noTninal word we may say Thame. 

112. 

Nam^es. — Convertible or Inconvertible. — Pronov/n8 
or Substantives. 

§ Names are either convertible, like J, thou, he, 
this, that, &c., or inconvertible, like Tnan, horse, 
stone, &c. (See §§ 93, 94.) 

A convertible name is a Pronoun ; an inconver- 
tible name a Substantive. 

113. 

Pronouns names of Substances. — How far Indi- 
vidual. 

§ The first fact to be attended to in the notice of 
the pronoun is the fact of its being a Tiame at all. 
That it is one has already been stated. It has also 
been stated, that in order to be one, it must apply 
to a substance. In this it differs from the adjective, 
which is no name at all. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PABTS OF SPEECH. 231 

On the strength of its being a name, on the 
strength (we may say) of its nominal character (or 
nominality), a pronoun can play the part of a sub- 
stantive in a proposition, and be subject or predicate, 
just as the speaker chooses to make it. 

That a pronoun is actually a name — a name of a 
i^ubstance — is clear. What do we mean by J, b 
them, by this, by that, &c. ? Most imdoubtedly a 
substance ; a substance with all its attributes, many 
or few, as the case may be. The whatever or 
whoever answers to the word this, is an object 
of which either the senses or the imagination can 
take cognizance. It may be a mem, a horse, a 
stone, a Phoenix, or a cardinal virtue ; still it is an 
object, and when we know what or who is meant 
we can change the pronoun into a substantive, and 
say man, horse, &c., instead of this, that, &c. The 
feet is, that in their application, pronouns and sub- 
stantives are connected with exactly the same class 
of objects, the something which they denote being 
the same, the way in which they denote it being 
different. Contrast with this use of words like I, 
thou, &c., that of words like red, white, fee, and 
you will see the difference between the pronoun and 
the adjective, and the extent to which the former is 
an actual name, whereas the latter is only a word 
suggestive of a name. 

A pronoun, then, is a kind of substantive — at 
any rate, it is a name applied to substances. There 
is, however, only one kind of substantive with 
which it agrees ; with the important dass of common 
(or general) names it has little to do. All pro- 
nouns (as has been already stated) are individual, 
or singular, or proper names. None are common. 



Digitized by 



Google 



232 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

They are all words like John or London^ rather 
than words like mem or town. 

Nevertheless, there is no single member of any 
dass of objects whatever to which such a pronoun as , 
this or that may not apply. It may mean a Tnan, a 
horse, &c., as aforesaid. Surely this is anything but 
individuality, singularity, or propriety. Is it not 
something rather the opposite? Is there not an 
idea of generality, plurality (I had almost said im- 
propriety), attached to a name which may denote 
any one object out of a million (or more) indif- 
ferently? What can well be commoner than a 
term which will denote anything or everything? 
Individual names have been said to apply to things 
of which there is one only (one and no more than 
one), and singular has been said to mean much the 
same as individual. The name, however, of the 
things that such a word as this can apply to is 
legion. Yet this is an individual, or singular, name. 

Proper names, too, seem at first, to be as unlike 
pronouns as they well can be. A proper name is a 
name appropriated to some particular individual ; 
appropriated in such a manner as to be incapable 
of any application elsewhere. To name a man John, 
and to call him Thomas^ is not to name him at aU. 
It is to misappropriate two terms at once, to rob 
Thomas without enriching John. Yet one and the 
same object may be called this and that, I and thou, 
and no misappropriation occur. Nevertheless, this 
and that, I and thou, &c., are proper names. 

The explanation of this apparent complication is 
simple. It lies in the fact, so essential to their con- 
stitution, of pronouns being convertible, or variable, 
names. A pronoun may mean anything whatever, 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAETS OF SPEECH. 233 

and apply to any amount of objecis real or imagi- 
nary. But it can only mean, denote, or signify 
one object, or group of objects, at a time. As long 
as John speaks of himself, I means John, but when 
Thomas talks of his self, I means Thomas, As long 
as a certain white stone is nearer to me than a 
certain black one, this means white stone. Change 
their places, and it is better expressed by that ; the 
hUich stone being what answers to this. 

Pronouns, then, in so far as they denote but one 
object (or one collection of objects) at a time, are 
individual, singular, or proper terms. They depart, 
however, from the character of the true proper 
names, like John and London, in being able to ex- 
press any amount of different objects at different 
times. In short, they are (as aforesaid) variable or 
convertible names. 

114. 

Pronouns the Names of Substances. — How far 
Common ? 

§ If pronouns depart in some respects from the 
character of the true and typical individual, sin- 
gular, or proper, how nearly do they approach that 
of the common, or general, names? The exact 
measure of the distance is as unimportant as it is 
unattainable. It is only certain that there is a 
broad line of demarcation between them. A common 
name, however generic it may be, always denotes 
objects that have a certain real or supposed relation 
to each other, objects with a certain amount of 
attributes in common. An oak and a seaweed, are 
equally vegetables, a mite and an elephant equally 



Digitized by 



Google 



234 PARTS OP SPEECH. 

animals; but no one would call a book a vege* 
table, or an inkstcmd an animal. Yet an oak, a 
seaweed, a mite, an elephant, a book, an inkstand, 
a griffin, a colour, a virtue, may aU be denoted by 
words like this and ^^f; indeed there are no two 
objects in the whole range of the real or the ima- 
ginary universe, that are so unlike each other, as 
not to be brought under the designation in ques- 
tion, and that easily, and without the creation of 
either obscurity or ambiguity of language. 

Though a pronoun is a name, it is not a class- 
name. It applies, indeed, to objects numerous 
enough to form a class ; but this is not sufficient. 
Objects, to form a class, must not only exist in 
certain numbers, but bear to each other a certain 
amount of resemblance. This is done by their 
having certain attributes in common. 

This means that, whilst common names are con- 
notative, pronouns are simply notative. 

Connotative names (§ 94) are founded upon the 
existence of more attributes than one ; notative on 
the existence of one only. Hence, a pronoun is in 
the same class with words like John and London, 
rather than with words like Tnan and town. 

115. 

Pronouns the Names of Stibstances. — Simply If otor 
tive (Denotative), — The Attribute they denx)te 
that of Relation. 

§ It is in their convertibility that the peculiar 
character of the pronouns exists. 

Except so far as it is convertible, a word like / 
is neither more or less than an expression like the 



Digitized by 



Google 



?ARTS OP SPEECH. 235 

present writer, R, G. Latham, or any other desig- 
nation of the author of the page now under notice. 

Now this convertibility of the pronouns arises out 
of the nature of the attribute that it expresses. 

The attribute expressed by a pronoun is, always 
and exclusively, an attribute of Relation, and it is to 
the fact of relations being changeable, that the pro- 
perties of the pronoun are due. 

Relations change. Qualities are (what is called) 
inherent. For an object to be called red it must, 
i/n, and of itself, possess the quality of redness. 
For an object to be designated as this, it requires no 
peculiarity of constitution at all. It merely re- 
quires to be in a certain relation to the speaker, or 
some other object. It may become that without 
any alteration whatever of itself It need not 
even change its place. It is enough for the speaker 
to change his, or for a different speaker to talk 
about it. 

A pronoun, then, is the name of a substance, 
denoted by a single attribute, that attribute being 
the attribute of relation. 

As the name of a substance, it can form the 
subject of propositions, and, as the ordinary sub- 
stantive can do no more, it is, in that respect, sub- 
stantival. 

As a name founded on the denotation of a single 
attribute, it connotes nothing, and consequently, can 
be applied to anything, though only to one object 
at a time. 

But as that single attribute is the attribute of 
relation, and. as relations can change, pronouns can 
be applied to any number of objects in succession, 
however different. 



Digitized by 



Google 



236 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

116. 

ProTwuns as compared with Proper Names. 

§ I here use proper names in the ordinary sense 
of the grammarians; meaning by it names like 
John, London, &c. 

What do they connote ? Nothing. 

What do they note or denote ? Less than the 
pronouns ; and be it remembered that the pronouns 
denote but one real attribute. 

How can a word that denotes less than a single 
real attribute denote anything at all? This we 
must investigate. We must investigate it in order 
to see in what respect the pronoun differs from the 
proper name. 

The information that a proper name gives us is 
purely, absolutely, and exclusively negative. What 
do I know of the individual called John from the 
combination JOHN? I guess that it means a 
human being of the male sex ; but this is only 
from knowing that it is to such objects that it 
generally applies. It may mean a dog, a horse, a 
ship — anything. 

All that the name reaUy tells me is this, viz. that 
the object to which it applies bears that name, or is 
supposed to bear it; that it is not a ThoTnas, a 
Charles, a London, a Julius Goesar ; that it is not, 
in short, anything not called John, or rather that it 
is not anything called by a name other than John. 
Certainly, this is little enough. Yet more than this 
I am unable to find in the ordinary proper name. It 
simply excludes so many others. 

Now this is what is done by the pronoun. Words 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAETS OF SPEECH. 237 

like I and this, &c., exclude words like thou and 
that, &c. But they do something more. They tell 
us something positive. What I may mean altoge- 
ther I cannot learn from the word itself. It most 
probably means a humali being. It is even chances 
that, meaning a human being, it means a person of 
the male sex. But it may mean something dif- 
ferent. In ^sop's fables it means a lion, tiger, 
dog, fly, &c. In Homer it means gods, goddesses, 
demons, &c. It may mean anything that any one 
may imagine to be endowed with speech, and to 
use it in talking about itself Nevertheless, it 
means a speaker of some sort. 

In like manner thou means an object spoken to. 

Again — this, however little it may tell us as to 
the nature of the object that it denotes, tells us that 
it is nearer to some speaker than the object desig- 
nated that. 

This is more than is done by the ordinary proper 
name, the difference between which arid the pro- 
noun it has been the object of the. present section 
to illustrate. 

117. 

Pronowas as coTnpared with Adjectives. 

§ Relation is an attribute. Quality is no more 
— no more and no less. 

The red-ness or white-ness, of an object is one of 
its attributes. The this-ness, or that-ness, of one is 
the same. The words are somewhat strange. The 
things, however, are alike. From red and white, 
we get the abstract forms red-nGss and white-ness, 
and we can get the same from this or that if we 



Digitized by 



Google 



238 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

want to do so, without violating the rules of lan- 
guage. 

There is something, then, common to the pro- 
noun and the adjective ; something common, not- 
withstanding the substantival character of the former 
upon which so much has already been written. 

To say, 

The rose you speak of is redy 
and to say. 

The rose you speak of is thisy 
is to utter a pair of exceedingly similar proposi- 
tions ; propositions which agree in giving a certain 
attribute to a certain flower. The first gives it 
that of redl-ness, the second that of this-ness. 

Yet there is a great difference in the import of 
the two predicates. The foimer, in giving us red- 
TiesSy gives us but one out of the many attributes 
that constitute the substance rose. The latter, in 
giving us thisnesSy gives us the rose itself, i.e. the 
self-same substance under another name. 

The name rose is the name of substance, i.e. of 
the aggregate of so many attributes. 

The name this is the name that that substance 
bears so long as it is in a certain relation to some 
other substance. 

Red is no name at all. It is a word which sug- 
gests, or implies, the name redness. But when we 
have got this, what is it ? It is no name for a rose, 
but only a name for one of its qualities. Neither 
is it the name for the qualities of a rose exclusively. 
It is the name of one of the qualities of a brick, 
an Indian, a soldier's coat, fee., &c. 

The difference between what is implied by a 
name expressive of a relation and a name expres- 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 239 

sive of a quality is the difference between a part 
and a whole, and this is the difference between a 
pronoun and an adjective. 

118. 

Pronouns as coTnpared with Abstracts. 

A pronoun is the name for a substance. 

It is the name of a substance based upon one 
(and only one) of its attributes. 

But that attribute, being the attribute of relation, 
has the peculiar properties just indicated. It applies 
to a whole substance, and applies to any amount of 
different substances at different times. 

In short, as a name, it is variable, convertible, 
temporary, ephemeral, momentary, transferrible, a 
name pro hdc vice (so to say). 

. The great majority of the substances to which 
pronouns apply are concrete ; i, e, when we come to 
know, we find that, though known only through 
one attribute, they have many. 

An abstraction is a substance with one attribute 
only ; i, e. the attribute which gives it its nam^. 
Redness, for instance, is a substance of which we 
can only say, in the way of predication, that it is 
red. 

It may be objected that this is no substance at 
all. Perhaps it is not etymologically. It is cer- 
tainly not so to the senses. It is a substance, how- 
ever, to the intellect; and it is a substance in 
grammar. It is something that the mind can con- 
template m and by itself. It is a something of 
which we may talk as we talk of the most concrete 
objects in existence. 



Digitized by 



Google 



240 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

No matter how immaterial, unsubstantial, or un- 
real, such somethings as goodness, whiteness, &c., 
may be, no matter how little any of our senses can 
take cognizance of them, no matter how difficult it 
may be for even the intellect to realise any definite 
notion of them, they are, still, in the eyes of the 
philologue and grammarian, substances, or some- 
thing possessing the grammatical attribute of a 
substance. He can, for instance, say. Goodness 
is the condition of happiness ; or, Happiness is 
the reward of goodness. He can say, in goodness, 
frorn^ goodness, by goodness, fee. ; and this is aU 
he could do if the word before him were house, 
or man; or the name of some object remark- 
able for its power of striking the senses by its 
physical properties of tangibility, visibility, or 
audibility. The writer* from whom I take this 
statement, admits and insists upon this property of 
abstract terms, though he adds, that "this indis- 
pensable and necessary use of language, in the 
common business of life, is the root of the most 
glaring fellacies, when we have occasion to reason 
on the fundamental principles of things in general/' 

An abstract name, though it has a substance, has 
nothing concrete answering to it. A pronoun has 
always a substance, and generally a concrete one 
(i, e, an object of more than one attribute), to which 
it applies. 

This is the difference between a pronoun and an 
abstract name. 

The substance that answers to a pronoun may 
be, and generally is, concrete. 

* Sir Gbatss Haughtoit, Frodromtis, p. 11. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 241 

The substance that answers to an abstract name 
never is, and cannot, ex vi termini, be concrete, 

(119.) 

Criticism. — Use of the Word Noun. 

§ If the doctrines of the preceding sections are 
true, the existing phraseology of the ordinary gram- 
mars is exceptionable ; complications arising out of 
the use of the word noun. The effect of it is to 
separate the substantive too much from the pro- 
noun, and to connect it too closely with the adjec- 
tive. 

In the first place, noun is derived from the Latin 
nomen = name. But the present treatise denies that 
adjectives are names, and gives reasons for the denial. 

The present treatise maintains that a name im- 
plies a nomine or object named. Now there is no 
nomine to an adjective. It is no answer to this 
statement to say that white, red, old, new, Szc, are 
the names of substances, things, or objects. They 
are not so. White thing, &c., are names ; but the 
nominal part lies in the word thing. All that the 
words white, &c., suggest is, the existence of a 
certain attribute as one amongst others constituting 
a substance. For this attribute (as aforesaid) white, 
red, &c., are not the true names. The true names 
are whiteness, redness, &c. 

The exact form which the language of a gramma- 
rian should take, in order to obviate these diffi- 
culties, is by no means an easy question. Neither 
is it one which any single writer is likely to deter- 
mine. The practice of teaching, along with the 
investigations necessary in the higher branches of 

M 



Digitized by 



Google 



242 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

philology, will, sooner or later, decide wliat portions 
of the present phraseology should be kept, and 
what allowed to grow obsolete. Meanwhile, it is 
convenient, for the present^ to forget as much as 
possible the connection between the words noun and 
name — ^adjectives being nouns, but not names. It 
is also convenient to ignore as much as possible 
the element pro in the word pro-noxm, or, at any 
rate, forget that it means for. This is needful be- 
cause the pronoun is reaUy as much of a noun as 
the substantive itself, and more of one than the 
adjective. To a certain extent it is, doubtless, a sub- 
stitute. Every pronoun, like every proper name, has 
its eauivalent. To every proper name there is the 
comiHpn, or general name of the dass to which the 
particular individual imder notice belongs. Thus, 
wherever there is a John or a Bvxieplmlua (as usually 
understood), there is a ma/n or a liorse. In like 
manner to every pronoun there is a corresponding 
substantive, this and thxit always meaning some- 
thing Qiousey many &c., as the case may be), though 
meaning it in a different manner. 

As far, then, as this is substitution, pronouns are 
substitutes for nouns. But proper names are also 
substitutes for common ones. Be it so. It follows 
that, with a change of view, nouns are substitutes 
for pronouns, and common names for proper. 

Now the evil of making the noun the standard 
and the pronoun the substitute, makeshift, or 
shadow of the noun lies in the circumstance of its 
being extremely likely, as a matter of fact in the 
history of language, that the pronoun is, in many 
instances, the older word of the two. The evidence 
upon this point lies within the domain of another 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAETS OF SPEECH. 243 

investigation. At present, it is sufficient to indi- 
cate its existence. 

A third point upon wliich we may be chary is 
the recognition of the use of the word noun as the 
name of a genus, to which adjectives and substan- 
tives are species. At any rate, we ought to give 
tlie same generic character to the pronouns ; some 
of which are substantival rather than adjectival 
(Z, thoUy he) ; others adjectival rather than substan- 
tival (this, that, some, ma/ny). 

The use of the word appellative to denote the 
"words capable of forming both subjects and predi- 
cates, with which power it has the application of 
the ordinary word noun, and includes substantives 
and adjectives, though recommended by the present 
writer in an earlier work,* is called for only occa- 
sionally ; on occasions, however, it is useful. 



(120.) 

Criticism, — Plurality and Non-plurality of 
Attributes, 

§ In all the previous sections, when the subject 
admitted, much was said concerning the extent to 
which a given substance had one, or more than 
one, attribute. Some had many, some few. Between 
those, however, which had only one, and those which 
had more than one, the diSference was evidently 
considered to be important. Indeed, it was this 
which made the distiQction between iadividual and 
common names. 

* Preliminary Dissertation I. to the fourth edition of 
English Language, 

M 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



244! PABTS OF SPEECH. 

Of these two classes, each fell into subordinate 
divisions. 

Common names differed chiefly from each other 
in being more or less generic, e. g, 7na/n was more 
generic than Engliahman^ animal than man, orgor- 
nized being than ani/mal. Individual names did. 
the same. Proper names implied no attribute at 
all ; pronoims, the attribute of relation ; abstracts 
an attribute, which, whatever it was, appertained 
to a substance which had no other attribute but 
it. Of aU these classes the characters were well 
marked. 

The attributes of the proper name were fractional, 
so to say, i,e. less than imity. 

Those of the pronoun and the abstract substan- 
tive agreed in being but one, or in their one-ness ; 
but between them there was this difference — ^when the 
substance which the pronominal name denoted- was 
known, it might be, and generally was, as a sub- 
stance, one of many attributes ; the (me-ness of the 
attribute belonging to the name. In other words, 
the non-plurality of attributes was nominxiL 

Meanwhile, the non-plurality of attributes in the 
case of the abstract name was real ; i, e. the sub- 
stance itself when known, having one and one 
only. 

Change the name of a substance expressed by a 
pronoun, and you may get a concrete substantive. 

Change the name of a substance (redn^s, for in- 
stance) denoted by an abstract name, and — But why 
proceed ? The thing cannot be done. Whilst every 
substance expressed by a pronoun has a second 
name, substances expressed by abstract names have 
but one. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 245 

Need more be said to show that, in the eyes of 
iihe present writer, at least, the plurality or non- 
plurality of attributes is of the highest importance ? 
Jt makes all the difference between notation and 
connotation. For the value of this the reader is 
referred to the work so often quoted. Mills' Logic ; 
"vrhere the bearing of the latter upon language as 
an instrument of thought is fally, but not too 
fully, illustrated. - 

What, however, if we consider (what may be 
called) the Thamed-^ness of an object an attribute ? In 
such a case, the true and typical proper name, like 
John or London, instead of being a word which 
gives us no attribute at all, is the name of an object 
¦with a name — the name itself, or rather the fact of the 
name being borne by it, being, if not an actual attri- 
bute, an approach to one. If this be the case, every 
object that has a name has, ipso facto, an attribute. 

Considering, then, the possession of a name as 
one attribute, it follows that words like /, thou, 
this, &c., which, over and above the fact of their 
being named, give us a relation as well, may be 
said to have two, and, having two, to be connota- 
tive. At any rate they are names implying a second 
attribute. 

I submit that, as far as this is an objection, it is 
one easily remedied (should need be) by a slight 
change in the termiuology. The material fact of 
names that give us a relation being different from 
names that give us neither a relation nor anything 
equivalent to it, stiQ remains. 

But this is not all. It may be said, that, even ac- 
cording to the view taken in our preceding section 
of the import of names like John and London, 



Digitized by 



Google 



246 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

they are relational All that a name like John 
tells us is, that the object which bears it is other 
than not-John — ^the universe being not-Jokn and 
John. This, it may be said, involves a relation. 
Be it so. The difference between the name of an 
object contemplated in its relation to the speaker, 
or some object known to the ^aker, and the name 
of an object viewed in relation to everything else, is 
still of great practical importance. 

121. 

The Attribute of Quantity. — Qucmtity a Rdcdion. 

§ The three attributes to whidi the chief pro- 
minence is ^ven by writers on the philosophy 
of grammar are — (1) the attribute of quality; 
(2) the attribute of quantity ; and (3) the attribute 
of relation. 

Quantity y from the Latin word quantum =how 
great, properly applies to magnitude rather than 
number, that is, if we look to its derivation only. 
The answer, however, to the question how mxiny is, 
in ordinary parlance, a case of quantity. 

Q. How many are there ? 

A. Three. This means — 

There are three — or 

The number is three. 

Here three is the predicate, just as .white is the 
predicate in the words snow is white. Can we 
talk of the three-^ness of anything? Yes. The 
phrase, though awkward, is allowable. At any rate 
there is such a thing as the triple character of an 
object. 

Little need be said respecting the attribute of 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 247 

quantity, except that, whatever it may be in other 
points of view, it is in the eyes of a grammarian an 
attribute of relation, so that the place of a numeral 
in a proposition is that of the pronoun rather than 
the adjective. Indeed, in most grammars (perhaps 
in all), the numerals and pronouns are noticed to- 
gether. 

122. 

The Attribute of Quantity. — Cardincds and 
Ordinals. 

§ The relation, however, between the cardinal 
and ordinal numbers is sufficiently remarkable to 
command a short notice. 

It most nearly resembles that of words like this 
and that on the one side, and here and there on 
the other. Compare such a series as Jtrst, second, 
and thirdy with this, that, and if other (to use a 
familiar abbreviation), or this, that, and yon, and 
the extent to which both have the character of 
ordinality is manifest. First, second, third, is a 
sequence of which the words nearest, not so near, 
and furtJter, give almost a translation. And what 
are these but this, that, and yon, imder another 
form? The relations in space are identical. 

Again — ^like this, that, and you, the words first, 
second, and third, imply the existence of a substance 
to which they correspond. These are truly names ; 
though convertible. This, however, we have learnt 
abeady from their place as pronouns. 

The relations of the cardinals to words like here, 
and there, is less clear. Neither is it so clear that here 
and there stand in the same relation to this and that, 



Digitized by 



Google 



248 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

as one and two do to first and second. Let us mark, 
however, the points in which they agree. That 
here, like iMs, implies a closer, and there, like that, 
a less dose proximity is obvious. And they imply 
it in the same way. This and that attach them- 
selves to substances ; Jiere and there, to certain points 
in space ; the objects occupying those points making 
no part of the idea. And this is the case with one 
and tvx). 

If this view be accurate, the cardinal numbers 
are more or less adverbial in character. Be it so. 
They may be this, and yet retain much of their 
pronominal character. But they are adjectival also. 
We can say one man, two men, &c., just as we can 
a few men, many men. Equally adjectival are 
here and there; words which, etymologically speak- 
ing, are dative cases of the demonstrative pronouns* 

The ordinals answer to the question which ? the 
cardinals to the question how mxmy ? 

Q. Which is this ? 

A. The first, second, &c. 

Q. How Tnany are there ? 

A. Three. 

To this extent, then, the relation between the 
cardinality and ordinality of the numerals is pecu- 
liar. It is not that of abstract and concrete. If 
it were so, the phenomenon which the numeration 
of (I believe) every language on the face of the 
earth would exhibit would be most anomalous. It 
would exhibit a reversal of the very general rule 
that the abstract is derived from the concrete, and 
not the concrete from the abstract ; inasmuch as, in 
all cases known to the present writer, the cardinal 
is the simple, the ordinal the derived form ; the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAETS OF SPEECH. 249 

cardinal being the analogue of the abstract, the 
ordinal of the concrete. 

In one respect, indeed, there is actually an abstrac- 
tion and concretion. The cardinal gives us the 
number imnus any particular object to which it 
applies. The ordinal, on the other hand, has always 
something with which it concerns itself. Neither 
relation, however, is the relation of red to redness, 
or redness to red. On the contrary, both the cardi- 
nals and the ordinal may (if necessary) take each 
their own proper abstract. We may talk of the 
captain of a class in school being proud of his first- 
ness, just as the second may be said to be vain of 
his forwardness. 

On the other hand, the word one-ness has been 
found necessary in more than one passage of the 
present work.* 

123. 

The Article. 

§ The part of speech now coming under notice is 
one which, in some languages, commands no attention 
whatever, inasmuch as it is not found in them. The 
Latin language has no article. At the same time 

* The points which the cardinals and ordinals have in common 
with the concretes and abstracts have had more stress laid upon 
them in a previous treatise of the author's than the present. 
In Preliminary Dissertation I. to his English Language (last 
edition) he considers the relation between them to be so far 
those of the abstract and concrete substantives as to look upon 
the fact of the ordinals being the simpler in form as an ap- 
proach to a philological paradox. Without exactly thinking 
this, at present, he looks upon the development of the two 
series as one of the most interesting questions in language. 

M 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



250 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

each and all of the languages derived from the 
Latin have one, or more than one. The French 
has the article le = the, and un = one. So have 
the Italian, the Spanish, &c. But the Wallachian 
article is the most remarkable. It follows the 
noun to which it belongs, instead of preceding it. 
It also coalesces with itj so that the two form one 
word. Thus if om = mem, the combination 
orn/-ul = the man. In this case the article is 
said to be pos^-positive, or placed after the substan- 
tive. 

Now this post-position of the article is by no 
means a rare £kct. Neither is its amalgamation 
with the substantive. What occurs in the Wal- 
lachian occurs in the Icelandic also. So it does in 
the Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, and Feroic, de- 
rived from it. 

K these facts be rightly interpreted, they will 
suggest the likelihood of the article being one of 
those parts of speech which originate during the 
later rather than the earlier stages of language ; as, 
indeed, it is. 

They will also suggest the manner in which a 
part of speech, originally non-existent in a lan- 
guage, may be developed. If the Latin be the 
mother-tongue of the French, &c., and these contain 
articles, how came those articles there? In the 
original Latin they were wanting. 

The investigation of this wiU tell us that, al- 
though the so-called articles of the modem lan- 
guages are wanting in the old Roman, the materials 
out of which they might be made, created, evolved, 
or developed, were present. The Latin had the 
word unvs = OTie, It had also the words ille, 



Digitized by 



Google 



I»AETS OF SPEECH. 261 

ilia = he and she. Now the French un = a = unus, 
the indefinite article having grown out of the nu- 
meral. And the French le = ille ; the definite 
article having grown out of the demonstrative 
pronoun, — oftener called the personal pronoun of 
the third person, but reaUy the demonstrative. 

Neither was the French process of evolution or 
development peculiar. The articles of all the allied 
languages arose out of these same pronouns, unu3 
and ille. Only, however, in WaUachian did it 
follow the noun. This is sufficient to show that, 
in one respect, at least, the article is, if no fuU 
and true pronoun, at least, pronominal in its origin. 
Should, however, the instances fi:om the tongues 
just cited be held insufficient, it may be added 
that, mutatis mutandis, the origin of the articles 
in the languages allied to our own is the same. 
What is the but a word of the same origin with 
the demonstrative th-is or tJia-t ? What is a but 
an; and an but an (Anglo-Saxon) and ane (Scotch) ; 
and an or a/ne but on£ ? 

So much, then, for the origin of tiie article, and 
the points in which it agrees with the pronoun. 
Those in which it differs fi:om the pronoun are, at 
least, of equal interest. 

A pronoun is essentially categorematic. If it 
were not so it would not be a pronoun. 

An article is essentially sj/ricategorematic. If it 
were not so it would not be an article. 

An article is sj/Ticategorematic at least ; and in 
many cases it is something more. It not only at- 
taches itself to its substantive, but it may actually 
coalesce, amalgamate, or become incorporate with 
it. At any rate, it may join on to the body of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



262 PAETS OF SPEECH. 

word, as has been suggested in § 27, and as the 
name indicates. 

Such being the case, the impropriety of putting 
the article at the head of the list of the parts of 
speech, as is done in many grammars, is apparent. 
Separated from the pronoun out of which it origi- 
nates, and connected with the substantive, adjective, 
or noim, with which its real relations are only in- 
direct, it is quite out of place ; only taking its 
proper position when in contact with the pro- 
noun. 

Pronominal, however, as it is, it is still syTi/- 
categorematic ; and (so being) supplies an instance 
of a part of speech losing its categorematic cha- 
racter, and becoming something else. How is, this 
done? The first point to be remembered is, the 
fact of every pronoun having a synonym, i. e. a 
substantive into which it may be translated. Every 
this is this something — this man, this stone, &c. 
Now when the two names are thus joined, the 
result is a substance plus its relations. 

Let the two ideas so far combine that the two 
words which form them partake of the nature of a 
compound. 

Let one of the words undergo a change of form, 
the result of which will be that the word in com- 
bination with the substantive will be slightly dif- 
ferent from what it is when separate and indepen- 
dent. 

The result, too, wiU be that out of the root of this 
and that we get the, a word incapable of existing 
by itself, but common enough, under the name of 
the definite article, in conjunction with a substan- 
tive. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAJRTS OF SPEECH. 263 

And out of the numeral OTie we get cm and a, 
words incapable of existing by themselves, but 
common enough, under the name of the indefinite 
article, in conjunction with a substantive. 

Dialogue. 

Question. — ^What are the words in English that come 
under the title of article as thus explained, L e, what are 
the words in English which are, at one and the same 
time, 

a. Pronominal in origin ; and 

5. Incapable of existing, except in conjunction with 

, either a substantive or some other pronoun? 

Answer. — An (or a) and the. 

Question, — Are there any others ? 

Answer. — Not in the ordinary grammars. More than 
one competent writer, however, has suggested that no is 
an article. To be this, it must, of course, be considered 
as different in its construction from the ordinary negative. 
In which case it certainly comes under the conditions of 
an article. It has no independent existence. It has an 
existence when coupled with a substantive or another 
pronoun. It ^ not one, and none, in power. But we 
can by no means use it, as we can those words, categore- 
matically. It seems, in short, to be truly articular. 

Question, — Are there any others ? 

Answer. — The construction of every is exactly the con- 
struction of no. We can say every man as we can say no 
man, and every one as we can say no one ; but we cannot 
say every and no alone. 

Question, — ^What do you say to many a-, and never a-, 
in such phrases as many-a-one and never-a-one ? Are they 
articular? 

^nsuj^r.— Certainly. But they are simply the indefinite 
a with a certain prefix. Every (= ever + ilk = each) is 
in a different category. It is not only articular, but a 
separate independent article. 



Digitized by 



Google 



254 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

The recognition of every and no as articles, are 
measures of the extent to which the previous doc- 
trine as to the essential characteristics of the article 
alters the phraseology of the ordinary grammars. 

It now only remains to ask, what are the logical 
conditions which more particularly evolve or de- 
velope the article? For these we, may look to 
§ 26. 

1. Every expresses a universal aflSrmative ; 

2. No, a universal negative ; 

3. A and tlie, the particular affirmative; the 
former indefinitely, the latter definitely. 

Dialogue. 
Question, — Are there no. articles except those that ex- 
press the quantity and quality of propositions ? 

Answer, — The words that express the quantity and 
quality of propositions {an and the, by the way, do this, 
and something more) are the chief. At the same time 
there are others. Though we can say, 

This hat is miney 
we cannot say, 

This hat is my ; 
so that my, thy, our, and your, are articular in respect to 
their construction — articular in construction, and pro- 
nominal in origin. If not actual articles, they are closely 
akin to them. 

124. 

The Substantive. 

§ An inconvertible subjective name is called a 
Substantive. 

In other words — 

A Substantive is an inconvertible name, capable 
of forming by itself, and single-handed, either sub- 
jects or predicates. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAETS OF SPEECH. 255 

More than this it is mmecessary to say, inas- 
much as the function of the ordinary substantive 
has already been investigated in the sections that 
treat of names. 

125. 
The Adjective. 

§ A word capable of forming the predicate, but 
not the subject of a proposition, is called an Ad- 
jective. 

The extent to which an adjective is no name, 
but only a word suggestive of one, has already 
been noticed. 

So has the relation between the adjective and 
the abstract substantive. 

So has the fact of the adjective being the word 
expressive of an attribute. 

So has the fact of the particular species of at- 
tribute expressed by the adjective being that of 
quality. 

Adjectives express qualities ; pronouns, relations 



126. 

The Adjective. — Its relation to the Participle and 
the Verb. — States and Actions. 

§ The ordinary division of attributes into quali- 
ties and relations has been made. 

A further division of the particular class of 
qualities is still necessary. It is one that concerns 
the philologue and grammarian exclusively. The 
logician has but little to do with it. We shall 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

arrive at it by attending to certain shades of mean- 
ing illustrated by the following sentences : — 
Ice is solid water. 
Water is liquid ice. * 
Each of these is not only correctly constructed 
as a proposition, but is true as a matter of fact. 
Take the two together, and what do they imply ? 
Change— change from solidity to liquidity ; at any 
rate, change of some kind. How is this change 
effected ? Does the water in becoming ice change 
itself from a liquid to a solid ? Does the ice in 
becoming water change itself from a solid to a 
liquid ? Or are some fresh agents brought in by 
which water is solidified and ice liquified ? Say 
that there are, and that these agents are heat and 
cold, and we get the proposition that 

Heat is the cause of ice becoming water, 

and 
Cold is the cause of water becoming ice. 
So that now we get the idea not only of change 
but of agency. 

And now for solid and liquid water write 
solidified and liquified. 

Ice is solidified water ; 
Water is liquified ice ; 
Ice is water solidified by cold ; 
Water is ice liquified by heat. 
Fio in Latin means I become. Hence solidi- 
fied and liqui-fied mean hecome-solid and become^ 
liquid. The abstract names that correspond to 
these two words are solidi-fi^ation (=the becoming- 
solid) and liqui-faction ( = the being-Tnadediquid), 
Why are they different ? Why does one end in 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAJRTS OF SPEECH. 257 

-fication and the other in -faction ? Why not say- 
either solidifaction and liquifactioUy or liquidifi- 
cation and solidification ? There is no great 
reason why we should not. The difference be- 
tween a thing becoTnvng solid (or liquid) and 
being-Tnade solid (or liquid) is rarely of much 
importance in ordinary language. Both expres- 
sions, however, suggest the idea of change ; one 
the idea of change effected spontaneously by the 
object itself the other the idea of change impressed 
upon it from without. 

Now solid and liquid are adjectives, whereas 
solidified and liquified are participles, whilst soli- 
dify and liquify are verbs. This shows, the ex- 
tent to which adjectives, participles, and verbs, are 
allied. 

They are aUied, but different, and the difference 
between them consists in the idea of change and 
agency implied by the participle and the verb. 
Solidity is a state ; solidification an action. Yet 
the solidity of water in the shape of ice, and the 
solidification which water undergoes in order to 
become ice, are equally attributes of water. 

For liquify write thxiw. 

For liquified write thawed. 

To the right of each write the water is. Thus 
The water is liquid. 
The water is thawed. 

From thawed eject the -ed, and substitute for it 
-mg — the water is thawing. 

For is thawing write thaw-s; as, the water thaws. 

What is the result ? Even this — that the pre- 
dicate and copula have coalesced in one word, and 
that thaws = a predicate + a copula. 



Digitized by 



Google 



258 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

The adjective has become first a participle, after- 
wards a verb. 

How ? By changing the state expressed by the 
word liquid into the action denoted by the word 
liquified. 

The slightest departure imaginable fi-om the ex- 
pression by which we denote the permanent state 
or condition of an object has this effect. To say 
that 

Water has the property of liquidity, 
Water is endowed with liquidity, 
Water becomes solid under certain circum- 
stances, 
Water can become solid, 
and the like, is to make water (the substance) more 
or less of an agent, and its attribute more or less 
of an action. 

To have the attribute of liquidity, is to act the 
part of a possessor or owner. 

To be endowed with the same is to be acted 
upon by some imaginary endower. 

To become anything is to pass fi*om one state to 
another, through one or more intermediate ones. 

The water that can become solid has certain, 
powers — no matter whether exercised or not. 

And so on through a whole list of similar ex- 
pressions. 

Except when we mentioned the words heat and 
cold, we have hitherto spoken as i^ in the changes 
imder notice, it was the water that was the agent. 
But what if, instead of saying, 

Water becomes ice, 
we say. 

Water is made into ice ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAETS OF SPEECH. 259 

In such a case water is anything but an agent. 
On the contrary, it is extremely passive ; the agent 
being elsewhere. In propositions like — 
Cold chauges water into ice, 
Cold freezes water, 
Cold solidifies water, 
we get the agent in question, — the agent which, at 
the first view, appears to make the ice. Yet it 
only makes it through the action of the water. 

However, the agency is now complete ; and we 
have both the cause {cold acting on water) and the 
effect {solidification). We have also the substances 
— ice, water, and cold — as well as the attributes, 
viz. solidity, liquidity, power of being changed 
from liquid to solid, and vice versd, power of 
changing, &c. The cold acts upon the water, pro- 
ducing a result. 

Now this action proceeding from the cold effects 
a result in the water — ^passing, or making a tromsit 
(so to say), from the one to the other. The action, 
energy, manifestation of power, or whatever we 
choose to call it, is now at its Tnaodmum, This is 
the case with the class of verbs called transitive. 
There is the agent and the object, and there is the 
relation between the two. The ordinary conditions 
of a state (a word implying permanence) are wholly 
absent. The only state in the matter is a state of 
change ; and this is scarcely a state at aU. 

Where the verb is transitive the term is many- 
worded, for a transitive verb implies the existence 
of some object upon which it acts ; and a transitive 
verb, imaccompanied by a name, is a contradiction 
in terms. The absence of such a name renders it 
intransitive, even though in form it be transitive. 



Digitized by 



Google 



260 PAETS OF SPEECH. 

I move my limbs is a proposition of which the 
predicate is a many-worded term. 

Subject. Copula. Predicate. 

I am moving-my-limbs, 

the word move being transitive. 

/ move = / am moving^-S.eTe the verb move 
is intransitive, merely meaning, I am in a state of 
motion. 

The water freezes — ^This is what we say when 
we look upon the solidification of water as an 
action of the water itself; freezes being intransi- 
tive. 

The cold freezes the water — ^This is what we 
say when we look upon the action of cold as the 
cause of the water becoming solid ; freezes being 
transitive. 

There are, then, degrees in the extent to which 
an attribute may be an action rather than a state. 

1. The sun is bright — Here we think more of 
what the sun is than what it does. 

2. The sun is a bright body — ^Ditto. 

3. The sun is a shining body — ^The notion of 
action now begins. Nevertheless the word body 
limits it. We think quite as much of the sun 
being a body as of a body shi/aing. 

4. Tite sun is shining — ^The idea of action be- 
comes stronger. 

5. The sun shmes — ^The idea of action becomes 
stronger still. 

6. The sun dazzles — Stronger still. 

7. The sun dazzles our eyes — Here we have 
agent and object — doing and sufiering — action and 
passion ; and the verb has attained its maodmum 
of verbality. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PAETS OF SPEECH. 261 

• 127. 

The Verb. 

§ A word capable of forming by itself both the 
predicate and the copula of a proposition, is called 
a Verb. 

Verbs are categorematic, and something more, 
i, e. hypercategorematic. 

They have two parts — (1) one copular, (2) the 
other predicative. 

Subject. Copula + Predicate. 

I speak 

is the verbal form of 

Subject. Copula. Predicate. 

I am speaking. ^ 

128. 
The Participle. 

§ The predicative element of the Verb, when 
isolated and treated separately, is called a Parti- 
ciple. 

A participle (i. e. a verb minus the copula) is in aU 
respects an adjective, the quality whereof consists 
in an action rather than a state. 

like the adjective, the participle is predicatively 
categorematic. 

If all propositions were perfectly simple, i. e. if 
there were no such things in language as complex 
terms, the parts of speech just enumerated would 
comprise all the words admissible into propositions, 
or, what is the same thing, all the words, with few 



Digitized by 



Google 



262 PAETS OF SPEECH. 

exceptions, that constitute language. But all terms 
are not simple ; and the existence in language of 
complex ones creates the occasion for other classes 
of words, or other parts of speech. There exist 
in language parts of speech, or classes of words, 
for the admission whereof into propositions a cer- 
tain degree of complexity in either the subject or 
predicate is a condition. These parts of speech, or 
classes of words, are two in number — ^Adverbs and 
Prepositions. 



129. 

Adverbs. 

§ A word inadmissible in a simple, but admissible 
in a complex term, and therein requiring the pre- 
sence of only a single categorematic, or hyper-cate- 
gorematic, element is called an Adverb. 
John is speaking loudly = 
John speaks loudly. 

All words that can take the place of loudly in a 
proposition are Adverbs. 

But — 

A verb = predicate + copula. 

Add to which, that 

It is its predicative or adjectival element which 
is modified by the adverb ; a part of speech which 
is really as much of an Sbd-adjective as an s^d-verb. 

Adverbs give the Tnanner or mode in which the 
action denoted by the verb takes place. Of these 
there are several species, inasmuch as not only the 
general character and degree of an action come 
under the denomination of a Tnode, but the con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



PABTS OF SPEECH. 263 

ditions of time and place as well, along with others 
of less importance. 

He speaks ; 

He speaks loudly ; 

He speaks very (degree) loudly ; 

He speaks very loudly now (time) ; 

He spoke Hhere (place). 

From modus (= mode) we have the logical 
terms modal and modality; terms by which we 
express the function of the adverbs. 

For an adverb to find its place in a proposition 
all that is necessary is a word denoting some action, 
to which the idea of the manner in which, or the 
conditions under which, it takes place is added. 

130. 

Prepositions. 

§ A syncategorematic word requiring for its in- 
troduction into a term two, or more, categorematic 
elements (those being subjective), is called a Pre- 
position. 

Hence — 

Prepositions connect subjectives, when more than 
one of them occurs in a term. 

In such an expression as, / am come from London 
by way of Windsor, and am going to Bristol 
through Bath, all words which can take the place 
of from, to, of, and through, are Prepositions. 

Pre = before ; positio = a placing, or position. 
Now, although words like from, to, &c., in the 
currently-studied languages, precede their subjec- 
tive categorematic, it is by no means a matter of 
necessity that they should do so. Indeed, in many 



Digitized by 



Google 



264 . PARTS OF SPEECH. 

languages they follow. If so, the so-called pro- 
position is really a jpos^-position (jposb = after). 

Hence, the term preposition, though current, is 
exceptionable, being too specific. 

Observe — The inconvenience of the ordinary 
classification into nouns (containing substantives 
and adjectives) and pronouns is made manifest by 
a sentence of this section — " Prepositions connect 
pronouns and subjectives, &c/' Some more familiar 
term was wanted here. To have said that prepo- 
sitions connected nouns would have been wrong ; 
inasmuch as adjectives are nouns, and adjectives, 
except so fiir as they are attached to some substan- 
tive or pronoun, are not parts of speech to which 
a pronoun can attach itself. 

To have said that prepositions connected pro- 
nouns would also have been wrong. The state- 
ment would have been too narrow. They connect 
substantives as well. 

It would also have been wrong to have said 
that they connected substantives. They also con- 
nect pronouns. 

As soon as we understand the fact of prepositions 
indicating a relation^ wo see the impossibility of 
their finding a place, either in a simple term or in 
a term containing only one name. For a relation 
to exist there must be at least two related objects. 

131. 

Conjunctions. 

§ A word which connects either two terms of 
the same kind, within the same proposition, or else 
two propositions, is called a Conjunction. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 265 

Mark, the words of the same hind. The copula 
connects two terms, viz. the subject and predicate ; 
but these are not of the same kind. 
In the proposition — 

All men are black or white, 
the conjunction or connects hiaak and white — ^both 
predicates. 
In— 

The day is bright, 

because 
The sun is shining, 
the conjunction because connects two propositions. 

Conjunctions are extra-terminal ; i, e. they lie 
beyond the term. 

Conjunctions are extra-terminal. Nevertheless, 
though they lie beyond the boundaries of any 
single term, they imply the existence of two. 



132. 

Yes am.d No. 

§ For the present we may call these simply Af- 
firmatives and Negatives. 

Yes r= It is so. 

No ^ It is not so. 

The single words stand as the equivalents to 
whole propositions. 

Is this enough to make them separate parts of 
speech? 

Not alone. Several words are in the same pre- 
. dicament ; and they are words belonging to differ- 
ent divisions of grammar. 

N 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

Here and there, in answer to the question, where? 
may do so : — 

Where are you ? Here. 

Oifie, two, &c., do the same, in answer to how 
many ? 

How many are there ? Two. 

Yet one and two can scarcely be called adverbs. 

Can yea and tio ? They are certainly adverbial 
rather than anything else. For the present, how- 
ever, they are dealt with as parts of speech, per se. 

They constitute a proposition. At the same 
time (being answers to a question) they imply a 
previous one. 

133. 

Interjections. 

§ A part of speech that exists wholly indepen- 
dent of propositions is called an Interjection. 

Words like oh ! ah ! pish ! &c., are Interjec- 
tions. 

134. 

Inflection. 

§ We have now gone through what are called 
the parts of speech, by which is meant the noun, 
pronoun, verb, &c., of the ordinary grammars. 

So doing, we have looked at them from one 
point of view only. We have considered them 
solely and wholly with a view to the place which 
they severally take in the structure of the proposi- 
tion. 

Now, although it has not been stated, totidem 
verbis, that this mode of treatment is different from 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 267 

that of the usual works on grammar, it has been 
more than once suggested that such is actually the 
case. More than once has the reader been re- 
minded that the tests or criteria by which the 
parts of speech of the present treatise are deter- 
mined are, in some degree, peculiar. Yet they are 
by no means either very doubtfiil or very obscure. 
Why, then, are they either wholly absent or imper- 
fectly exhibited in the usual works upon language ? 
Have the grammarians overlooked them altogether ? 
Or has the present writer overlooked certain facts 
that modify their application ? 

The answer to this involves the consideration of 
the phenomena of what is called Inflection. 

Firstly, that of the term itself. — Let a word be 
changed in respect to its form, and let these 
changes be compared to the bends of a trained tree ; 
only instead of the English word bending, let us 
use the Latin term inflectio (from fledo = / bend)y 
and say that " certain words, under certain condi- 
tions, are inflected/' or " exhibit inflections" 

Next, let us consider the functions of a preposi- 
tion. It is clear that the words so called are 
raierely so many means to an end ; that end being 
the expression of certain relations between certain 
substantives and pronouns — certain substantives 
and pronouns, sometimes single, sometimes con- 
joined with, or attended by, an adjective. Of 
these means there may, certainly, be more than one 
sort ; at any rate, we know of no necessity for the 
expression of the relation in question being limited 
to one form. We may make this clear by taxing 
our ingenuity in the formation of an artificial lan- 

N 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



268 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

guage, one of the conditions of which should be 
that there should be no prepositions. We may do 
it more easily still, by simply comparing such sl 
pair of words as father's son, with the three words, 
son of father. In the former the appended sound 
of the final 's does the work (tliere or thereabouts) 
of the word of in the latter. And why can we 
not go further? why not s&y fatheri, father o, fathert, 
or something of the same sort, for to fatlter ? Why 
not say fatherl, or fathera, for from father, and so 
on ? The answer to this question is, that it is not 
the custom of the men and women who speak 
English to do so. That the Latins, however, did 
so is well known. So did the Greeks. So did 
our own ancestors to some extent. In Latin — 



Pater = father. 
Patris = father's. 
Patri = to father. 



Patres = fathers. 
Patrwn = of fathers. 
Patribus = to fathers. 

That there ia a broad difference between the 
system which gives us such a single word as patri, 
and the system which gives us such a combination 
as to a father, is dear ; and it ia highly probable 
that, with such a difference existing, there is also a 
name by which it is expressed. 

What is this name ? Like many others, it will 
involve a metaphor. The idea which gives us the 
names for such a form as patri, &c., is the idea of fall- 
ing or declming from an upright position ; an idea 
which brings us to such terms as case (from casus 
= /<^^0, and declension (from declino = decline). 

Let father in English, and pater in Latin, be the 
original categorematic forms — forms capable of 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 269 

Baaking either the subjects or predicates of pro- 
positions hy themselves. 

Let father's and patri's be considered to be the 
same words, though in a less upright, independent 
position. In short, let us call them fallvngs-off 
from the original ; only, instead of fallings-offy let 
XLS use the Latin word case. 

Patris and father's wiU, then, be cases of pcUer 
ond father; and — 

The system that gives us the series pater, patris, 
patri, will be a system of what is called declen- 
sion. 

Carry the metaphor still fiirther. Let an up- 
right line represent pater, and let the several slants 
it would give in falling represent the cases. 

(1) 

Father — pater. 

(2) 
Fathers — patri's. 

patri. 




No. 1 is upright. In reality, it is no case (or 
falling) at all. It is customary, however, to call it 
the Casus Eectus, or Upright Case ; and, inaccurate 
as the expression is, it is not very inconvenient. 

Nos. 2 and 3 are Oblique, i. e. Oblique Cases ; 
and so they are called in grammar. 

Certain inflections are the equivalents to prepo- 
sitions. 

A categorematic word plus the equivalent to a 



Digitized by 



Google 



270 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

preposition, is in the same predicament with a cate- 
gorematiq word plus a preposition itself. Sach a 
word as patri's can no more form a term than such 
a combination as, of a father. 

And this explains a common statement in books 
of logic, viz* that it is only nouns in the Casus 
Rectus that are categorematic. In an oblique case, 
a noun, for all its importance, and all its otherwise 
categorematic character, can only be the part of a 
term. 

135. 

Inflection. — Nwmber. 

§ The previous section has shown that the rela- 
tion which two words in the same term bear to 
each other may be expressed by declension, instead 
of by separate words in the shape of prepositions. 

Are there any other modifications of meaning 
which may be expressed either by the same or 
similar means ? 

We have seen that there are. The diflFerence 
between pater and patres, between fiither and 
fathers, is a difference of Number. 

136. 

Inflection. — Oender. 

§ In Latin doniinus = master^ whilst domina 
= mistress ; and this difference of form, as indica- 
tive of a difference of sex, is carried throughout 
the cases and numbers. 

Dominus, a master. 

DominOy to a master. 

Domini, masters. 

Dominorum, of masters, &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 271 

As opposed to— 

Lormna, a mistress. 

DomvnoBy of a mistress. 

Dominarum, of mistresses, &c. 
This difference is a difference of Gender. 



137. 

Inflection, — Gender. — Of Prorumns. 

§ In ordinary substantives the phenomenon of 
gender is of no great importance. 

But it exists in Pronouns also, where it modifies 
the statements of §§ 90-96. 

In Latin ille = he, whereas the form for she is 
ilia. 

What do these words tell us ? They tell us that 
the object to which they apply is in a certain rela- 
tion to the speaker, i. e. that it is the object spoken 
ofy rather than the object speaking, or the object 
spoken to. 

But they tell us something more. They teU us 
that the object designated by ille is a male, the 
object designated by ilia being a female. 

Now the sex of an object is not only one of its 
attributes, but it is one of its qualities. If so, 
pronoims expressive of sex are pronouns and some- 
thing more, i.e. pronouns with an adjectival power 
superadded. 

138. 
Inflection. — Degrees of Comparison. 

§ Instead of more wise and most wise, say wiser 
and wisest, and you have a pair of single words 



Digitized by 



Google 



272 PABTS OF SPEECH. 

acting as the equivalent to a pair of combina- 
tions. 

This is the expression of a difference of Degree 
by either a declension or something akin to it. At 
any rate, it is the expression of a mode by means 
of an infiedion. 

139. 

Inflection of Verbs, — Conjugation. 

§ Like nouns and pronouns, verbs are inflected, 
the time (past, present, or future) at which an 
action takes place, and the agent does it (the 
speakeTy the object spoken to, or the object spoken 
of)y being the chief elements in the complex idea 



In Latin — 




Voco = 


IcaU; 


Vooas = 


Thou calleat ; 


Vocat = 


He caUa ; 


Vocamus = 


WecaU; 


Vocatis = 


TecaU; 


Vocant s= 


They call ; 


Vocavi = 


I called; 


Vocaviati = 


Thou calledst ; 


VocavU = 


He called, &c. 



all of which is so much inflection. 

The inflection of verbs is called their conjugation. 
Hence — 

The conjugation of verbs, and the declension of 
nouns and pronouns, are two species of the genus 
inflection. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PABTS OF SPEECH. 273 

140. 

CriticisTn. 

§ We are now in a position to see the possibility 
of the phenomena of inflection traversing, compK- 
cating, and modifying, the doctrine founded upon a 
basis exclusively logical. 

The close relations that logically exist between the 
verb and* noun have already been noticed (§§ 126— 
128). What^ however, would be the effect of a 
verb, on one side, being so fiilly conjugated, and a 
noun, on the other, being so fully declined as for 
neither of them to appear without some sign of 
either their nominal or verbal character attached to, 
and inseparably connected with, it? The logical 
affinity would be concealed by the inflectional dif- 
ferences. 

Now this is no imaginary case. In English the 
word envy is either a verb or a nov/n, and we may 
say either / envy him, or, / look upon hvra with 
eyes of envy. 

In Greek the syllable fihon (<j>6ov) has the same 
power. Between, however, the Greek language 
and the English there is this difference : the former 
never uses the syllable fthon by itself If it be 
nominal in its power, it has certain inflections 
attached to it that are peculiar to nouns ; whereas, 
if it be verbal, a verbal inflection is assigned to it. 

No noun in Greek ends in -ein. Many verbs 
do ; indeed, -ein is a verbal, or conjugational, in- 
flection, and by no means a nominal or declensional 
one. What, however, if a word so ending take the 
place, in a proposition, of a substantive ? There is, 

N 3 



Digitized by 



Google 



274» PARTS OF SPEECH. 

to a certain extent, a conflict between the logical 
and formal teste. 

And this really exists. The combination to 
fthonein (to ^Ooveiv) = envy, the substantive. 
Yet it has the outward signs of a verb; and a 
verb it is, if we look to the form only. Look, 
however, to the meaning, and it is a noun. 

That this complication would be abolished if we 
abrogated the inflections is dear, since such a word 
as fthon might (like envy) as easily be a noun as a 
verb. But, on the other hand, it might as easily 
be a verb as a noun ; for a word with no charac- 
teristic signs at all may be anything or everything, 
as a part of speech. In I go up, the word up is 
an adverb. In / go up the tree, it is a preposi- 
tion. 

Separated from its inflections, the root fthon 
would have been what we may call indifferent, 
i.e. would have been, like the word up, a word as 
capable of being one part of speech as another. 
This, indeed, is the case with the word lately 
quoted — envy. It has nothing about it more 
nominal than verbal, or more verbal than nomi- 
nal. 

141. 

Determination of Forms by Inflection. 

The smaller the amount of inflection, the greater 
the number of indifferent words ; i.e. words like 
up and envy, as opposed to fthon-os, and fthorv-ein, 
which may be called determinoUe. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OF SPEECH. 275 

142. 

Criticism. 

Without going further into these details, we may 
see from the little already written that the gram- 
marian who undertook the arrangement of the 
parts of speech according to the logical properties 
of the words of the language under notice, might 
find his classification traversed by the apparent 
contradictions suggested by their inflectional forms. 
-And such has actually been the case. The etymo- 
logical test has been opposed to the logical, and 
vice versa. 

It is maintained, however, by the present writer 
that this antagonism is apparent rather than real. 
It is held, too, that even if it were more real than 
it is, it would affect but a small portion of the wide 
field of language. In languages where inflections are 
rare, and the forms of the words indifferent, the 
etymological difficulty has no existence, there being 
no formal test by which the logical can be tra- 
versed. And even in languages where inflections 
are abundant, the only parts of speech which can 
create any difficulty are the verbs and nouns — 
these being the only two in which any notable 
amount of inflection occurs. The extent, however, 
to which a verb is allied to the noim, has already 
been exhibited. 

It is undoubtedly true that in such a sentence as 
they spoke, the idea is wholly verbal. But abstract 
from it the ideas of the agents (expressed by they), 
and look upon the action without regard to the 
time in which it occurred, and the idea becomes 



Digitized by 



Google 



276 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

that of the act of speaking in general, an idea 
purely substantive. In like manner — 

To ervy is human ; to forgive, divine, 
gives us the truly substantive ideas of — 

Error is human, forgiveness^ divine. 
Instances of this kind could be multiplied, if 
necessary, ad i/njinitum ; enough, however, has 
been written to show that the difference between 
the logical and inflectional tests is less real than ap- 
parent. That a word expressive of the same idea 
may sometimes appear as a pure verb, sometimes as a 
participle, and sometimes (as in the infinitive mood, 
the gerunds, and supines) as a substantive, is ad- 
mitted in all grammars — though not, perhaps, so 
explicitly as it should be 



143. 

Pronxmns and Participles as compared with 
Substantives and Adjectives, 

§ To proceed. It has been the object of the 
preceding sections to show that — 

All words forming different portions of a propo- 
sition are different parts of speech. 

Is the converse of this true ? Is it true that — 

All words forming the same parts of a proposi- ' 
tion are the same parts of speech ? 

Not according to the present classification. A 
pronoim takes the same place in a proposition as a 
substantive, and a participle as an adjective. Ne- 
vertheless, pronouns and participles are separate 
parts of speech. Of course this may be altered 
by altering the definition of the term part-of- 



Digitized by 



Google 



PABTS OF SPEECH. 277 

speech. It is doubtful, however, whether this will 
be done. 

The difference of idea conveyed by a participle 
as contrasted with the ordinary adjective, and the 
pronoun as compared with the substantive, has 
already been explained. It is the diflFerence be- 
tween an action and a state, a quality and a re- 
lation. 

144. 

Recapitulation. 

To recapitulate. — ^Words fall into two primary 
divisions : — 

I. Those that are wholly independent of propo- 
sitions; and, 

II. Those whose existence depends upon the ex- 
istence of a proposition. 

The former class contains the interjections only. 

The second falls into three divisions ; the Jirst 
containing such words as Yes and No ( = i^ is so, 
and it is "not so), words equivalent to a whole propo; 
sition. They are answers to questions, and, as such, 
imply the existence of a previous proposition. 

The second contains the conjunctions, words 
whose place lies between two terms, but not m 
any term at all. These terms must be of the 
same kind, i.e. either subjects or predicates. They 
need not, however, be within the same proposition; 
indeed, they rarely are so. If so, conjunctions are 
of two kinds — 

Intertermvnal, or between the terms of the one 
and the same proposition ; e. g. all men a/re black or 
white. 



Digitized by 



Google 



278 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

InterpropositionaZj or between two diflferent 
propositions ; e. g, — 

The day is bright, 

because 
The sun shines. 

Of copuUis, or words that connect different 
terms, i.e. the subject with the predicate, — there is 
no instance in language ; consequently, there is no 
such part of speech as the copula. The word that 
serves as a copula is always a copula and predicate 
beside. For the explanation of the apparent para- 
dox, see § 15. 

The third, and most important class, contains 
those words which enter into the structure of 
terms, sometimes by forming whole ones, sometimes 
by forming parts of ones, and sometimes by form- 
ing terms, and something more. These are as 
follows : — 

Verb, Particles, 

Nouns, Hypercate- Syncategore- 

Categorematic. gorematie. matic. 



Subjective. Predicative. 



Pronoun. Substantive. Adjective. Participle. Verb. Adverb. 



Preposition. 



Article. Article. 

V V ' 

The reasons of the several places of the above- 
named classes of words are by no means obscure, 
and they are often given in the ordinary grammars 
with sufficient perspicuity. 

Nothing but the name of a substance either 
really existing, or capable of being perceived by 
the senses, or conceived by the imagination, can 
form the Subject of a proposition. 

This is expressed in the current grammatical 



Digitized by 



Google 



PARTS OP SPEECH. 279 

definition of a substantive as the name of any- 
thing we can see, hear, feel, or discourse of (i, e. 
reason about)! 

Such a substance must either possess or be without 

certain attributes ; e. g. it must either be white or 

not white. Hence, any word which suggests the 

name of an attribute may form a Predicate ; e, g. — 

Snow is white ; 

Soot is not white. 

But we may also predicate of any substance 
that it may be equal to, or identical with, an- 
other ; e, g. — 

A man is an animal 

A bird is not a quadruped. 

This shows that the name of a substance may 
enter into the structure of a proposition either as 
subject or as predicate. 

Every object or entity must be endowed with 
certain qualities or attributes ; e. g. snow is white 
— man is mortal. That the names of such qualities 
or attributes can become the predicates of proposi- 
tions, has been shown above. 

In order, however, for it to be a subject, it must 
be something more than a word suggestive of a 
name. It must be the name itself. 

With substantives the name denotes the object 
directly. 

With pronouns it denotes it indirectly, i. e. 
through its relations. 

Verbs express actions implying that a certain 
object comports itself in such and such a manner. 
It is something, or it does something, or it suffers 
something. So run the usual expositions of the 
meaning of the word verb. 



Digitized by 



Google 



280 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

Nothing but a word of this kind can be at once 
predicate and copula. The predicate element de- 
notes the particular state or action ; the copula 
element, its existence, or, to speak more generally, 
its applicability or non-applicability to the subject. 

In order for a proposition to be simple, its terms 
must be simple. 

The only sorts of words which can be admitted 
into complex terms are words which either express, 
1st, the relation that two or more nouns bear to 
one another, or, 2ndly, the mode (or manner) in 
which states or actions take place. And it follows 
from hence that the only words admissible into a 
term where there is but OTie noun (or nominal ele- 
ment) must be words expressive of the mode (or 
manner) of a state or action. Words of this kind 
are called Adverbs, because, the predicate with 
which they combine generally coalesces with the 
copula^ and becomes a verb. 

The only other class of words must consist of 
those that denote the relation that one out of two 
or more nouns in a term bears to the others. 

This explains the nature of adverbs and preposi- 
tions. 

When the words that find their places within 
the limits of a term have been exhausted, we come 
to the conjunctions that, belonging to no single 
term, connect two. 

145. 

Place of the Article. 

§ The place of the article is peculiar. In respect 
to its origin, it is pronominal. So it is in respect 



Digitized by 



Google 



PART^ OF SPEECH. 281 

to its import, for it is certainly a relation that it 
expresses. But its place in a proposition is that of 
a syncategorematic (and not a categorematic) word. 

Its true relations are found in the remarks upon 
the WaUachian and Icelandic languages in § 123 ; 
wherein it is shown to coalesce with the substan- 
tive, and to become not only a part of a terrriy but 
also a part of a word. In such a condition it 
partakes of the nature of an inflection ; so that a 
substantive plus an article is in much the same 
condition as a substantive plus the equivalent of a 
preposition. 

The question now arises as to whether inflections 
can be called parts of speech. 

They are not called so at present, however much 
they may be equivalent to them. 

Nevertheless, it is safe to caU an article a avh- 
inflectional word — i.e, a word which, without being 
actually an inflection, approaches one. 

146. 

Development of Infiedions. — Conclusion, 

§ This leads to a fresh series of investigations, a 
series of great importance and interest, but foreign 
to the present work. 

The history of the article has been the history 
of either an actual inflection or something closely 
akin to it, developed out of a word originally 
separate and independent. 

What if other inflections are in the same pre- 
dicament ? What if the signs of case in nouns 
have similarly originated out of prepositions ? What 
if the signs of persons in verbs are pronouns ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



282 PARTS OF SPEECH. 

What if — but instead of raising jRirther questions 
on these points, let us simply say that the natural 
history of language tells us that aU this, and much 
more like it, actually takes place. As, however, it 
is the Natural History of Language, and not of 
Logic, that gives us information on these points, the 
present treatise concludes with a mere indication of 
the question. 



FINIS. 



Woodfall and Kinder, Printers, Angel Court, Skinner Street, London. 



Digitized by 



Google 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR 



The English Langua.^e. By Dr. R. 6. La- 
tham, F.R.S. Fourth Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. £1 8«. cloth. 

In the present enlarged edition, the first volume is occupied chiefiy with discus- 
sions on the German origin of the English language. The student of English 
philology will here find ample details connecting the foundations of old English 
speech— *• the wells of English undefiled**— with the continental languages of 
ancient times. By copious ir>roofs from classical and antiquarian sources, the 
author defines the geographical and ethnological limits within which each Ger- 
manic dialect was spoken ; and, in this particular, the work presents what may be 
called a Philological Geography of Germany, tracing the areas occupied by the 
several Teutonic races. The student of German and Anglo-Saxon is thus directed 
to the authentic sources of the knowledge conveyed to him in the copious dis- 
sertations on the affinities of early English with its mother-dialects, which he 
will find in the work. In this section much curious information is given, respect- 
ing the initial and final forms, and the other variations, of appellatives ; ana the 
origin of many names of persons and places is traced. 

The varieties of idiom, originating in diflferent provinces, are exemplified by 
quotations and specimens from each country and period, to enable the student to 
account for the stages, the relations, and the divergency of English peculiarities 
derived from a multitude of other languages. The student is introduced to com- 
parisons with the Dutch, the High-German, the Danish, the Swedish, the Norse, 
and the Icelandic languages. There are also disquisitions, accompanied with 
extended specimens, on the British and Gaelic branches of the Keltic stock of 
languages; comprehending the Cornish, Welsh, Armorican, Irish-Gaelic, Scotch- 
Gaelic, and Manks tongues. A separate chapter relates to English affinities trace- 
able in the Greek, Latin, Italian, Piedmontese, Spanish, Catalonian, Portuguese, 
French, Vaudois, Romanese, Enghadin, Rumango, Provincial French, Provencal, 
and Anglo-Norman. 

An interesting chapter, treating of the affiliation of dialects of the English, 
contains a view of provincial forms of speech at present existing; amongst others, 
the peculiarities of Somersetshire, Devonshire, Gloucestershire, Dorsetshire, the 
Isle of Wight, Lancashire, Cumberland, Northumberland, Yorkshire, Derbyshire, 
Cheshire, Stafford, and the Eastern counties. There is also a section on Ameri- 
canisms. 

On the whole, the inspector of these volumes, in glancing at the contents and 
turning over the leaves, can scarcely fail to conceive the impression that they 
contain an Encyclopaedia of information on the origin, the lawl, the peculiarities, 
and the powers of the English language, whether regarded in a popular or in a 
literary point of view. 

A Hand-Book of the Eng^lish Languagre, 

for the Use of Students of the Universities and higher 
Classes of Schools. By Dr. R G. Latham, F.K.S. 
Second Edition. 12mo. 7s. 6d. cloth. 

The object of the " Hand-book " is to present to students for examination, in a 
more condensed form, the chief facts and reasonings of** The English Language." 
Less elaborate than that work, it is less elementary than the ** English Grammar." 
Like all the other works by the same author, it gives great prominence to the 
ethnological relations of our tongue; and insists upon historical investigation, and 
the application of the general principles of comparative philology, as the true 
means of exhibiting its real growth and structure, in opposition to the more usual 
method of treating it as a mass of irregularities. It has the further object of 
supplying a knowledge of those laws of speech and principles of grammar which 
apply to langiiage generally. 



Digitized by 



Google 



An Elementary Ennrlish Grammar for the 

Use of Schools. By Db. R G. Latham, F.R.S.. late 
Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. Sixth Edition. 
l2mo. 48. 6(2. cloth. 

The object of thii work is to Ut down the prhicipl«> - of English grammar as dis- 
tinffubhed firom mere rules. These principles are red by surveying the origin 
ana growth of the language, and particularly th** several steps of the transition 
from the inflected character of its A iglo-Saxcm stage, to its present uninflected 
structure. The student in the middle and hi^er classes of schools, for whom the 
work is chiefly intended, is made acquaintcn with the connection of the various 
branches of the great Gothic stock of languages; and, by learning the history of 
his own tongue, and its relations to the dialects with which it is connected, ac- 
quires the elements of the general phikriogical classiflcation of languages. The 
book presents him with new and numerous facts, and habituates him to reasoning 
upon them ; and while the work can be wholly mastered, independently of any 
knowledge of either of the classical languages, as much logic is given as is necessary 
to explain the structure of propositions. 

Some of the peculiarities of the grammar consist in a minute analysis of the 
powers of the letters, whether single or combined: in the comparison of irregular 
inflexions with obsolete cognate words; in tracing the laws and forms of the 
derivation of words ; and in a treatise on the varieties of English verse, and their 
representation hy symbolical formulas. 

'* It is a work m which grammar, no longer an assemblage of conventional rules 
of speech, becomes a philosophical analysis of our language, and an elementary 
intellectual exercise adapted to the highest purposes of instruction." — Minutes of 
the Council qf EdueaHon. Fd, I. 

Elements of English Grammar, for the Use 

of Ladies' Schools. By Dr. R. *G. Latham, F.RS. 
Fcap. 8vo. U. M. cloth. 

'* Instead of a mere dry classification of words and rules, often difficult to be 
understood, it gives a pnilosophical view of the whole subject, and yet with so 
much clearness as to assist the reason no less than the memorv. The first part 
gives the history of our language, and traces its formation from the German tribes 
who successively conquered and settled in our island. In the third part, which 
treats of dederwion and conjugation, the connection of these subjects with the 
rules of euphony is shown in a very lucid and interesting manner. We think this 
little work will prove a boon to mothers and instructors, and invest with interest 
a brandi of education which has often proved one of the most uninviting steps in 
the ladder of learning.**— Quorterfy Edticational Magazine, No. YIII. 

History and Etjnnology of the English Lan- 
guage, for the Use of Classical Schools. By Dr. 
R. G. Latham, F.R.S. Second Edition, revised. 
Fcap. 8vo. Is, 6i. cloth. 

This is an introductory grammar, intended for those desirous of studying the 
English language with reference to the history, the transitions, and the analogies 
of Its forms. U consists of an exposition of the fundamental principles of E!ng- 
lish grammar, and the chief facts m the historv of the language. The philological 
division of the work is preceded by an historical sketch of tne successive intro- 
duction, into this country, of the dialects of the Saxons, the Angles, and the 
Jutes. The author reviews the earliest books of the Anglo-Saxon period, and 
details the poinu of difiference which characterize the Semi-Saxon, the Old Eng- 
lish, and tne Middle and New English stages in the growth of our literature : 
giving, in an appendix, the translations of the specimens dted to illustrate the 
several epoo|is. 

The etymological part of the treatise commences with an analysis of orthogra- 
phical systems, particularly in connection with the euphonic changes which arise 
from the combination of letters. The logical structure of propositions isr then 
briefly explained ; and this introductory matter is followed by the usual declen- 
sions, of which the peculiarities are so explained as to show their affinity to the 
ancient Saxon and tne modem German languages. 



O 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 