-A 



OUTLINES 



OF 



THEORETICAL LOGIC. 



Candifliset 
^rmttD St ^t Hinbnfitg l^xta. 

For MACMILLAN & Co. 

iMtti; BRIX AND DALD¥. 
Actnl: J. H. AND JAMES PARKBR. 

BDHON3TX)N AND DOUGLAS. 

WILLIAM ROBERTSON, 

: JAHEa UACLEHOSB. 



J^^/s 



/ 



OUTLINES- 

\ 

\ 



OF 



THEORETICAL LOG 




» -X / 



FOUNDED ON THE NEW ANALYTIC OF 
SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON. 



^tstpeb for a ^vA^ntk b j^^ools snb ((olbjts* 




BY 



C. MANSFIELD INGLEBY, M.A. 



or TRIVITY OOLLBOS, CAMBRIDOB. 

TEACHBA or UBTAPHYBIOS AND LOOIO IV THE IVDUSTRIAL DBPARTUCKT or THE 

BIBMINOBAM AND MIDLAITD IKBTITDTE. 



MACMILLAN AND Co. 
1856. 



• / 



PKEFACE. 

The following pages are designed to form the 
basis of class-instruction in the science of Theo-* 
retical Logic. As many modem works of this kind 
are in circulation, a few words may be expected in 
explanation of the motives whichhave induced me to 
give this treatise to the public. The discoveries of 
Sir William Hamilton, upon which these outlines 
are mainly founded, do not date further back than 
1840, in which year they were first promulgated. Of 
the treatises which have been published since that 
date two only profess to embody those discoveries, 
and those two are not fitted to form the text-book 
of a lecture-room. All other treatises are deficient 
in several of the staple subjects of the science, and 
the majority intrench upon the domains of Lan- 
guage, Rhetoric, and Philosophy. A good text- 
book is therefore a desideratum. Accordingly, 
when I commenced my lectures at the Institute, I 
was thrown entirely on my own resources for the 
exposition of several important branches of the 
science; and it was not long before a request was 
preferred to me by several of my claas to print for 



VI PREFACE. 

their benefit certain of the notes with which I had 
famished them, and which consumed much time 
in dictation. 

The peculiar characteristics of the following 
treatise are (1) the doctrine of extension and inten- 
sion, (2) the quantification of the predicate, (3) the 
solution of opposed propositions, (4) the reduction 
of the thirty-six moods in each figure to nine es- 
sential moods, (5) the evolution of all additional 
moods caused by the introduction of the sign of 
partial quantity on the one hand, and by the ultra- 
total quantification of the middle term on the 
other, and (6) the doctrine of induction. The 
treatise is likewise characterised by the exclusion 
therefirom of the doctrine of modals, and of enthy- 
memes and sorites. 

In the treatment of syllogisms I have employed 
no scheme of pictorial notation, for the simple rea- 
son that I am thoroughly convinced of the general 
uselessness of any such, and therefore strongly de- 
precate its use. I am acquainted with the schemes 
of Euler, Ploucquet, Lambert, Hamilton, and 
Boole, of which I take Lambert's to be the best ; 
but I am far firom thinking it desirable to trouble 
the student with it. 

Li the course of the following pages I have not 
scrupled to avail myself of the demonstrations of 



PREFACE. vii 

others; and where I have found such expressed 
with a truth, clearness, and precision, which I 
should despair of approaching, I have transplanted 
into my own work as much as I found necessary, 
in all cases (except in the statement of the canons 
of syllogisms, which are taken from Sir William 
Hamilton's Disquisitions) acknowledging the obli- 
gation by annexing the name of the author. But 
inasmuch as in all such cases I have not unfre- 
quently amended the grammatical construction, I 
have been unable to indicate the extracts by the 
usual addition of " ". 

I have already stated the immediate design of 
my work ; independently of that, I have sufficient 
fidth in my own labours to entertain the hope that 
they may not be without influence upon logic as a 
branch of liberal education in the Universities. 
This hope will be fully realised, as far as Cam- 
bridge is concerned, if I am in the most indirect 
manner instrumental in giving logic a place in 
the curriculum of her studies, and thus removing 
from her a stigma as disgracefril as it is peculiar. 

My claims to originality are small: they are 
confined to the treatment of logical opposition and 
the principle of the congruity of syllogisms. In 
stating the thirty-six moods of the syllogism I 
have not borrowed from any other writer, but have 



draim them up from my own investigation. How- 
ever, I believe they will be found to agree with 
those of Sir William Hamilton. 



BlBHINORAH, 

July litt, \ 



COBREOTIONS. 

JiS^/olfoiffwij; Errata ocearred tknmgh (Ae negUgeneteMaiUdonOte 
Avtkar't illnea; he tra$ti they an the imly ihmdert which 
di^fyvTt Ikit lUtU vxTt. 

P. 56. 4thlinafToiiithebottom,/iir'Brgumenfreadagreomeat. 
P. 63. 13th line from the top, Uie word ' All'abouldbeonclosed 

F. 64. Sth line from the top, the braakets eudoeiLg the word 
'Any' should ba traosferred to the ' All' of the pre- 
ceding line. 
P. 73. Jth line fromthe bottom, the word 'Certain' on theright 

hand should be enclosed in [ ] 
P' 73- Stb line from the ton, the word ' Certain ' to be pi«aeded 
bya[ 

¦ fth line from the bottom, the word 'Certam'tobeenoloaed 

in[] 

N.B. It would ba better in pages ;« and 73 to eub- 

rtituto (Certain) for [Certain] whererer the latter 

occurs, inaamuob ss the [ ] have been appropriated to 

ingniah the redundancy of the aign of quantity 

the 6th and'yth lines from the bottom, the word 
tnit«' (which ia used by Baynes) ia equivocal, 
¦bould ba rapUoed by the wokI 'dBterminate,' 



INTRODUCTION. 



OF THE DEFINITION AND SPHERE OF 
THEORETICAL LOGIC. 

Theoretical Logic is the Science of the 
Laws of Thought. 

Thought is conversant with 1 Conception, 
2 Judgment, 3 Reasoning, 4 Science. 

The mind, in performing the act of conception, 
forms a Concept of every object of thought. 

Conception is the process, the concept is the 
product. 

A Concept is the cognition or idea of the gene- 
ral attribute or attributes in which a plurality of 
objects coincide (Hamilton). 

This process of conception obviously involves 
the perception of a number of objects, their com- 
parison, the recognition of their points of similarity, 
and their subjective union by this common attri- 
bute (Baynes). 

Accordingly a concept may either refer to an 
individual or to a species (that is, a class compre- 
hending several individuals) or to a genus (that is, 
I. L. 1 



2 INTRODUCTION. 

a class comprehending several species) or to higher 
clasps. 

Judgment is the action of referring one concept 
to another. The result of such action put into 
words is a sentence expressing the relation between 
two concepts.. The concepts in such a sentence 
are' called the Terms, and the sentence itself is 
called the Proposition. 

A proposition is an expression thaf two notions 
or concepts can or cannot be reconciled (Thomson). 

Keasoning is concerned with the relation that 
subsists between two propositions. The two being 
compared, the result is the generation of a third 
proposition. 

In certain cases (which will be explained in 
the right place) an inference expressed in words 
is called a simple Illation ; in other cases, a Syl- 
logism. 

A system of such illations and syllogisms, con- 
catenated according to the laws of logical progres- 
sion, is called an Organon. 

An organon may be either for the discovery of 
truth or for imparting it to others. 

What logic is not. 

Logic is not concerned with the philosophy of 
language, or in any way with the means of ex- 
pressing what is thought. 

Language expresses all that is thought. Logic 
is the instrument of which language is the material, 
and philosophy the result. As the prerequisite of 
philosophy is -logic, so the prerequisite of logic is 



INTRODUCTION* 3 

language. Logic abhors an ellipsis. When an el- 
lipsis is presented to logic, logic demands whether 
the ellipsis is an ellipsis of thought, or of language 
merely ; whether there is, in point of fact, an un- 
certainty in thought which language has faithfully 
expressed ; or whether the thoijght is simple, sure, 
clear, and language has introduced the ellipsis as 
an idiom merely. If the thought is uncertain, 
logic applies itself to deal with the ellipsis, which 
is the faithful exponent of that thought; but it 
may oblige language to .eliminate the ellipsis for 
the sake of clearness and precision. If however 
the ellipsis is one of language merely, the thought 
being explicit, logic will not deal with the ellipsis 
at all, but will demand, as the prerequisite of its 
action, that the ellipsis should be eliminated, and 
the implicit thought should be rendered explicit in 
language. In all cases logic deals with what is 
thought, and with that only. 

Logic does not concern itself with any existing 
real objects, nor with the content or matter con- 
tained in any term or proposition. 

As language deals with the representation of 
thoughts with a view to the communication of 
them fix)m one thinker to another, philosophy re- 
gards only the matter, the content of those thoughts, 
and the evolution of practical truth. Now logic 
being the instrument that enables philosophy to 
deal with language, it is an intrusion for logic to 
pretend to deal with the matter or content of 
thoughts. Philosophy requires logic to fiimish the 

1—2 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

formal organon for the inyestigation of practical 
truth, i. e. the determination of facts. In all cases 
then, logic deals with the form of what is thought, 
with concepts, and their relation in judgment and 
inference. 

A term may refer to an aaually existing 
thing, or to a class under which seyeral objects are 
subsumed. 

But logic has nothing to do with the concrete 
object, that is, the object considered in itself, but 
solely with the concept of which the term is the 
sign. 

So also a proposition may ,be true or false, or 
it may express a contingent truth or an apodictic 
truth (an universal and necessary truth). 

But logic has nothing to do with these things, 
it is concerned only with the form of the pro- 
position. 

. Accordingly the only fallacies of reasoning that 
logic can take cognizance of, are departures from 
the formal laws of the syllogism ; all other fallacies 
bjplong to physics or to metaphysics. . 

So also logic has nothing to do with the ad- 
visability of suppressing a premiss, or otherwise- 
accommodating an argument to the habits of 
thought of men in general. Such matters belong 
exclusively to rhetoric. 

From the above remarks, it is plain that neither 
the doctrine of Modals, nor any exposition of 
Enthymemes or Sorites, ought to find place in a 
treatise on logic. 



PART I. 



OF TERMS. 



Had man no power of classifying in intellect 
the confiised multitude of objects presented to the 
senses, he must remain for ever destitute of any- 
thing worthy of the name of knowledge. With no 
clear recognition, even of the individual, since 
comparison and discrimination would be impossi* 
ble, he must for ever abide amidst the obscurity 
and vagueness in which knowledge commences — 
helpless amidst a multiplicity of objects which 
he could not comprehend — ^bewildered by a con- 
fusion which there would be no possibility of re- 
calling to order. The earliest effort of the mind is 
accordingly directed to extricate itself from this 
confasion, and this determines the exercise of the 
comparative faculty, and the formation of concepts 
(Batnes). 

Amidst the multitude of confiised objects pre- 
sented to the mind in perception (apprehension), 



6 OP TERMS. 

some are found to affect us similarly in certain 
respects. These objects the mind considers; by 
comparison it recognises their resembling qualities ; 
by attention these qualities are exclusively con- 
sidered, since the concentration of the mind on 
them involves of necessity its abstraction from those 
in which they are severally dissimilar. Since the 
resembling attributes which these various objects 
possess in common cannot, when separately con- 
sidered, be discriminated, the objects themselves 
are, in this restricted point of view, necessarily con- 
sidered as one. In other words, the understanding 
grasps into unity a multitude of objects (severally 
distinct) by a common feature of identity. On this 
unity thus formed it sets the seal of a name, that 
it may be enabled ever afterwards at once to discri- 
minate the various objects of its knowledge, and 
commodiously to refer each to its. own class, and 
thus be saved the endless labour of enumerating 
all the particulars by which objects are individu- 
ally discriminated. A notion is thus a purely 
ideal or subjective whole which the mind, from the 
limitation of its power, is necessitated to form in 
order to classify in thought, and discriminate in 
language, the various objects of its knowledge 
(Batnes). 

This being the case it is obvious that a concept 
can afford only a partial knowledge, and has only 
a relative existence. .It can only afford a partial 
knowledge, since it embraces some only of the 



OF TERMS* 7 

manj marks by which an object is known. ' It has 
only a relative existence, since this knoTi^edge is 
not given absolutely, but only in connection with 
some one of the objects to which the concept is 
related. (For a notion though potentially appli- 
cable to all the objects which it contains, can only 
be truly known on occasion of its being actually 
applied to some one of these objects. This is at 
once the test and the evidence of its relative cha- 
racter : and this being its character, it is obviously 
altogether dependent on the objects from which it 
is formed). A concept has thus in its totality 
a purely subjective existence destitute of any ob- 
jective reality. Being what it is, namely, an ideal 
whole, subsisting only by relation to the objects 
whose resembling parts it embraces, it is obvious 
that, as it has no independent existence, it can 
convey to us no independent knowledge; and that 
if we destroy the objects, we destroy the resem- 
bling attributes in each ; and destroying, the resem- 
bling parts we annihilate the whole which they 
together constituted (namely j the concept). As 
however a concept has only a subjective being, 
existence and knowledge are here- identity. If 
no qualities be discriminated in objects as similar, 
we have no knowledge of a concept, that is, no 
concept exists. If we cannot assign an object to 
any class, that is, cannot say that it does or does 
not belong to any concept, we do not imderstand 
or comprehend it. We think an object, that is, 



g OF TEBMS. 

recognise it to he what it is, only as we think it 
under i^me concept. 

Concepts being thus formed, the great prerequi- 
site of logic is, that they shall be expressed in 
language. In every part of logic grammar is 
called upon to express everything that is con* 
tained in thought, whether impliedly or not. The 
triumph of language is the expression of a perfect 
analysis of thought. Concepts considered through 
the medium of a name are called Terms. Let us 
suppose that the mind is taking cognisance of a 
number of objects, and has discerned in each some 
common point of resemblance. Let us suppose that 
this point of resemblance has been considered apart 
from the object, and that the concept of the com- 
mon attribute has received the seal of a substan- 
tive name. This name henceforth stands for all 
" the objects severally and collectively from the 
analysis of which it sprung, and each object will 
be referred to under that name, with the prefix of 
the definite or indefinite article. 

The more searching the analysis has been, and 
in consequence, the greater is the number of com- 
mon points of resemblance comprised in the term, 
the fewer number of objects in the universe will that 
term stand for ; and conversely, the more superficial 
has been the scrutiny of the objects, and the fewer 
the common features of identity, the greater will 
be the number of objects that will stand under 
that. term. For example, in reviewing the vege- 



OF TERMS. 9 

table world a veiy superficial glance enables us to 
discern the circumstance that an immense number 
of different objects have the common attribute of 
green. If, however, we descend to the more minute 
particulars than the colour of foliage, if, for in- 
stance, we seize upon such common points of re- 
semblance as roots, trunk, boughs, branches, leayes, 
and such like, and bring these under a common 
term, we shall find that the number of objects 
comprised in it is immeasureablj reduced, consist- 
ing in fact only of trees and shrubs. In like man- 
ner we shall find universally, that the wider the 
term, the greater the number of objects, and the 
fewer the number of marks of identity ; whereas 
the narrower the term the fewer the number of 
objects, and the greater the number of marks of 
identity. This canon has been called by Sir 
William Hamilton the cardinal point of logic. 

It is evident, then, that we may regard the 
term, whether summum genus, subaltern genus, 
species, or infima species, as expressing two things : 
1st, The mark or marks of identity in the indivi- 
duals; 2ndly, .The objects or object subsumed 
under the term. 

For example, "body" expresses primary qua- 
lities, namely, geometrical solidity, physical solid- 
ity, (impenetrability), autantitypy, (absolute in- 
compressibility), mobility and situation, and also 
secundo-primary and secondary qualities. It like- 
wise stands for all our concepts of objects in seve- 
ralty which possess these attributes in common. 



10 



OF TERMS. 



The following table exhibits the facts already 
enunciated : 

Name. Mark. Object. 



Genera 



a 


A. 


a, 


by Cf d. 


- ^ 


A. B. 


hf c, d. 


y 


A. B. C. 


c, d. 


h 


A. B. C. D. 




d. 



Species 

Individuals. €, c', e", &c. 

In this table a is the term expressing the 
summum genus ; ^ and 7 are the terms expressing 
subalterna genera; S is the term expressing the 
infima species ; e, e', e", &c. are the terms express- 
ing concepts of the individual real objects which 
constitute these genera and species: a expresses 
the. mark of identity A, and stands for the logical 
objects a, 6, c, d^ of which a is the lowest in the 
scale of generalisation, and d the highest : /8 and 
7 speak for themselves : S expresses the marks of 
identity A, B, C, D, and stands for the highest 
logical object d\ the individuals e, e', ^\ &c. 
have all the marks of S, and constitute the com- 
plete species d^ which is indicated by the term S. 

In this table also it will be observed that there 
is an inverse ratio between the number of marks 
of identity and the number of logical objects. 
The greater the number of marks expressed by 
any term, the less is the number of objects sub- 
sumed under it, and vice versa. 

The following examples may serve to illustrate 
tjae table. 





J» 


' 


•'$ 


f 




f 


¦ 


n 






" 




"¦ 





Ijll |33l|3l3|| 

«h, !l ?l 1^ I 



OF TEBMS. 13 

Now, to take the case of a single genus and 
a single species, to begin with, for the sake of sim- 
plicity: let X be a genns consisting of diyers 
species of which Y is one. It is evident that 
either of these may be considered the greater logi- 
cal whole of the two, that is, we may consider the 
genus X as comprehending all the indiyidual 
objects of the species Y, or we may consider these 
indiyidual objects, and therefore the species Y, as 
including all the marks of identity of the genus 
X ; in other words, we may at pleasure treat the 
genus as comprehending the species, or the species 
as including the genus ; in the former case we are- 
said to proceed in the logical whole of comprehen-' 
sion (or intension or depth), in the latter we are 
said to proceed in the metaphysical whole of ex- 
tension (or breadth); to explain which fully we 
must proceed to that branch of logic which treats 
of propositions. 



PAET II. 
OF PROPOSITIONS, 

For all purposes of logic a proposition nday 
be considered as simple, and as such may be de- 
fined to be the expression of our judgment that 
two notions or concepts, do or do not agree. 

It accordingly consists of two terms, and a 
sign of relation is or are, which is called the 
Copula. The one notion being afltaned (or denied) 
of the other, the leading term of which the other is- 
afltaned (or denied) is called the Subject ; and the 
other term so affirmed (or denied) of the subject, is 
called the Predicate. 

Of the subject it is easy to see that if it stand 
or a class (and not for an individual) we may 
affirm the predicate of some indefinite part of it, 
while on the other hand, whether it stand for a 
class or an individual we may affirm the predicate 
of all the subject. 

The subject then has always a quantity definite 
or indefinite, and for all purposes of logic this 
quantity must be distinctly expressed in words, 
and in such case the subject is said to be quantified. 

Thus when we say : 

All men are mortal, or, 
Some men are cowards ; 



OF PROPOSITIONS, 15 

the words ' AH' and ' Some' are signs which ex- 
press the quantification of the subject * men.' 

Owing to the ambiguities of language it is 
desirable to have recourse to the expedient of 
attaching the signs of quantity by means of a 
hyphen to the terms to which they belong ; thus, 
' All-men.' 

In the previous chapter we have exhibited and 
explained the various relations of concepts in a 
system of classification. From what has been 
there said, it may be readily perceived that when 
we bring an object under a concept, that is, when 
we predicate of it that it belongs to such a class, 
we must know that it occupies a certain place in 
that class. For if we were uncertain what place 
the individual object occupied in the class, or 
whether it occupied any place at all, we should 
not know the class, and could not therefore bring 
any object under it. 

For example, if I do not know whether * rose' 
comes under the concept * flower,' or whether it is 
equal to some part or the whole of that concept, or 
whether it is superior to it, I do not know the 
class * flower,' and cannot of course predicate 
* flower' of *rose:' in other words I cannot bring 
'rose' under the concept 'flower,' since I do not 
know what the concept means, what it contains, 
or what it does not. This is clear; for as we 
have already explained, since a concept as a facti- 
tious unity in thought (a logical whole) is abso- 
lutely worthless, and indeed not cognizable, out of 



16 OP PROPOSITIONS. 

relation to the individual objects, the aggregate of 
whose resembling qualities it constitutes, and since 
an object is truly known only as it is thought, 
through or under a concept, it follows that com- 
prehension in such a case would be impossible. 
K therefore we understand the object at all, we 
must (by an act of judgment) fix in thought the 
sphere which it occupies under the class to which 
in predication we have assigned it. In other 
words, if we comprehend what we utter, every 
notion holding the place of predicate in a proposi- 
tion must have a detenninate quantity in thpught, 
and therefore the predicate ought to be quantified 
in language (Baynes). Notwithstanding this un- 
questionable conclusion, the impropriety of such 
quantification has been tacitly assumed or expressly 
aflSrmed by the majority, if not the whole, of the 
logical writers of antiquity whose works are ^xtantl 
The few who have touched upon the subject seem 
for the most part to have conceived the possibility 
of its express quantification only universally, as 

Omnis homo est omne animal. 
Yet in point of fact there is nothing in Logic more 
certain than the propriety of quantifying the predi- 
cate ; for its quantification must always take place 
in judgment ; and logic, as we have already said, 
demands as its prerequisite that everything that is 
contained in thought shall be expressed in lan- 
guage. In affirming the predicate of a subject we 
simply express the relation of quantity in which 
a class stands to an individual, or two classes to * 



OF PROPOSITIONS. 17 

one another. If this relation were indetenniriate, 
that is, if we were uncertain whether it was a part, 
or whole, or none, there could be no predication. 
The very fact of predication is therefore always 
evidence that the concept constituting the predi- 
cate holds a relation of determinate quantity to the 
subject ; in other words, we think only as we think 
under some determinate quantity, all thought 
being nothing more nor less than a comparison of 
part and whole. Or, let us put the argument in 
another form: all predication is but the utter- 
ance of thought: the predicate has a determinate 
quantity in thought: all predication must there- 
fore have a determinate quantity (Baynes). It is 
true that common language generally makes an 
ellipsis of the quantification of the predicate in the 
proposition ; but it does the like in respect of many 
other things which are unambiguous in thought, 
more especially in inference and argumentation, and 
yet in all such cases the postulate applies, that for 
all purposes of logic everything that is contained, 
however implicitly, in thought, sh^U have a deter- 
minate expression in language. We conclude, then, 
that in all propositions both the subject and the 
predicate ought to be quantified. 

Quantity belongs to terms, not, as some logi- 
cians say, to propositions; but it is by an act of 
judgment that the quantity of any term is deter- 
mined in respect of any other term. The. prin- 
cipal signs of the quantity of a term are *Air 
and *Some.' When the proposition is negative, 
i.L. 2 



18 OF PROPOSITIONS. 

that is, contradictorily denies a predicate of a 
subject, the English language necessitates the 
adoption of the sign 'Any' (or 'No'). AflSrma- 
tion being as we have said indicated by the copula 
4s' or 'are,* negation is indicated by 'Is not' 
or 'Are not' (or 'No — is'). That attribute of a 
proposition, which consists in its being an affirma* 
tion or negation, is called its Quality. Hence 
while we speak of the qu9,ntity of the terms, we 
say the quality of the proposition which expresses 
the relation between those terms. 

The following table will shew the different 
species in the several genera, quantity and quality. 

{Universal ] •« "j 
Particular J ^ > of a term. 
Individual} I J 
fAflSrmative 



c8 



Quality i Negative J ^ I of a proposition, 
[infinite } 2 1 

It will be observed that in each of these genera 
a third species appears. This is but. the form of 
the co-existence of the other two. Thus the indi- 
vidual is in respect of its species a particular, but 
it constitutes in itself a universal. Again, a pro- 
position, in denying an indefinitely quantified pre- 
dicate of a subject, affirms thereof a predicate of 
indefinite quantity. Thus, if I say, ' the soul is 
not mortal,' I posit the soul in the complement of 
* immortal,' that is, I affirm that 'the soul is 
some immortal ;' . and this is called ' an infinite 



OP PROPOSITIONS. 19 

judgment/ because the remainder of the logical 
universe ('immortals') is unlimited, save hj the 
abstraction of ' all mortals/ and therefore is for all 
logical purposes considered as infinite. However, 
the indimdtuzl quantity of a term, and the infinite 
quality of a proposition belong rather to the matter 
or content of such term and proposition respect- 
ively, and, as such are not subjects of which logic 
can in strictness take cognisance. Though the 
term quality is properly restricted to the affirm-^ 
ative or negative character of propositions, yet 
we may, without departing from this just restric-* 
tion, treat in this place of the efiect of qualifying 
the quantity of a term, t. e. of regarding it as in- 
cluded or excluded : and first of dichotomy. 

Dichotomy is the separation of the logical 
universe into two parts. We take, for instance, 
X out of the imiverse ; what is left is Not-X. 
These two complementary terms are called contra-* 
dictory terms ; their peculiar property is that they 
exclude one another; and that the two together 
make up or exhaust the universe of thought. They 
exclude each other, since by including X, we 
virtually exclude Not-X ; and by including Not-X, 
we virtually exclude X. They exhaust the imi- 
verse, because whatever is not X, must be Not-X, 
and whatever is not Not-X must be X. 

Now, if after making a dichotomy of the uni- 
verse, X, Not-X, we seize on a common attribute 
of a part, and a part only, of the subclass X, and 
thus dichotomise it into the contradictory parts Y 

2—2 



20 



OF PROPOSITIONS. 



and Not-Y, these last tenns are said to be con- 
trary; their peculiar property is that they agree 
in certain marks of the subclass ^, but contradic- 
torily differ in certain marks of the higher class Y; 
and that not only are they mutually exclusive in 
the class Y, but they are both excluded from the 
negative side of the first dichotomy, Not^X. 

Let us illustrate this by reference to the table 
at page 10, and take the summum genus a. The 
universe consists of a, b, c, and d, and Notna, Not- J, 
Not-c, and Not-€? : now from the a extract such 
individuals as have the marks A, B, C, and D, then 
all the individuals in ^ are either b, c, and rf, or 
Not-&, Not-c, and Not-rf ; but these terms do not ex- 
haust the universe : they are contrary only, t,e. are 
contradictory in the sub-class /8, and in that only. 

Besides the symbols of quantity, All and Some, 
I shall employ the symbol Certain, by which I 
mean Some at least, Not*all ; their contradictories 
are Not-all, Not-any, Not-certain. Thus : 



Affirmatives. . 

1. AU-X. 

Definite universal in- 
clusion of X. 



2. Some-X. 
Indefinite inclusion of X. 
(Universal or partial.) 



3. Certain-X. 
Partial inclusion of X. 
(Indefinite or definite.) 



Negatives, 

1. Not-all-X. 
Indefinite exclusion of X. 

(Universal or partial.) 

2. Not-any-X. 
Definite universal ex- 
clusion of X. 



3. Not-certain-X. 
Partial exclusion of X. 
(Indefinite or definite.) 



OF PROPOSITIONS. 21 

We proceed now to ennmeiate in a tabular form 
all possible a£Srmatiye and negative propositions, 
employing X and Y as representatives of the 
terms. 

Affirmative (assertorial). 

1. AU-X is AU-Y. 

2. AU-X is Some-Y. 

3. Some-X is AU-Y. 

4. Some-X is Some-Y. 

Negative (contradictory). 

1. AU-X is not AU-Y. 

2. AU-X is not Some-Y. 

3. Some-X is not AU-Y. 

4. Some-X is not Some-Y. 

It may be objected that the negative propo- 
sitions are ambiguously expressed. We reply, 
without the hyphen between the sign of quantity 
and the term, the objection would be valid; but 
with the hyphen we are convinced that no more 
precise modes of expressing these contradictories 
are to be foimd in the language. However, if it 
be considered desirable, the negative propositions 
may be expressed as follows. 

Negative, 

1. Some-X is not Some-Y. 

2. Some-X is not Any-Y. 

3. Any-X is not Some-Y. 

4. Any-X is not Any-Y. 

The word *Some' in all these propositions 
means ' Not*none, perhaps AU ;^ . bearing this in 



22 



DP PROPOSITIONS. 



mind it is easy to discern that some of these pro- 
positions are comprised in others, according as an 
indefinite subject or predicate is comprised in a 
definite subject or predicate : the following table 
exhibits all these relations. 



All-X is All-Y } inoludes . 

'include. . 



AU-X is Some- Y) 

>ii 



Some-X is AU-Y ) 

( Some-X is not Any-Y 
^ Any-X is not Some-Y 

j^ I Any-X is not Any-Y}. 



All-X is Some-Y 1 
Some-X is All-Y 






. {Some-X isSome- Y 



g 



. include { Some-X is not Some-Y 

{Some-X is not Any-Y 
Any-X is not Some-Y 






The above eight propositions are written by 
Sir William Hamilton as follows: 

Affirmatives, 

A.F.A. = All- is AU- 
A.F.I. = All- is Some- (A), 
I.F.A. = Some- is AU- 
I.F.I. = Some— is Some— (I). 

¦Negatives. 

A.N. A. = Any- is not Any- (E), 
A.N.I. = Any— is not Some— 
I.N. A. = Some— is not Any— (0), 
I»N.I. = Some— is not Some—. 

In this table A signifies. definite, and I indefi- 
nite. F signifies an aflirmative quality, and N a 
negative quality. For the explanation of (A), (I), 



OF PROPOSITIONS. 23 

(E), (O), the reader is referred to Whately's Logic^ 
Book 11. ch. 2, § 1. 

Of the adequacy of the four negative prapoi^-- 
tions to express the contradictories of the four 
affirmative propositions we may entertain a rea- 
sonable doubt. For example. Let * AU-X is 
All-Y* be the affirmative proposition, now what 
is the proposition which denies this? or in other 
words, what is its contradictory? The answer is 
* AU-X is not AU-Y.' This is hardly English, 
but in the absence of a native idiom it must suffice. 
It means that the whole class X is not co-incident 
with the whole class Y, and, as all concepts refer 
to individual objects, it denies that the same indi- 
viduals constitute both classes. This may happen 
in these cases only, (1) when there is one indivi- 
dual at least in the class X which is not foimd 
in the class Y, or (2) when one individual at least 
in the class Y is not found in the class X, or 
(3) when both (1) and (2) are concurrent. Or, to take 
a concrete example : let our fundamental proposi- 
tion be, * All-cloven-footed animals are Some-rumi- 
nants.' The contradictory of this is established by 
the production of a sow which is cloven-footed but 
not ruminant, or by the production of a hare, which 
is ruminant but not cloven-footed, or by the produc- 
tion of both. The contradictory therefore may be 
always expressed under one of the two following 
forms : ' Some-cloven footed animals are not Any- 
ruminants,* and * Some-ruminants are not Any- 
eloven-footed/ So far all is clear ; but the difficulty 



24 OF PROPOSITIONS. 

is in the attempt to express these two propositions 
in one. The nearest approximp-tion to the exact 
contradictory expressed in a native idiom is, * Some- 
cloven-footed animals axe not Some-ruminants;' 
in using which we must always bear in mind 
that one of the signs of quantity may mean 
' Any.' 

Accordingly for all purposes of Logic the pro- 
position * Some-X is not Some-Y,' may be em- 
ployed as the contradictory of the proposition, 
* AU-X is AU-Y.' By a similar train of reasoning 
it will readily appear that ' Some-X is not Any-Y' 
is the contradictory of 'AU-X is Some-Y;' also 
that * Any-X is not Some-Y,' is the contradictory 
of * Some-X is All-Y ;' and lastly that * Any-X is 
not Any-Y ' is the contradictory of ' Some-X is 
Some-Y.' To verify these assertions, the reader is 
strongly recommended to examine closely the rels^ 
tions set forth in the table at page 22 ; and besides 
the exercise of substituting for the symbolic propo- 
sitions therein their equivalents derived from nature, 
(an exercise highly to be commended), the student 
should experimentalise on the abstract formal pro- 
positions, being careful to give ' Some' its possible 
maximum value of 'AH' in affirmative propositions, 
and of ' Any' in negative propositions. 

The advantages accruing from the quantifica- 
tion of the predicate are innumerable. Not the 
least important of these is the result that all con- 
version of propositions is simple. By the term 
'conversion' logicians ordinarily understand a 



OF PROPOSITIONS. 25 

transposition of the terms, and snch change of 
qnantitj, or even of quality, as is necessary to ren- 
der the converted proposition the exact equivalent 
of the original one, t. e, so that the former contains 
neither more nor less than the latter. But with a 
quantified predicate no such change of quantity 
or quality is necessary to preserve unchanged the 
sense of the propositions. In any proposition, where 
both terms are quantified, conversion is effected by 
simply transposing the terms with their quantitated 
adjuncts. Thus : 

AU-X is All-Y = AU-T is All-X. 
AU-X is Some.Y= Some-T is AU-X. 
Some-X is AU-Y = AU-Y is Some-X. 
Some-X is Some-Y = Some-Y is Some-X. 

The student may readily satisfy himself of the 
fact that these observations are applicable to the 
four negative propositions. 

In fact the effect of quantifying the predicate 
is the annihilation of all essential distinction be- 
tween subject and predicate, so that either term in 
a proposition may be made (by conversion, if 
iiecessary) that of which the other is predicated. 
Let us investigate this result more closely. Take 
the proposition * X is Y,' in which no quantities 
appear. What does this mean ? In extension it 
signifies * X is contained under Y ;' in intension it 
signifies ' X comprehends in it Y.* In the former 
case we mean that Y is the larger logical whole, 
and that X is subsumed imder it. In the latter 



26 OP PROPOSITIONS. 

case we mean that X is the greater metaphysical 
whole, and that Y is subordinated to it. In the 
proposition, then, *X is Y,* in whichever whole 
we proceed, X is the subject and Y the predi- 
cate. Now let us quantify both terms and it will 
appear that there is no longer any necessity for 
interpreting the copula differently, according to the 
whole in which we proceed, but that the copula 
becomes a mere sign of identity. Thus we say, 
' AU-X is Some-Y,' or ' Some-Y is All-X,' and 
similarly, ' Spme-X is AU-Y,' or * AU-Y is Some- 
X,' and the essential distinction between subject 
and predicate is no more. Similar remarks apply of 
course with as much force to negative propositions. 
The following are examples of the above eight 
propositions, i. necessary, ii. contingent. 

I. Necessary Prepositions. 
(These aire all derived from pure science.) 

Affirmatives, 

1 . All-parallel lines are All-non-intersecting lines. 

2. All-radii of a circle are Some-equal straight 

lines. 

3. Some-parallels are All-circles having a com- 

mon centre. 

4. Some-square numbers are Some-even numbers. 

Negatives. 

1. All-odd numbers are not All-cubes. 

2. All-quadrilaterals are not Some-squares. 



OP PROPOSITIONS. 27 

.3. Some-odd numbers are not All-multiples of 
an odd number. 

4. Some-radii of a plain spiral are not Some- 
equal radii. 

II. Contingent Propositions, 
(These are all derived from experience.) 

Affirmatives.^ 

1. All-vertebrate animals are Alt-fishes-reptiles- 

birds-mammals and men. 

2. All-fishes are Some-cold blooded. 

3. Some-flying vertebrates are All-birds. 

4. Some-fishes are Some-vertebrates that intromit 

in fecundation. 

N^atives. 

1. All-animals that intromit in fecundation are 

not All-cold-blooded vertebrates. 

2. All-fishes have not Some-eyelids. 

3. Some Silurian and Devonian animals are not 

All-vertebrates. 

4. Some-reptiles are not Some-animals having 

dorsal parapophyses. 

Affirmatives. 

1. All-birds are All-vertebrates having the limgs 

fixed in the interstices of the ribs. 

2. All-reptiles are Some-vertebrates having two 

auricles and one ventricle to the heart. 



28 OF PROPOSITIONS. 

3. Some-vertebrates having the nasal canal com- 

municating with the mouth are All-reptiles. 

4. Some-cold blooded are Some-vertebrates that 

lack the outward sign of the organ of 
hearing. 

Negatives. 

1. All-mammals are not AU-flyiiig vertebrates. 

2. All-vertebrates having cochlea to the laby- 

rinth are not Some-fishes. 

3. Some-Silurian and Devonian are not All- 

fishes. 

4. Some-reptiles are not Some-vertebrates hav- 

ing the scapular arch articulated to the oc- 
ciput. 



OF PKOPOSITIONS. 



29 



5 ^.^^ 



Affirmation. 



ft- 



9 9 



ii 



i 

o o 2. P 



El 
& 

I. 

OD 

J 

5 



ft- 



g-s: 



S3 



80 Hy- 



g. CD 

CD 



OD 

CD 

I; 

B 



3. 






e 



\^ 



3 •" 





Line of Depth. (Intension) 












•? 












M 


OQ 


OS 


tj\ 


e» 


CU 


»» 


M 








1 

• 


• 






Odd 


^1 


8 1 
.6| 


a 


00 
OS 


- 


.» 

.» 
A 




3 


^ 


3 


3 


1 


3 




tH 




5 


1^, 






^ 




>¦ 


«3 


















! 


;» 


\ 

\ 
\ 


3 


;> 

^ 




5 




> 


• 


CD 


^.^ 
















« 


5 
SI 


\ 
\ 
\ 




> 




^, 


^ 


P* 




i 


k 




\ 




5 


t^ 


> 


> 


>• 


^® \ 










5 






t^ 


>: 


>¦ 


1 

• 




^ 




\ 


5 




> 


9r 
9 


\^ 










^ \ 








9 
.3 


\ 
\ 


k 

"» 


>¦ 




9 


\ 






5 

• ^ 


\ 
\ 


> 




i 


.5 


Negation. \ 












A 


^ 






P 




\ 





Beal. 



Ideal 



30 OF PROPOSITIONS. 

I 

In the process of generalisation, we begin with 
the real individual objects. Logically regarded, 
they are severally indivisible: we cannot affirm of a, 
that ' Some-a is not Some-a,' or of a', that ' Some-a' 
is not Some-a" &c. We select from among those 
individuals a^", a^% a^'\ &c., being all that have the 
mark of (infima) species A!'" : we accordingly sub- 
limate that group into the place of species. We now 
select from among the marks of the A''", that mark 
which is next shallower (and therefore wider) than 
Ar'\ viz. A''', and, we accordingly sublimate the 
same group again, viz. to 6th subaltern genus : but 
there are other individuals, a^\ (/\ a\ &c. which, 
though not possessing so deep a mark A^", have 
the shallower mark ^' ; and all such individuals 
we group under that name, and sublimate at once 
to 6th subaltern genus (vide 2nd column). We now 
select from among the various attributes of the 
two groups A''", and ^\ the next shallower (and 
therefore wider) attribute than A''', viz. A'', and 
these two groups we accordingly sublimate to 5th 
subaltern genus : but there are other individuals, 
a^, a*", a'', &c. which, though lacking the deeper 
marks AT' and A''", possess the shallower mark A''. 
These we group, and sublimate at once to the 5th 
subaltern genus (vide 3rd column) ; and so on, imtil 
all our groups are found in the summum genus; and, 
as a finishing stroke, all the individuals a, a, a, &c. 
which lack the marks hr\ Ar\ AT, A"^, A'", A", 
and A', but possess the attribute A, (the shallow- 
est and broadest of all) are per saUum sublimated 
from the region of reality to the summum genus. 



OF PKOPOSITIONS. 31 

In employing this table it must be bome in 
mind that all propositions can be read in either 
whole, without changing the sign of quantity. 
Thus All-A" is Some-A', may be read either, all A" 
contains in it (as attribute) some A', (depth) ; or, 
all A" contains imder it (as constituent) some A', 
(breadth). 

Terms have the same extension, or are co- 
extensive, when they stand for the same objects. 
Thus man^ rational, are co-extensive, because, 
(speaking of course with sole reference to beings 
of this world,) every man is rational, and every 
rational is a man, that is, the same objects are 
denoted'hj both terms. 

Terms have the same intension, or are co-inten- 
sive when they stand for the same marks. Thus,* 
rood, acre, are co-intensive, because every mark 
(except that of the extension) possessed by a roodia 
likewise possessed by an acre, and vice versa; 
that is, the same marks are connoted by both 
terms. * All-man is All-rational,' is the co-ex- 
tensive relation between terms that are not co- 
intensive. 'All-rood is Some-acre' is the non- 
co-extensive relation between terms that are co- 
intensive. Terms have equal extension, or are 
equi-extensive when the objects denoted by each 
are equally extensive. 
Thus: 

Justices of the court of Queen's Bench, 1750, 
and 

Justices of the court of Queen's Bench, 1850, 



32 OP PROPOSITIONS. 

are terms which are co-extensive ; though, in point 
of fact, some only of the former are some only of 
the latter. Terms have equivalent intension, or 
are equi-intensive when the marks connoted by 
each are of equivalent degrees of generalisation. . 
Thus, triangular, trilateral, are terms which agree 
in connoting triplicity, but the one connotes angu- 
larity, and the other laterality, and angles and 
sides are of equivalent degrees of generalisation, 
viz. geometrical-of-two-dimensions. . 

In the first of the last two examples the terms 
are co-intensive, as well as equi-extensive ; and 
in the second, the terms are co-extensive, as well 
as equi-extensive. We might have chosen differ- 
ently. Thus, for the first, we might have chosen 

, the relation between Jiours on the dial, and a jury, 
(no hours on the dial are any of a jury). And 
for the second, we might have chosen equilateral 
and equiangular which are not co-extensive, since 
for instance, an equilateral parallelogram (not a 
square) is not equiangular. 

Now what is the bearing of these remarks on 
the last table? Carry the eye down the first 

file (or column). The groups A, A', A", &C....A''", 
are composed of exactly the same individuals 
a^'\ a^", a^", &c. They are merely sublimated, firom 
the species gradatim to the summum genus, ac- 
cording to the attributes they possess. Accord- 
ingly we say, that no two of the groups, A, A', 
A", &c. . . AT", are co-intensive, but they are all 
co-extensive. Again, carry the eye along the first 



OP PBOPOSITIONS. 33, 

rank (or row). The groups, A, A, A, &c. have 
precisely the same mark or marks, A ; but they 
do not contain the same set of individuals among- 
the a^a^... a', a, ... a", a", ... &c. Accordingly 
we say, that all the groups A, A, A, &c. are co- 
intensive, but no two of them are co-extensive. , 

Similar remarks apply of course to all the files 
and all the ranks. 

For all the table says to the contrary, however, 
any two or more of the groups in one file may he 
equi-intensive ; and any two or more of the groups 
in one rank raay he equi-extensive. 

Now if we introduce the new quantity certain^ 
indicating partial (definite or indefinite) inclusion, 
or partial (definite or indefinite) exclusion, of the 
term to which it is prefixed, we shall have to add 
ten propositions to the foregoing eight, which are 
all as important in a logical point of view as those 
eight, simply because they validly express actual 
judgments. These ten are as follows : 

Affirmative, Negative. 

AU-X' is Certain-Y. AU-X is not Certain- Y. 

Certain-X is AU-Y. Certain-X is not AU-Y. 

Certain-X is Certain-Y. Certain-X is not Cer- 
Some-X is Certain-Y. tain-Y. 

Certain-X is Some-Y. Any-Xis not Certain-Y. 

I Certain-X is not Any- Y. 
Certain here means. Some at least. Not-all : it 
indicates a partial quantification, whether definite 
or indefinite. Its value may be known or un- 
known: it may, if you please, be numerically 

I.L. 3 



34 OP PROPOSITIONS. 

exprimaUe. The propositions, * Certain-X is Cer- 
tain-Y,' and * Certain-X is not Certain-T/ where 
' Certain* is a definite quantity, are called nvmeri- 
aaJly dejinite propositions* 

We now proceed to state, according to Sir 
William Hamilton's masterly analysis, the result 
and process of affirmation and negation, and to 
contrast the two qualities according to the wholes 
in which they proceed. In result affirmation is 
indusi(m, and universal affirmation is absolute in- 
clusion, that is, the inclusion of a definite this or 
all (individual or class). Negation is exclusion^ 
and universal negation is absolute exclusion, that 
is, the exclusion of a definite this or all (individual 
or class). In process affirmation proceeds down- 
wards or inwards, from greatest to least, from the 
constituted whole to the constituent parts. Nega- 
tion proceeds upwards or outwards, from least to 
greatest, from the constituent parts to the consti- 
tuted whole. In coifUarasty in proportion to the 
intension is affirmation, in proportion to the exten- 
sion is negation. At the maximum of extension 
there are predicated by affirmation least of the 
most ; that is, there are given the fewest attributes 
to the greatest number of things: by negation, there 
are given the most of the least, that is, there are 
withdrawn the greatest number of attributes from 
the fewest fhings. At the maximum of intension 
there are predicated by affirmation the most of the 
least, that is, there axe given the greatest number of 
attributes to the fewest things : by negation, there 



jOf psoPCNSinoNSf 35 

are given the least of the most ; that is, there are 
withdrawn the fewest attributes from the greatest 
nnmber of things. Hence in breadth, to posit the 
genus is not to posit the species or the individual; 
but to sublate the genus is to sublate the species 
and the individual : also in depth, to posit the in- 
dividual is to posit the species and the genus ; but 
to sublate the individual is not to sublate the 
species or the genus. 

In the foregoing exposition there is one point 
which demands elucidation. The direction in 
which affirmation and negation proceed may be 
discerned from the following considerations. Hav- 
ing regard to the table at page 29, and reading it 
in breadth (or extension), an individual or class 
contained in any superior class, saj the sixth 
subaltern genus, is necessarily included in every 
higher genus, but is not necessarily included in 
any lower class. In order then to include it in 
such lower class we must make an affirmation in 
which such class stands as predicate, that is, we 
proceed downwards. Similarly, if an individual 
or term be not contained in the sixth subaltern 
genus, it is necessarily excluded from every inferior 
class, but not necessarily excluded from any 
superior class* Accordingly if we wish to exclude 
it from such class we must make a negation in 
which such class stands as predicate, that is, we 
proceed upwards. If the table be read in breadth, 
the individual is greater than any class, while the 
summum genus is the least class : 'SO that if in any 

3—2 



36 OF PKOPOSITIONS* 

affirmation or negation, the signs of quantity be 
made to stand (improperly no doubt) for the inten-* 
sion of the terms to which they may be prefixed, 
affirmation would proceed upwards and negation 
downwards. But as we have already seen (page 
28), terms are only expressly quantified with refer-* 
ence to the logical whole of extension. Affirmation, 
therefore, is always downwards and negation up- 
wards. The former proceeds inwards towards the 
most intensive class, the latter outwards to the 
most extensive class. 

When in a proposition the quantity of both 
terms is definite (whether universal or particular), 
the judgment expressed thereby is called a defi- 
nition of the most implicit of the two terms. De- 
finition may be of three kinds. 1. By the inten- 
sion of the defined concept. 2. By its extension. 
3. By accidental coincidence. Examples : of 1. 
Man is a being endowed with reason, conscious- 
ness, free-will, and understanding : of 2. Britons 
are those that dwell in England, Scotland, or 
Wales: of 3. A triangle is a figure contained 
by three straight lines. 

Having now treated of the Quantity of a Term 
and the Quality of a Proposition, we proceed to 
consider the Relation of Propositions. Relation is 
properly predicated of a plurality of propositions 
only. It is of three kinds, as follows : 

Independent 
Relation \ Qonjunqjtive \ of propositions. 
Disjunctive 



OP PROPOSITIOl^S. 37 

Independent propositions are of tiie following 
forms: 

X is T and X is Z (or Z is X). 

X is T and Y is Z (or Z is T). 

X is T and Z is W (or W is Z). 

In any of these forms, the propositions in each 
pair (though in two instances intemallj connected), 
are categorically independent. 

Conjunctive propositions are of the following 
forms: 

If X is T Xis Z (or Z is X), 
If X is Y Y is Z (or Z is Y). 
If X is Y Z is W (or W is Z). 

In all these forms, the latter proposition is con- 
sequentially dependent on the former. 

Disjunctive propositions are of the following 
forms : 

Either X is Y or X is Z (or Z is X). 
Either X is Y or Y is Z (or Z is Y). 
Either X is Y or Z is W (or W is Z). 

In each of these forms the propositions are 
consequentially exclusive of each other. 



PART m. 



OF ILLATION. 



We restrict the term Illation to that kind of 
inference which is direct and immediate, and we 
confine the term Syllogism to that kind of infer- 
ence which is indirect and mediate. When, from 
the consideration of one or more propositions, in- 
volving only two terms, we are enabled to arrive 
at a judgment not formally identical with the 
ludsnoients expressed in such proposition or pro- 
posSons, the process of arri4ig at the second 
judgment is called immediate inference or Illation. 

Illation by Oppositicn. 

The simplest instance of this, (excluding Con- 
version, which, when the predicate is quantified, 
is no inference at all), are the inferences depend- 
ing on logical Opposition. Two propositions are 
said to be in opposition, when the terms of each 
are the same while the one proposition is affirma- 
tive and the other negative. Accordingly it fol- 
lows that when any one of the following proposi- 
tions, viz. ; 



OF ILLATION. 



39 



? Affirmative, 



1. AU-XisAll-T 

2. All-X is Some-Y 

3. Some-X is AU-Y 

4. Some-X is Some-Y 

is asserted simultaneously with any one of the fol* 
lowing, viz.: 

5* Some-X is not Some-Y 

6. Some-X is not Any-Y 

7. Some-Y is not Any-X 

8. Any-X is not Any-Y 

the two are in opposition. 



Negative, 



The following are. all the pairs that can be 
formed by taking one proposition from the affirma- 
tives, and one from the negatives. 

1+8. 1+7. 1+6. 1+5. 2+8. 2+7. 2+6. 2+5* 
3+8. 3+7. 3+6. 3+5. 4+8. 4+7. 4+6. 4+5, 
sixteen in all. 

Those pairs that exclusively contradict each 
other are (as we have already seen) called Contrar- 
dictories, the one proposition denying exactly that 
which the other affirms. In Contradictories more- 
over, there are always two terms indefinite, and 
two definite. Those propositions in any pair 
which are inconsistent with each other, without 
necessarily excluding each other, are called Con- 
traries. Those propositions in any pair which are 
consistent with each other, but whose Contra- 
dictories are Contraries, are called Subcontraries* 



40 



OP ILLATIOK. 



Those propQsitions in any pair, which may be 
simultaneously either inconsistent or consistent, are 
called Subalterns. The remaining combinations of 
propositions, two and two, viz. those in which 
.there is no difference of quality, both propositions 
being affirmative or both negative, are not cases of 
opposition at all. They will be treated of under 
another head, (Illations by Fluxion.) 

The cases of opposition above enumerated, viz. 
four Contradictories, five Contraries, five Subcon- 
traries, and two Subalterns, (that is, sixteen in all,) 
appear in detail in the .following tables. In all 
such pairs, Some of course means Some at least, 
perhaps All. However, in investigating the con- 
ditions of their solution, we replace every * Some' 
by Certain, 



I. Exclusives (or Contradictortes). 



I AU-X is AU-Y 
ISome-X is not Some-T 

/AU-X is Some-Y 
ISome-X is not Any-Y 

f Some-X is AU-Y 

i Some-Y is not Any-X 

/ Some-X is Some-Y 
vAny-X is not Any-Y 



In each pair, the pro- 
positions cannot both 
be true at once, or both 
false at once. One of 
the two must be true, 
and the other false. 



OF ILLATION. 



41 



II. Inconststeiits (or Contraries). 



f All-X is AU-Y 
vAny-X is not Any-T 

I AU-X is AU-Y 
iSome-X is not Any-Y 

f All-X is AU-Y 
vSome-Y is not Any-X 

•f All-X is Some-Y 
vAny-'X is not Any-Y 

f Some-X is AU-Y 
vAny-X is not Any-Y 



In each pair, the pro- 
positions may both be 
' false at once, but they 
cannot both be true at 
once. 



ni. ConststerUs (or Suicontraries). 



f Some-X is Some-Y 
i Some-X is not Some-Y 



I All-X is Some-Y 

t Some-X is not Some-Y 

f Some-X is AU-Y 

I Some-X is not Some-Y 

{Some-X is Some-Y 
Some-X is not Any-Y 

{Some-X is some-Y 
Some-Y is not Any-X 



In each pair, the pro- 
positions may both be 
true at once, but they 
cannot both be false at 
once. 



42 



OP ILLATIOI^. 



IV. Suhahems* 



r AU-X is Some-Y 
iSome-T is not Any-X 

rSome-X is AU-Y 
\Some-X is not Any-Y 



In each pair, both 
propositions may be 
true at •nee ; or both 
may be false at once. 



These tables may be greatly simplified. It is 
observable that in the table of Contraries, the pro- 
positions of each pair are the Contradictories of 
those in a corresponding pair in the table of Sub- 
contraries. Thus : 



Contraries. 

All-X is AU-Y. 
Any-X is not Any-Y. 


Subcontraries. 
Some-X is not Some-Y. 
Some-X is Some-Y. 


AU-X is AU-Y. 
Some-X is not Any-Y. 


Some-X is not Some-Y. 
All-X is Some-Y. 


All-X is AU-Y. 
Some-Y is not Any-X. 


Some-X is not Some-Y. 
Some-X is AU-Y. 


All-X is Some-Y. 
Any-X is not Any-Y. 


Some-X is not Any-Y. 
Some-X is Some-Y. 


Some-X is AU-Y. 
Any-X is not Any-Y. 


6ome-Y is not Any-X. 
Some-X is Some-Y. 



Similarly, the propositions in either of the two 
pairs of Subalterns, are the Contradictories of those, 
each to each, in the other. Thus*: 



All-X is Some-Y. 
Some-Y is not Any-X. 



Some-X is not Any-Y» 
Some-X is AU-Y. 



OF ILLATION. 43 



I. Contradictortes. 



There is no condition of solubility of a pair of 
Contradictories, inasmuch as the propositions so 
opposed cannot be simultaneously true. 

II. and III. Contraries and Suhcontraries. 

If the propositions in any pair of Contraries be 
ffJse, those in its corresponding pair of Suhcon- 
traries are true. We may therefore confine our 
attention to the pairs of suhcontraries : 

1. 

Some-X is not Some-Y, 
Some-X is Some->T. 



Certain-X is not Certain-T > .« . ^ 

2. 

Some-X is not Some-T, 
All-X is Some-T. 

Some-X is not Certain-T ^ are the resulting 
and, All-X is Certain-Y j illations. 

3. 

Some-Y is not Any-X, 
Some-X is Some-Y, 



Certain-Y is not Any-X ) are the resulting 
and, Some-X is Certain-Y j illations* 



44 OF ILLAnOK. 

4. 

Some-X is not Some-T, 
Some-Xis All-Y. 

Certain-X is not Some-Y i aie the resulting 
and, Certain-X is All-Y j iUations. 



5. 

Some-X is not Any-Y, 
Some-X is Some-Y. 



Certain-X is not Any-Y ) are the resulting 
and, Certain-X is Some-Y j illations. 



I append a couple of examples. 

Some-civilian is not Some-militaiy. 
Some-civilian is Some-military. 

Therefore, if certain members of parliament be 
the civilians who constitute a portion of the mili- 
tary, the class civilian is divisible into militaiy 
M.P.'s and not-military, and the class military is 
divisible into military M.P.'s and not-civilian. 

Again, 

All-human is Some-biped. 
Some-biped is not Any-human. 

Therefore, if birds be the bipeds who are not 
human, the class biped is divisible into birds and 
men, and the other bipeds, if any. 



OF ILLATION. 45 

IV. SubaUems. 
Let All-X is Some-T ) be simultaneous- 



-xF 



and Some-Y is not Any-X J \j true. 

All-X is Certain-Y ) axe the resulting 
and, Certain-Y is not Any-X j illations. 

and if Some-X is All-Y 1 be simultaneous- 

and Some-X is not Any-Y j ly true. 

Certain-X is All-Y | are the resulting 
and, Certain-X is not Any- Yj illations.* 

In all these cases Certain implies definite quan- 
tity. 

These solutions are of more importance in ap- 
plied logic than their form would lead us to suppose. 

In concluding our remarks on these instances 
of immediate inference, we may call attention to 
the fact, that in every case in which an inference is 
drawn immediately from two propositions, we have 
. only to lay down the illative result as the original 
proposition, and the two opposed propositions will 
form a double immediate inference therefrom. 

We now proceed to consider 

Illation by Privation* 

The following Table will exhibit all possible 
assertorial inferences from the eight general propo- 
sitions, by writing for one or both terms its contra- 
dictory (or infinite complement). 



46 OF ILLATION. 

1. AU-X is AU-Y, 

IAny-X is not Any-not-T, 
Any-not-X is not Any-T, 
AU-not-X is AU-not-Y. 

Example to 1. * The just are all the holy.' 
* No just man is unholy.' * No holy man is un- 
just.' * All unjust men axe all the unholy.* 

2. All-X is Some-Y. 
Any-X is not Any-not-Y, 
Any-not-X is not Some-Y, 
Some-not-X is AU-not-Y. 



Therefore, 



Example to 2. ^ All the righteous are happy.' 

* None of the righteous are unhappy.' * Some 
happy men are not unrighteous.' *A11 who are 
not happy are not righteous.' 

3. Some-X is AU-Y. 

ISome-X is not Any-not-Y, 
Any-not-X is not Any-Y, 
AU-not-X is Some-not-Y. 

Example to 3. ' Some happy persons are all 
the righteous.' * Some-happy persons are not un- 
righteous.' *No unhappy person is righteous.' 

* All who are unrighteous are unhappy.' 

4. Some-X is Some-Y. 

rp, p f Some-X is not Any-not-Y, 
' (Any-not-X is not Some-Y. 

Example to 4. ' Some desirable events are 
probable.' ^ Some desirable events axe not im* 



OF ILLATION. 47 

probable.' *Some probable events are not un- 
desirable/ 

These are all the immediate (assertorial) infer- 
ences by privation that can be drawn from affirm- 
ative propositions. 

It will be observed that each proposition except 
the fourth affords three inferences and no more. 
When we proceed however to negative proposi- 
tions, the circmnstances are very different. 

No negative proposition can yield more than 
two assertorial illations, and one negative propo- 
sition affords none at all. 

5. Some-X is not Some-Y. 

On this proposition no categorical immediate 
inference by privation can be drawn. 

6. Some-X is not Any-Y. 

,T» /• (Some-X is Some-not-Y, 
Therefore, |A„y.^ot.x i^ ^ot Some-not-Y. 

Examples of 6. ^ Some possible cases axe not 
probable.' * Some possible cases are improbable.* 
^ Some improbable cases are not impossible.' 

7. Any-X is not Some-Y. 

rp, n fSome-not-X is Some-Y, 

' (Some-not-X is not Any-not-Y. 

Examples of 7. * No probable case is some- 
possible.' ^ Some impossible cases are some possi- 
ble.' ^ Some improbable cases are not impossible.' 



48 OF ILLATION. 

8. Any-X is not Any-Y* 



Therefore, ^ 



AU-X is Some-not-Y, 
Some-not-X is AU-Y, 
Certain (indefinite) -not-X is not Any- 

not-Y, 
Any-not-X is not Certain (indefinite)- 

not-X. 



Examples of 8. * No human virtue is perfect.' 
* All human virtues are imperfect.' * All perfect 
virtues are unhuman.' * Certain imhuman virtues 
are not imperfect.' * Certain imperfect virtues are 
not unhuman.' 

Besides assertorial inferences of this nature, 
there are copious hypothetical inferences, namely, 
conjunctive, disjunctive, and both together. One 
example of this large family of illatives will suf- 
fice. 

Take the proposition Any-X is not Any-Y: 
it is susceptible of the following conjunctive in- 
ference: *If both the propositions, All-not-X is 
AU-pY, and AU-X is AU-not-Y be untrue, then 
Some-not-X is Some-not-Y.' 

It is evident th'at instances of this kind of 
illation might be multiplied ad infinitum. We 
proceed then to 

Illation by Fluxion. 

By this we mean to speak of immediate infer- 
ences derivable firom the above eight propositions, 



OF ILLATION. 49 

hy supposing a quantity to shrink or swell, that is, 
decrease or increase towards the limits zero and 
infinity, or towards the limit3 individual and uni- 
versal. 

The reader is referred to the table at p. 22, 
from which the following statements may be veri- 
fied: 

1. All-X is AU-Y. 

f All-X is Some-Y, 
Therefore, sSome-X is AU-Y, 
ISome-X is Some-Y. 

2. All-X is Some-Y. 
Therefore, Some-X is Some-Y. 

3. Some-X is All-Y. 
Therefore, Some-X is Some-Y. 

4. Some-X is not Any-Y. 
Therefore, Some-X is not Some-Y, 

5. Any-X is not Some-Y. 
Therefore, Some-X is not Some-Y. 

6. Any-X is not Any-Y. 

{Some-X is not Any-Y, 
Any-X is not Some-Y. 
Some-X is not Some-Y# 

These are all fluxional inferences by descent 
from the inclusion or exclusion of a greater quan- 
tity to that of a less. 

I.L. 4 



I 

60 OP " ILLATION. 

The following are examples of complex flux- 

ional illation: 

__ * 

JAII-X is Some-T, and 

|Some-X is AU-Y ; ' 

therefore, AU-X is AIl-T. 
Again, 

jSome-X is not Any-T, and 

[Any-X is not Some-Y: 

therefore, Some-X is* not Some-Y. 
Numerous examples might be given from the 
same table of hypothetical illation. Thus, from 
the proposition ^ 

AU-X is not All-Y, 

we have the disjunctive inference 

either, Some-X is not Any-Y, 
or, Any-X is not Some-Y, 

and the conjimctive inferences 

if Some-X is Certain- Y, 

then Any-X is not Some-Y, and also 

if Certain-X is Some-Y, 
then Some-X is not Any-Y. 

Instances of this kind may be multipUed to a 
great extent. Their amplification will be good 
practice for the student. 

There is yet another class of fluxional illa- 
tions. 

The ordinary ' hypothetical syllogism,* as it is 
improperly called, is, as Sir William Hamilton 



OP ILLATION- 51 

o1>BeiTes, no syllogism at all, but merely an im- 
mediate inference. It is either conjunctive or dis- 
junctive. The conjunctive illation is of this kind. 

IfWisX, TisZ. 

But W is X 
Therefore, T is Z. 

There are however many other forms of this 
illation. 

The disjimctive illation is of this kind. 

W is either X, T, or Z. 

But W is not X or Y. 

Therefore W is Z : 

with many other forms. 

That these illations are nothing more than im- 
mediate inferences is readily seen by transforming 
them thus. 

Let W, X be U, and Y, Z be V. 

Then the conjimctive illation becomes 

AU-U is Some-V. 
Some-U is Some-V, 

which is an illation by fluxion. 

Again, let us resolve the disjunctive premise, 

W is either X, Y, or Z, into its constituent 
propositions; these are: 

If W is X it is not Y or Z. 
IK W is Y or Z it is not X. 

4-2 



li 



52 OP ILLATION; 






If W is Tit is not X or Z. 
If W is X or Z it is not Y. 

If W is Z it is not X or T. 
W is X or Y it is not Z. 

The first pair means, 

All cases of W is X, is all cases of W is not Y, 
jgid W is not Z. 

The second pair tneans, 

All cases of W is T, is all cases of W is not X, 
and W is not Z. 

The third pair means, 

All cases of W is Z, is all cases of W is not X, 
and W is not T. 

Now let W, X be U, W, Y be V, and W, Z 
be Q. 

Then we have 

AU-U is All.not-(V + fl). 
All-V is AU-not-(U + fl). 
AU-a is All-not-(U + V), 

which are three equivalent forms of the same ex- 
pressions, the illation being by privation. 

Any one, then, may stand as sumption in the 
disjunctive illation. 

Let AU-O is All-not-(U + V) be the sumption. 

Then Some-Q is Some-not'(U + V) is an illa- 
tion by fluxion. 

Logicians reckon many other kinds of imme- 
diate inference besides those we have mentioned ; 
all of them however are questionable* 



OF ILLATION. 



53 



Immediate inferences, to which we deny the 
name of syUogisms, have been called by Kant, 
* Syllogisms of the Understanding.' 

It must be careftdly borne in mind that though 
an immediate inference from a given proposition 
may immensely facilitate the process of reasoning, 
yet that the neglect to do so will ijiever reduce the 
constituent parts of a system of ratiocination to 
enthymeme^ or sorites. (For the meaning of these 
words see Whately, Bk. ii. c. 4, § 7.) 



PAET IV. 
OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

The term Syllogism is here restricted to mean 
the expression of an argument in which it is neces- 
sary to compare two terms with a third term, in 
order to determine the relation between those two 
terms. This kind of inference is said to be medi- 
ate, and the third term with which the other two 
are compared is called the Middle Term. Thus, 
if it be suspected that bitter beer is deleterious, 
we should be unable to convert that suspicion into 
a certainty, until we had found that it contains* 
strychnine or some other determined deleterious 
drug. This argument, which all men go through 
every day of their lives, is logically expressed as 
follows: 'Bitter beer contains stiychnine; every 
liquid that contains strychnine is deleterious ; there- 
fore bitter beer is deleterious.' 

In all such arguments it is evident that there 
must be two propositions which (whatever other 
points of similarity or dissimilarity they may have) 
agree in this, that they both involve the middle 
term : and disagree in this, that they connect the 



OF THE STLLOGISM. 55 

middle tenn with different terms* Thi gBiienl 

canon of mediate inference is this : 

The agreement or disagreement of one concept 
with another is ascertained by a third concept^ in- 
asmuch as this wholly or in part agrees with both, 
or with only one, of the concepts to be compared. 

The syllogism may accordingly be defined to 
be a formula of comparison of any two concepts 
with, or through the medium of, a third, in order 
to ascertain whether they agree or not. 

Every syllogism therefore consists of three pro- 
positions involying the three terms. Divers names 
have been employed by logicians to particularize 
these propositions and terms. The following names 
appear to deserve the preference. The most exten- 
sive or most comprehensive of the two propositions, 
from which the third is inferred, we call the Sump- 
tion. The other of those two we call the Sub- 
sumption. The sumption and subsmpption we 
call the Premises, and the resulting proposition 
we call the Consequence. The term that is com- 
mon to the premises (which in most ancient writers 
is called the Argument) we have called the middle 
term, in acquiescence with modem usage. The 
term involved in the sumption, besides the middle 
term, we call the Major Term; and the term in- 
volved in the subsumption, besides the middle 
term, we call the Minor Term. Example. ' All 
men are mortal ; Gabriel was not mortal ; there- 
fore Gabriel wa9 not a man.* Here 'man* is the 
major t^m ; ' Gabriel' the minor term. They are 



56 OF THE SYLLOaiSlT. 

compared ttrough the medium of 'mortal,' which 
is therefore the middle term. * All men are mortal' 
is the most extensive premise ; and as j;he syllo- 
gism is in the logical whole of extension, this is 
the sumption, and * Gabriel is not mortal' is the 
subsumption. ' Gabriel is not a man' is the ' con- 
sequence.' 

^ Not only must every syllogism, as we have 
said, contain three terms and no more, and three 
propositions and no more, but of the premises one 
at least must be affirmative. Moreover the conse- 
quence must express the worst relation of the two 
terms with the middle term. If one of the premises 
be negative, the consequence must also be nega- 
tive. The comparison of each of the two terms 
must be with either the whole or some part of the 
middle term. Neither term must be distributed 
in the consequence (that is imiversally affirmed or 
denied) unless it has been so in the premise in- 
volving it. All these conditions are involved in 
the above canon. (For the copious illustration of 
all these points the student is referred to Thomson's 
Laws of Thought (1854), § 93.) 

The necessity of quantifying the predicates of 
the sumption, the subsumption, and the conse- 
quence of a syllogism, may be easily shewn. For 
since the^syllogism is but a means of stating the 
afgument or disagreement of two terms by means 
of their agreement or disagreement with a third, 
it is imperative that the extent of these terms 
themselves should be taken into account* . Apart 



OF THE SYLLOGISM. 57 

fix>m this there can be no measurement of extent 
and no conclusion of identity or difference of ex- 
tent as the result of such measurement; and there- 
fore no conclusion of scientific significance. The 
implicit quantification of the predicate has accord- 
ingly been always held by logicians, though they 
have, with well nigh one consent, most illogically 
rejected its explicit quantification* As there is still 
some hesitation on their part to allow the claims 
of the new doctrine in reference to the syllogism, 
I will enter into a more detailed demonstration of 
its truth. 

In any syllogism the process of the reasoning 
and the evidence of its validity is the same, and 
it is the following: the middle term is the mean or 
measure; in the first place one extreme is compared 
with the middle term, an,d seen to agree with it so 
far; then the other extreme is compared with the 
middle, and also seen to agree with it so far; and 
thereupon this identity of agreement is affirmed. 
But in either case, if I do not know the extent of 
the term compared, (cannot take it, that is, in some 
definite extent,) I cannot tell how far it agrees with 
the middle. Or, again, if I do not know the ex- 
tent of the middle term, (cannot take it in some 
definite extent,) I cannot tell whether the term to 
be compared agrees with it in extent or not, — 
whether it is part, or whole, or none. The predi- 
cate notion, however, in every reasoning, is one of 
these terms, and stands in one of these relations. 
It is, therefore, absolutely necessary, as we have 



58 OF THE STLLOaiSH. 

said, to the validity of the reasoning that the pre- 
dicate should always be quantified. (Baynes). 
The incidents of the syllogism are 

1 . Subordination of propositions. 

2. Figilre. 

3. Mood. 

4. Action (or Motion). 

1. The syllogism may be deductive or induc- 
tive; but unta further notice, when we speak of 
the syllogism, we mean the deductive syllogism. 

In the Syllogism then the sumption must stand 
first, and the subsumption must occupy the subor- 
dinate place. This distinction however may be lost 
sight of in dealing with the empty formulae of the 
syllogism, where, in point of fact, any proposition 
may stead as sumption. The form in which a 
proposition appears in the syllogism is of more im- 
portance than the order of the propositions. The 
English language generally requires that the 
second term in any.afltanative proposition in ex- 
tension should be more extensive than the first. 
But even this distinction may for the present be 
lost sight of; and we may assume that any propo- 
sition and its converse are equally admissible in 
the syllogism. 

2. The Figure of a syllogism depends solely 
on the relative position of the middle term. 

The figures are three in number. In the first 
figure the middle term is the subject of the 
sumption, and the predicate of the subsumption. 
In the second figure the middle term stands as 



OF THE SYLLOGISM. 59 

predicate in both premises. In the third figure 
the middle term stands as subject in both pre- 
mises. 

Galen, on insufficient authority, has had the 
credit or discredit of adding to these a fourth 
figure, which, through the lack of independence in 
logical speculation, held an unquestioned place in 
modem treatises on logic, until its claims were 
disputed and finally overthrown by Sir Willis^m 
Hamilton. In this supposititious figure the middle 
term was said to be the predicate of the sumption, 
and the subject of the subsumption. 

The real fact is, that when a syllogism appears 
in this spurious figure, one has simply to transpose 
the order of the premises to reduce the syllogism 
to the first figure; and it is somewhat remarkable, 
(though perhaps never before remarked,) that if in 
the premises and consequence the more extensive 
term occupy the place of predicate, there can be 
only one syllogism appearing in the fourth figure 
that is not reducible to the first figure ; namely, 
the following : 

j Any-T is not Any-X, 
t AU-Y is'Some-Z. 

Therefore Some-Z is not Any-X. 

This of course is in the third figure; but it will 
be also observed that the syllogism is redundant in 
the subsumption, and that the same consequence 
would follow if the subsumption were * Some-Z is 
Some-T;' If this proposition stand as subsump- 



60 OP THE SYLLOGISM. 

tion in the above syllogism, the argument is 
ahready in the first figure ! 

Each figure has its own peculiar canon. 

Canon of first figure. In so far as two concepts 
are related, either both positively, or one positively 
and the other negatively to a common term, of 
which the one is subject and the other predicate, 
so far are these two concepts related positively 
or negatively to each other as subject and pre- 
dicate. 

Canon of second figure. In so far as two con- 
cepts (both subjects) are either both positively or 
the one positively and the other negatively related 
to a common predicate, so far are they either posi- 
tively or negatively indifierently subject and predi- 
cate of each other. 

Canon of third figure. In so far as two con* 
cepts (both predicates) are either both positively 
oi the one positively and the other negatively 
related to a common subject, in so far arjB they 
positively or negatively indifferently subject and 
predicate of each other. 

3. The Mood of a syllogism is determined by 
the quantity of the two terms and the quality of 
the two propositions which stand as sumption and 
subsumption. 

The moods of each figure are thirty-six in 
ntimber, of which twelve have positive conse- 
quences (and of these twelve, seven are redundant) 
«ind twenty-four have negative consequences (of 
which twenty-four, twelve are redundant). 



OP THE SYLLOGISM. 



61 



The moods of the first figure may be exhibited 
in the following tables, which are the result of 
combining the four propositions: 



AU-Y is AU-X 

AU- Y is Some-X 

Some-Y is AU-X 

Some-Y is Some-X 






AU-Z is AU-Y 

AU-Z is Some-Y 

Some-Z is AU-Y 

Some-Z is Some-Y 

Some-Z is not Some-Y 

4 

Some-Z is not Any- Y 

Any-Z is not Some-Y 

. Any-Z is not Any- Y . 



¦4a 

P 

o 

teg 

O 

I 
lis 

lia 



And also of combining the eight propositions : 

AU-Y is AU-X 

AU-Y is Some-X 

Some-Y is AU-X 

Somei-Y is Some-X 

Some- Yisnot Some-X 

Some-Y is not Any-X 

Anv-Yis not Some-X 

Any- Y is not Any-X 






AU-Z is AU-Y 

AU-Z is Some-Y 

Some-Z is AU-Y 

Some-Z is Some-Y 



§ 

o to 

I"! 



By this procedure it will be observed that 
We elicit every possible combination of YX, and 
ZY, preserving the condition that both proposi- 
tions shall not be negative. 

Complete Table of Moods in Fig, 1, 
(valid and suflScient). 

AU^Y is AU-X 
AU^Z is AU-Y 



AU-Z is AU-X 



62 



OF THE STLLOQISM. 



AU-Y 


is 


Some-X Some-Y 


is 


All-X 


AU-Z 


IB 


Some-Y x Some-Z 


is 


AU-Y 



All-Z is Some-X 



Some-Z is All-X 



AU-Y 
Some-Z 



is Some-X 
is Some-Y 



ac 



Some-Y 
Some-Z 



is Some-X 
is All-Y 



Some-Z 



IS 



Some-X 



Some-Z 



IS 



Some-X 



Any-Y is not Any-X 
AU-Z is Some-Y 



oc 



Some-Y is AU-X 
Any-Z is not Any-Y 



Any-Z is not Any-X Any-Z is not Any-X 



AU-Y is Some-X 
Any-Z is not Some-Y 



Some-Y is not Any-X 
Some-Z is aU-Y 



Any-Z is not Sojne-X Some-Z is not Any-X 



Any-Y is not Any-X 
Some-Z is Some-Y 

Some-Z is tiot Any-X 

Any-Y is not Some-X 
AU-Z IS Some-Y 

Any-Z is not Some-X 

AU-Y is Some-X 
Some-Z is not Some-Y 

Some-Z is not Some-X 



Some-Y is Some-X 
Any-Z is not Any-Y 

Any-Z is not Some-X 

Some-Y is AU-X 
Som^-Z is not Any-Y 

Some-Z is not Any-X 

Some-Y is not Some-X 
Some-Z is AU-Y 

Some-Z is not Some-X 



Some-Y is Some-X Any-Y is not Some-X 

Some-Z is not Any-Y w Some-Z is Some-Y 



Some-Z is not Some-X 



Some-Z is not Some-X 



OP THE SYLLOGISM. 



63 



AU-Y is 
Some-Z is 



Surplus Moods^ 

(valid but rednndant). 

[AU]-X Some-Y 

Some-Y oc [All]-Z 



Some-Z 


is 


Some-X 


AU-Y 
AU-Z 


is 
is 


[AUJ-X 
Some-Y 


AU-Z 


is 


Some-X 


[AU]-Y 
Some-Z 


is 
is 


AU-X 
AU-Y 


Some-Z 


is 


AU-X 



is' some-X 
is AU-Y 



Some-Z 


is 


Some-X 


Some-Y 

[AU]-Z 


is 
is 


AU-X 
AU-Y 


Some-Z 


is 


AU-X 


AU-Y 
AU-Z 


is 
is 


Some-X 
[AU-Y 


AU-Z 


is 


Some-X 



[AU]-Y is Some-X 
Some-Z is AU-Y 

Some-Z is Some-Y 



AU-Y is [AU]-X 
Some-Z is not Some-Y 

Some-Z is not Some-X 

[AU]-Y is AU-X 
Some-Z is not Any- Y 

Some-Z is not Any-X 

AU-Y is [AU]-X 
Any-Z is not some-Y 



Some-Y is not Some-X 
« [All]-Z is AU-Y 

Some-Z is not Some-X 



Any- Y is not Some-X 
cc AU-Z is [AU]-Y 

Any-Z is not Some-X 

Some-Y is not Any-X 
=c [AU]-Z is AU-Y 



Any-Z is not Some-X Some-Z is not Any-X 



OP THE STLLOOISU, 



[Aai]-T U All-X 
Any-Z knot Any-Y 


Any-Y is not Any-X 
=c AU-Z is [AU]-Y 


Any-Z is not Any-X 


Any-Z is not Any-X 


[AU]-T is Bome-X 
Any-Z bnot Any-Y 


Any-Y U not Any-X 
=c 8ome-Z is [All]-Y 


Any-Z ianot Some-X 


Bome-Z is not Any-X 


AB-Y in Spme-X 
8ome-Zi8notBS^]-Y 


Any-Y bnot Some-X 
= Bome-Z ia [AU]-Y 


Som«-Z ianot Some-X 


Some-Z IB not Some-X 



The quantity ' All' in brackets in tlie Table of 
Smrplos Moods indicates a redundant distribution : 
if ' Some' be written for ' [All],' tbe consequence 
drawn is tbe same. 

The sign = standing between two syllogisms 
indicates that they are congruoua, that is, that if 
in either syllopsm X be written for Z and Z for 
X, the other results. 

From the above Tables of Moods in the first 

fioiire. Tables of Moods in the second figure are 

y simply converting the sumption, and 

Uoods in the third figure by converting 

ptwn. 

e purposes of natural expression, it is 
to observe the rule of writing every 
proposition in soch order of terms as 
the most extensiTQ term the predicate. 



OP THE SYLLOGISM. 65 

For example, we prefer to say * AU-X is Some-Y' 
rather than the converse, because *T' is the broader 
term, a fact indicated by the quantity of both 
terms. 

But, on the other hand, in negative propo- 
sitions, we prefer saying ' Some-X is not Any-Y,' 
, rather than the converse. When both terms are 
definite, however, as ' AU-X is All-Y,' and * Any-X 
is not Any-Y,' it is indifferent in which order the 
terms stand ; as, in the latter case, we say, * No-X 
is Y,' and *No-Y is X' indifferently; and a 
similar remark applies to propositions in which 
both terms are indefinite, as * Some-X is Some-Y,' 
* Some-X is not Some-Y.' 

The fallowing table contains the moods appli- 
cable to any one or two of the figures or to all 
three of them. The distinctions axe grounded 
upon two assumptions. First, that every propo- 
sition shall stand in the natural order of the terms 
according to the English language. Secondly, 
that congruous propositions shall be regarded as 
only one form of ratiocination. 

For this purpose, and especially with a view to 
avoid any particular succession of the major and 
minor terms, let us write *G' and ^T' for the major 
or minor terms, either being major or minor at 
pleasure, and we retain *Y' as the sign of the 
middle term. 

The following table then exhibits all the essen- 
tially distinct moods of syllogism of which the 
English language is susceptible. 

I. L. 5 



66 



OF THE SYLLOGISM. 



AU-T 

Au-r 



IS 

is 



AU-G 
All-Y 



All-r is AU-G 



Any- Y is not Any-G 
All-r is Some-Y 

Any-Fis not Any-G 



All-Y is Some-G 
Some-F is Some-Y 



Some-F is Some-G 



Any-Y is not Any-G 
Some-F is Some-Y 



Some-F is not Any-G 



Some-Y is Some-G 1 
Some-F is not Any-Y 



Some-Fisnot Some-G 

All-Y is Some-G 
Some-Fis not Some-Y 



Some-Fisnot Some-G 



g - 



All-Y is Some-G 1 
AU-F is Some-Y 

AU-F is Some-G 



Good for fig. 1 only. 



Some-G is not Any-Y 
AU-F is Some-Y 

Some-G is not Any-F 



Good for fig. 2 only. 



All-Y is Some-G 1 

Some-Y is not Any-F j^ q^^ ^^ gg^ g ^^ly. 

Some-G is not Any-F 



In all then there are nine essential moods. 

The following points must be carefully kept in 
view in studying this table. 



J 



OF THE SXLLOmSM. 67 

lat. That in the form of syllogism it is indif- 
ferent which of the extreme terms is major, and 
which is minor. In fact, that *G' and T' really 
differ in some point, either in quantity and kind, or 
in kind only ; but as to the difference in kind, we 
know nothing whatever about it. We know that 
there is such a difference, and that is all. 

2ndly. That in such form it is indifferent 
which premise is sumption, and which is sub- 
sumption. 

3rdly. That the figure of the syllogism is 
only an unessential variety, and becomes of mo- 
ment only in consequence of the peculiar idiom of 
the language in which the reasoning is expressed. 

4thly. That the English language, in certain 
forms of affirmation and negation, necessitates a 
particular order of terms, and that this order is 
strictly observed in the above table. 

5thly. That wherever a mood is competent for 
the first figure, its exemplar is written in that 
figure, that figure being at once the most formal, 
and the most natural. 

Besides the thirty-six moods already investi- 
gated, there are twelve combinationa, firom which 
no inference can be drawn, viz. : 

Some-T is AU-X Some-T is Some-X 

Some-Z is Some-Y =c AU-Z is Some-Y 



5—2 



68 OF THE 8TLL0GISM. 

Some-Yis AU-X 
AU-Z isSome-Y 



Some-Y is Some-X 
Some-Z is Some-Y 



Some-Y is All-X Some-Y is not Some-X 

Some-Z is not Some-Y « AU-Z is Some-Y 



Some-Y is All-X Spme- Y is not Any-X 

Any-Z is not Some-Y « All-Z is Some-Y 



Some-Y is Some-X Some-Y is not Some-X 

Some-Z is not Some-Y « Some-Z is Some-Y 



Some-Y is Some-X Some-Y is not Any-X 

Any-Z is not Some-Y x Some-Z is Some-Y 



The reason why no third proposition in *Z ' and 
* X ' results from any of these twelve pairs, is that in 
each case Aristotle's principle fails, which requires 
that the middle term ' Y' shall be distributed, {i,e. 
universally predicated) in one of the premises. In 



OF THE SYLLOGISM. 69 

all these twelve pairs the middle tenn has in both 
premises the indefinite quantity some. 

The feint of drawing an inference in such cases 
is called the fallacy of the undistributed middle. 
The following are examples of it : 

L 

Some-Y'is All-X 
AU-Z' isSome-T 



Nonsequitur AU-Z' is AU-X' 



Some-cases of rarefaction are caused by heat, 
All-comets are cases of rarefaction ; 

/. All-comets are rarefied by heat. 

II. 

Some-Yis AU-X 
¦ AU-Z isSome-Y 



Hon sequitur AU-Z is Some-X ... (1). 

Some-cases of rarefaction are derived from other 

causes than heat, 
All-comets are some-cases of rarefaction ; 

.•, All-comets are rarefied by something else than 
heat. 

AU-X is Some-W 

AU-Z is Some-X firom (1). 

AU-Z is Some-W 



70 OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

All bodies undergoing rarefaction from some 

other cause than heat are cooled down ; 
All-comets are so rarefied ; 

/. All comets by rarefaction are cooled down. 

Here the effect ' X' ' excludes the effect * W; 
that is, if the comet by rarefaction be made hotter 
it cannot be made cooler. The same informal con- 
cluding thus gives birth to opposite conclusions. 

. III. 

Some-Y is All-X 
Some or AU-Z is AU-Y 



Some-Z is Some-X 



Heat is caused by th^ proximity of comets, 
It is hot to-day; 

.*. Comets are near the earth to-day. 

IV. 

Some-X is AU-Y 
Some-Z is All-X 



Some-Z is AU-Y 



Comets are discernible in hot weather, ' 
To-day comets are seen ; 

.•. To-day it is hot. 

Now if for some, wherever it is the quantity 
of the middle term * Y', we write certain^ in the 



OF THE STLLOGISH. 71 

sense of partial quantity definite or indefinite, and if 
we suppose that the * Certain- Y' of the one premise 
in any pair, together with the ' Certain-Y' of the 
other premise in that pair, do together exceed the 
universal quantity of ^ Y', then an inference can be 
drawn, which extends to a quantity of * Y' at least 
equal to the difference between the two certains. 
In few words we say: If of two propositions the 
middle term be not distributed as predicate in either, 
but if it be quantified in both, and the sum of its 
quantities exceed its universal quantity, a conse- 
quent may be drawn. This is called the principle 
of the ultra-total qiuintification of the middle term*. 
For example : 

Half the brigade were slain 
A majority of the brigade were brave 

Some brave men were slain 



i. e. —- — Y is Some-X 
2 

> -- — Y is Some-Z 



Some-Z is Some-X 



Bearing in mind this condition of the over- 
lapping of partial definites, we may write all the 
twelve moods which have been dismissed as in- 
competent, and state the consequents. 

* Finrt schematised by Lambert : named by Sir W. Hamilton. 



72 OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

Let Certain in the one premise be definite or 
indefinite, and [Certain] in the other premise be 
greater than the diflference between aU and certain 
in the first : or vice versa. 

Then the following twelve additional moods 
are valid ; five being sufficient, and seven redmi- 
dant. 

Additional Moods, 
. Valid and sufficient. 

Certain-Y is Some-X 
Some-Z is [Certain]-Y 

Some-E is Some-X 



Certain- Y is Some-X Certain-Y is not Some-X 
Some-Z is not [Certain]-Y « Some-Z is [Certain]-Y 

Some-Z is not Some-X Some-Z is not Some-X 



Certain-Y is Some-X Certain-Y is not Anv-X 

Any-Zisnot[Certain]-Y « Some-Z is [Certairi-Y 

Any-Z is not Some-X Some-Z is not Any-X. 



Surplus Moods. 
Valid but redundant. 

Certain-Y is [All]-X Certain-Y is Some-X 

Some-Z is [Certain]-Y ex: [AllJ-Z is [CertainJ-Y 

Some-Z is Some-X Some-Z is Some-X 



OF THE SYLLOGISM. 73 

Certain-Y is [AUJ-X 
[AU]-Z is [Certam].Y 

Some-Z is Some-X. 



Certain-Y is [All]-X Certain-Y is not Some-X 

Some-Zisnot[Certain].Y « [All]-Z is [Certain]-Y 

Some-Z is not Some-X Some-Z is not Some-X 

Certain-Y is [AllJ-X Certain-Y is not Any-X 
Any-Zis not [Certain]-Y oc [All]-Z is[Certain]-Y 

Any-Z is not Some-X Some-Z is not Any-X 

Writing each pair of congruous syllogisms as 
one, and adopting the notation already explained, 
the following represent the three valid sufficient 
forms: 

Certain-Y is Some-G i 

[Certain]-Y is Some-r ( Good for Figs. I, 

Some-F is Some-G j ' 

Certain-Y is Som^-G ] 

[Certain]-Y is not Some-Z I Good for Figs. I, 

Some-r is not Som.e-G ( ^^' ™" ¦ 

Certain-Y is Some-G 

i jDertaij-Y is not any-F [ Good for Fig. III. 
Some-G is not any-F 

The syllogism is sometimes presented under a 
form involving six (or perhaps more) terms, each 



74 OP THE SYLLOGISM. 

premise exhibiting two (or perhaps more) proposi- 
tions hypothetically connectei Accordingly some 
writers on logic have treated of these syllogisms 
under the head of hypothetical. But the fact is, 
that all such are immediately reducible to the 
assertorial form. The following are examples of 
this class of syllogisms. 

In All cases where U is V Y is Z 
In All cases where W is X U is V 

In All cases where W is X Y is Z 

In All cases where U is V Y is Z 
In Some cases where W is X U is V 

In Some cases where W is X Y is Z 

In All cases where U is V Y is Z 
In Some cases where U is V W is X 

In Some cases where W is X Y is Z 

In All cases where Y is Z U is V 
In All cases where U is V W is X 

In Some cases where W is X Y is Z 

Now in these formulae if *U' with the attribute 
'V; be 'U", 'T' with the attribute 'Z' be ' Y", 
and 'W with the attribute 'X' be 'W", these syllo- 
gisms are reduced to the following assertorial forms. 

All-U' is Some-Y' 
AU-W is Some-U' 



AU-W is Some-Y' 



OF THE SYLLOGISM. 75 

All-U' is Some-Y' 
Some-W is Some-U' 



Some-W is Some-Y' 

AU-U' is Some-Y' 
Some-U' is Some-W 

Some-W is Some-Y' 

All-Y' is Some-U' 
AU-U' is Some-W 

Some-W is Some-Y' 

It is obvious that by reference to the tables of 
moods, hypothetical syllogisms may be multiplied 
without limit. 

The syllogisms that we have already treated of 
are designated * Figured Syllogisms,' in contradis- 
tinction to another class which we have hitherto 
kept out of sight. 

The canon of the unfignred syllogism is the 
following. 

In as far as two concepts, either both agreeing 
or, one agreeing the other does not, with a common 
third concept, in so far these notions do, or do not 
agree with each other. 

The unfigured syllogism in the terms * G,' * Y,' 
\ r.' expiresses either that 'G and Yare tdenticaly (that 
is the same in kind and quantity), or not identical, 
as the case may be, and that Y and T are identical, 
or not identical ; and that therefore G and T are 
identical, or not identical, as the case may be : or. 



76 OP THE SYLLOaiSM. 

on the other hand, that G and Y are the same in 
kind, but that G is in Y, and that Y and F are the 
same in kind, but that Y is in F, and therefore 
that G is in F : or that G, Y and F being of the 
same kind, Y is in G, and F is in Y; and therefore 
that F is in G.' ' 

In such syllogisms there are indeed two ex- 
treme terms and a middle term, but no term is 
subject or predicate in any proposition ; and it will 
be often found that the attempt to reduce the un- 
figured syllogism to the figured is fraught with 
complexity and redundancy, if not with absurdity. 

The student may, for practice, try the experi- 
ment of throwing the unfigured syllogism, Hhe 
fruit is bigger than the stone, the stone is bigger 
than the kernel; therefore the fruit is bigger than 
the kernel,' into a figured syllogism. 

Syllogisms, besides being figured and unfigured, 
are also analytic and synthetic. In the former, 
which is the most natural method of reasoning, the 
consequence is expressed first, and the premises 
then stated as its reasons. In the latter, which is 
that cultivated by logicians, and to which there- 
fore exclusively all logical nomenclature is rela- 
tive, the premises precede, and, as it were, effectu- 
ate the consequence. Example. If it be asked, 
^is Z in X'? we reply analytically * Yes; for Z is 
in Y, and Y is in X' ; but synthetically we should 
reply ' Yes; for Y is in X, and Z isin Y' ; the syl- 
logisms in both cases being unfigured. 



PAET V. 

OF CHAINS OF REASONING, DEDUCTIVE 

AND INDUCTIVE. 

In rendering logical processes subservient to 
purposes of science, the mode of procedure is, to 
a certain extent, determined bj the nature of the 
subject-matter. 

To that extent therefore the discussion of me- 
thod is excluded from a treatise on formal logic. ' 

The pure logical aspects of continuous chains of 
reasoning are but two. 

Reasoning may be analytic or synthetic; it 
may be deductive or inductive. 

For the sake of perspicuity, we will first inves- 
tigate the distinction between deductive and in- 
ductive reasoning. 

In deduction we reason from the whole to the 
parts, from the genus to the species, from the 
species to the individual. 

All the forms of syllogism with which we have 
had as yet to deal are deductive. 

The deductive syllogism may be figured or 
unfigured. 



78 OF CHAINS OP BEASONIKa, 

In a simple chain of deductive syUogisms we- 
start from the .greatest whole either in extension 
or comprehension, and we terminate with an indi- 
vidual olgect, or the all-embracing attribute. 

Induction, on the other hand, is reasoning from 
the parts to the whole, from the individual to the 
species, from the species to the genus. The induc- 
tive syllogism is in one figure only. In a simple 
chain of inductive syllogisms we start from the in- 
dividual objects, or the shallowest attributes, and 
we reason to the most extensive class, or to the 
most complex object (extension or intension). Ac- 
cordingly (employing for the sake of illustration 
the whole of extension only), we may descend 
from the most extensive whole to the smallest con- 
stituent parts by a chain of deductive syllogisms, 
and we may ascend through the same series back 
to the greatest whole by a chain of inductive syllo- 
gisms; or, on the other hand, we may first ascend 
by induction, and then descend by deduction. 
These two logical procedures are as it were the 
converse of each other. Hopeless then, nay absurd, 
must appear the attempt of nearly all lo^cians to 
assimilate the one procedure to the other. 

Some have endeavoured to shew that the in- 
ductive syllogism belongs to the third figure; 
others, that it ought to be classed with hypotheti- 
cals. Both views are manifestly erroneous. Let 
us take examples of a single inductive, and a single 
deductive syllogism, in extension, the two being 
the converse of each other. 



DEDUCTIVE AND INDUCTTIVE. 79 

Inductive. Deductive. 

AU-B is Some-A 



c, c', cf\ are Some-A 

c, c^ cf\ are AU-B 

.-. All-B is Some-A 



c, c', c", are Some or All-B 
.*. c, c', c", are Some-A 



In the inductive syllogism the predicate of the 
second premise must be universal, or, in other 
words, c, cf, cf\ must be constituents of a given 
whole. When this is the case the induction is said 
to be complete. It is worthy of observation that 
if this predicate be indefinite, no conclusion can be 
drawn; the premises c, &, cf\ are Some-A, and 
c, cfy cf\ are Some-B, being incompetent. For ex- 
ample: ^ . 

Isaac, Levi, and Abraham, are avaricious, 
Isaac, Levi, and Abraham, are All-the-Jews; 
.". All Jews are avaricious. 

This conclusion is just; but if the three indi- 
viduals named do not constitute all the Jews, no 
conclusion at all can be drawn. It is true, that by 
indefinitely increasing the number of individuals 
that collectively form the subject of both premises, 
that is, by indefinitely approximating to the uni- 
verse of Jews, the conclusion can be made more 
and more probable; but until our induction ex- 
hausts the universe, that is, until we have found 
every individual Jew to be avaricious, we have no 
right to predicate that fact apodictically; and it 
must be remembered that logic deals with none 
but necessary reasoning. 



80 OF CHAINS OF BEASONIKG, 

We maj extend what has been said on the in- 
ductive syllogism to chains of reasoning of all 
Aorts. The simplest case is where the individnals 
if i^f i^^y belong to a species S, that species to a 
genus 7, 7 to a genus fi, and )3 to a snmmnm genns 
a: or we may extend the generalisation still higher. 
In the example given the following are the induc- 
tive and deductive series respectively. 

Inductive. Dedtictive. 

9f €', «", are Some-a All-)8 is Some-a 

«, «', «", are AU-S 

All-5 is Some-a 



AU-S is Some-a 
All-8 is Some-Y 



All-7 


ia Some-/3 


AU-y 


is Some-o 


AU-y 
AU-S 


is Some-a 
is Some-y 


AU-S 


is Some-a 


AU-S i£ 


1 Some-a 
areAUor Some-S 


e, e', e", 


are Some-a 



Home-yis Some-a 

Some-yis Some-a 
All-7 is Some-/8 

Some-/8is Some-a 

It is seldom, in the application of logic to 
science, that any inductive operation involving a 
longer chain of syllogisms is employed. The diffi- 
culty and complexity of an inductive process lies 
in something else than the length of the chain of 
reasoning, or in any of the formal details of the 
syllogisms employed. 

In the domain of nature everything is pre- 
sented to us under the forms of substance and acci- 
dent, cause and effect, or action and reaction. 



DEDUCTIVE AND INDUCTIVE. 81 

Under the first form our judgments are assertorial, 
that is, a predicate is simply afBrmed (or denied) of 
a subject. Under the second form our judgments 
are conjunctive, one proposition being affirmed (or 
denied) as the consequence of another of which it 
is logically independent. Under the third form our 
judgments are disjunctive, an alternative being 
presented between two or more propositions. Now 
in point of fact these three forms are cognizable 
under a single form, since the accident may always 
be affirmed (or denied) as the effect of the sub- 
stance, and in the case of action and reaction, either 
may stand as cause, and the other as effect. Ac- 
cordingly, in the investigation of nature, with a 
view to determine the dependence of phenomena 
upon each other, the occupation of the observer and 
inductive reasoner is commonly called the search 
after causes. Now as logic can take no cognizance 
of the content or matter contained in any term or 
proposition, it is manifestly out of its province to 
inquire whether two phenomena (presented in the 
form of propositions) are connected by the relation 
of substance and accident, cause and effect, or ac- 
tion and reaction. The business of logic is simply 
to consider the relation of identity subsisting be- 
tween two or more propositions formally distinct. 

We proceed then to investigate the syllogistic 
forms, hypothetical of course, under which the in- 
ductive philosophy can conclude, from observation 
and experiment, that two observed phenomena are 
universally connected in a certain manner. 
I. L. 6 






82 OP THE SYLLOGISM. 

It is of course assumed that the laws of nature 
are constant, and that the like effects follow the 
like causes in the absence of neutralising or modi- 
fying concurrent causes. It is by virtue of this 
assumption that the conclusions are invested with 
the character of universality. 

Now let us assume that we ar& presented with 
a given instance which is analysed and resolved 
into four phenomena X', X", X"', and Z. Let Z be 
the phenomenon whose cause we seek, and let X' 
and X" be two assigned causes selected on account 
of some apparent probability that one or other is 
the cause we seek. Then X'" is called the Resi- 
dual Phenomenon, and of course if neither X' nor 
X" be the cause sought that cause will be found 
among the constituents of the residual phenomenon. 
Now let us suppose that the circumstances of the 
case permit us to experimentalize on the effect of 
any two of the three constituents X', X", and X'"; 
then the following are the only possible results. 

I. X'andX"giveZ, X'andX"'give Z, X" and X"'do not give Z. 
IL X'and X'giveZ, X'andX'" do not give Z, X"and X'" give Z. 

III. X'andX"do notgiveZ, X'and X'"do not give Z, X"and X'"giveZ. 

IV. X'andX"donotgiveZ, X'andX"'give Z, X"and X'" do not give Z. 
V. X'andX"do notgiveZ, X' and X'" give Z, X" and X'" give Z. 

TL X'andX"giveZ,X'andX'"donotgiveZ, X"andX'"do notgiveZ. 
VIL X'andX"giveZ, X' and X'" give Z, X"andX'"give Z. 

These are the only practicable combinations. 
From I. it follows that X' is the caaise sought 



OF THE STLLOGISM. 83 

From II. that X" is the cause sought. Froin III. 
it follows that X' is a contradictoiy cause, and 
from IV. that X" is a contradictory cause. From 
V, we learn that the required cause is to be sought 
for in the residual phenomenon, and from VI. 
that the residual phenomenon contains a contra- 
dictory cause* From VII. we learn that X', X", 
and X'" are all three equivalent causes. These 
results are susceptible of a syllogistic schema- 
tism. 

Let the concurrence of X' and X" present the 
phenomenon Y'. Let the concurrence of X' and 
X'^' present the phenomenon Y", and let the con- 
currence of X" and X'" present the phenomenon 
Y'". Then from I, we have the following sche- 
matism : 

In all cases where Y' is Z is. 

In all cases where Y' is X'" is not. 

Therefore in some cases where Z is X'" is not. 

In all cases where Y'' is Z is. 

In some cases where Y" is X" is not. 

Therefore in some cases where Z is X" is not. 



Either in all cases where Z is X' is, or in all cases where Z is 
X" is, or in all cases where Z is X!" is. 

But in some cases where Z is X'" is not, and in some cases where 
Z is X'' is not. 



Therefore in all cases where Z is X' is. 



In this disjunctive iDation, the truth of the 
sumption depends on the fact that X', X", and X''' 



* * * 

* * * 



81 OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

comprise the whole universe of phenomena. Of 
course no induction can extend so far as that in 
practice the major premiss in question is of pro- 
blematical modality only; but logic, as we have 
seen, takes no cognizance of the problematioal or 
presumptive, but only of the assertorial. 

From U. we have the following, schematiatu : 

In all cases where Y' ia Z is. 

In all cases where Y' is X'" is not. 



Therefore in some cases where Z is Ji'" is not. 

In all cases where Y'" is Z is. 
In all cases where Y'" is X is not. 

Therefore in some cases where Z is X' is not. 

Either in all cases where Z is X' is, or in all cases wbers Z \b 
X" is, or in all cases where Z is X'" is. 

But in some cases where Z is X''' is not, and in some cases where 
Z is X' is not. 

Therefore in all cases where Z is X" is. 



From III, we have the following schematism 

In all cases where Y' is Not -Z is. 
In all cases where Y' is Z'" is not. 

Therefore in some cases where Not -Z is X'" is not. 

In all cases where Y" is Not -Z is. 
In all cases where Y" is X" is not. 



Therefore in some cases where Not -Z is X'' is not. 



Either in all cases where Not -Z is X' is, or in all cases where 
Not -Z is X" is, or in all cases where Not -Z is X'" is. 









OP THE SYLLOGISM. 85 

But in some cases where Not -Z is X'" is not, and in some cases 
where Not -Z is X"' is not. 

Therefore in all cases where Not -Z is X' is. 



From IV. we have the following schematism : 

In all cases wh^re Y' is Not -Z is. 
In tJl o&EKs where Y' is X.'" is not. 



Therefore in some cases where Not -Z is X'" is not. 

In all cases where Y"' is Not -Z is. 
In all cases where Y''' is X' is not. 



Therefore in some cases where Z is X' is not. 

Either in all cases where Not -Z is X' is, or in all cases where 
Not -Z is X'' is, or in all oases where Z is X'" is. 

But in some cases where Not -Z is X'" is not, and in some cases 
where Not -Z is X' is not. 

Therefore in all cases where Not -Z is X" is. 

In a similar manner the schematisms V. and VI. 
might be written. The conclusions from V, viz. 
where Z is X'" is, merely informs ns that the 
cause of Z is to be sought for in X'", the residual 
phenomenon. 

The conclusion from VI, where Not-Z is X'" 
is, merely informs us that in the residual pheno- 
menon X" there is a cause, but for which Z would 
be present. The result of VII shews that the se- 
lection of assumed causes X' and X" was unskilfdl 
or unlucky, and recourse must \>e had again to 
experiment. 



» * 
* t 
t » 



86 OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

SyllogisTna hy hypothesis. 

Syllogiams are often employed hypothetically 
in a ci;ain of reasoning. The following example 
may serve for an illuBtration. To prove that if 
there are more hairy people in the world than 
hairs on any one, two persons at least must have 
the same numl)er of hairs. 

I. 

(Simple Illation.) 

All the hairy people are more in nnmber than the 

hairs of any one. (Datum.) 
Therefore All the hairy people in the world are 

more in number than the hairs on A. 

II. 

The number of hairs on A is equal to the number 
of different mimlDers of haira from 1 to the 
number A has. (Mathematical truth.) 

1 the hairy people in the world are more in 
number than the hairs on A. (Consequent of I.) 

lerefore all the hairy people in the world are 
more in number than the different numbers of 
hairs from 1 to the number of hairs on A. 

The next is an assertorial syllogism hypothe-. 
ally posited. 



OF THE SYLLOGISM. 87 

III. 

Let every one of the hairy people in the world 
have a different number of hairs from the num- 
ber on any one else. (Hypothesis.) 

All the hairy people in the world are more in 
number than the different number of hairs 
from 1 to the number A has. (Consequent of II.) 

Therefore some (one at least) of the hairy people 
in the world have higher number of hairs on 
them than the number A has. 

IV. 

(Disjunctive Illation.) 

Either each of the hairy people in the world has a 
different number of hairs from that on any one 
else; or some (two at least) have the same 
number of hairs. (Mathematical truth.) 

But if the first alternative be true, there are some 
(one at least) who have higher numbers of 
hairs on them than the number A has, which 
is the contradictory of the datum. 

Therefore some (two at least) have the same num- 
ber of hairs. 

This example, which belongs rather to applied 
than to formal logic, is introduced with the view 
of shewing in a small compass, the value of a 
suppository assertorial syllogism ^ The use made 

^ Is not this the syllogisrm which Aristotle calls i( inro$4a€<a$^ 



88 OF THE SYLLOGISM* 

of it in the preceding example, is called die 
Reductio ad absurdum. 

Without infringing on the sphere of applied 
logic, it is difficult to discuss the subject of ana- 
lysis and synthesis as methods of teaching science 
and of investigating scientific truths. Whether 
the names be well or ill applied, as discriminating 
between algebraical and geometrical processes, is 
a matter of great doubt. We have already em* 
ployed these terms to designate the direct and 
inverse methods of stating an argument. (See 
p. 76). The student must carefully bear in mind 
that no such sense is to be attributed to the terms 
analytical and synthetical as applied to distinguish 
such processes as those of algebra and geometry. 
I specify algebra and geometry, simply because 
these are the only sciences in which the two 
processes we are speaking of are exhibited in per- 
fection. 

In the opinion of the writer both those pro- 
cesses are deductive, and further, that there is no 
logical difference between them; in other words, 
they differ only in their subject matter. 



THE END. 



c t. 

• * ' * 

4. C C 



CAMBRIDGE, June 1869. 

MACMILLAN & CO/S 

PUBLICATIONS- 



JESCHTLI Enmenides. 

The Greek Text with English Notes.: with an Introduction, containing an 
Analysis of C. O. MUUer's Dissertations ; and an English Metrical Translation. 
By BERNARD DRAKE, M.A., Fellow of King'? College, Cambridge; Editor 
of ''Demosthenes de Corona." 8yo. cloth, 7$. €d, 

ANTH0L06I/L Latina Selecta. In 2 vols. Small 8vo. 

Vol. I.— Containing select Epigrams of Catullns, Virgil, Claudian, Ausonius, 

with others from the Anthologia Latina. 
Vol. II. — Containing select Epigrams of Martial. 

Edited with English notes, by J. E. B. MAYOR, M.A., Fellow and Classical 
Lecturer of St. John's College, Cambridge, Editor of Juvenal. 

[Preparing, 

ARISTOPHANES. The Greek Text revised, with a Com- 
mentary. By W. O. CLARK, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity 
College. IPreparing, 

ARISTOTELES de Rhetorica. The Greek Text, with English 

Notes. By A Fsllow ov Tkihitt College. {Preparing* 

ARISTOTLE on the Vital Principle. Translated from the 

Original Text, with Notes. By CHARLES COLLIER, M.D., F.R.S., Fellow 
of the Royal College of Physicians. Crown 8vo. cloth, Bt, 6d, 

BEAMONT.— Catherine, the Egyptian Slave in 1852. A Tale 

of Eastern Life. By W. J. BEAMONT, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, 
Cambridge, late Principal of the English College, Jerusalem. Fcap. 8yo. 5t.6d, 

BENGELII GNOMON NOVI TESTAMENTI, in quo ez 

Nativa Verbonim vi simplicitas, profunditas, concinnitas, salubritas en* 
suum coelestium indicatur. Editio Tertia. Imperial 8vo. cloth, 18«. 

BIRES.— The Difficulties of Belief in connexion with the 

Creation and the Fall. By THOMAS RAWSON BIRKS, M.A., Rector ef 

Kelshall, Formerly Fellow of Trinity College ; Author of « The Life of th« 

Bey. O. Bickersteth." Crown 8vo. cloth, 4*. 6(f. 

Contents. Introduction. — On the Knowledge of God. Chap. I.— On the 
Power of God. II. — On the Nature of God. III.— On the Creation of 
Free Agents. IV. — On Temptation in Free Agents. V. — On the Creation 
and Fall of Angels. VI.— On the Creation and Fall of Man. VII.— On 
the Permission of Satanic Temptation. VIII. & IX.— On Original Sin. 



S MACMILLAN & CO.'S FUBUCATIOirS. 

BOLTON.— The Evidences of Christiftiiity as Exhibited in 

the Writings of its Apologists down to Augustine. An Essay which obtained 
the Hulsean Prize for the Year 1892. By W. J. BOLTON, of GonviUe and 
Caius College, Cambridge. Bro. doth, 6«. 

BRAVE WORDS fdr BRAVE SOLDIERS and SAILORS. 

Tenth ThouiiMid. 16mo. sewed, id, ; or 10«. per 100. 

[Printtdfor DMribuHom, 

BUTLER (Professor Archer).— Sermons, Doctrinal and Prac- 
tical. By the Rev. WILLIAM ARCHER BUTLER, M.A. late Professor 
of Moral Philosophy in the University of Dublin. Edited, with a Memoir of 
the Author's Life, by the Very Rev. Thomas Woodwakd, M.A. Dean of 
Down* With Portrait. Third Edition. Svo. cloth, 12#. 

BUTLER (Professor Archer).— A Second Series of Sermons. 

Edited from the Author's Manuscripts, by J. A. Jerbmxx, D-.D. Regius 
Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge. 8vo. cloth. 10«. Gd. 

BUTLER (Professor Archer).— Lectores on the History of 

Ancient Philosophy. By the Rev. W. ARCHER BUTLER, late Professor 
of Moral Philosophy in the University of Dublin. Edited, firom the Author's 
Manuscripts, by William Hbpworth Thompson, M.A. Regius Professor 
of Greek in the University of Cambridge. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth, It, 5$, 

BUTLER (Professor Archer).— Letters on Romanism, in 

Reply to Mr. Newman's Essay on Development. Edited by the Very Rev. 
T. Woodward, Dean of Down. 8vo. cloth, 10«. 6d, 

BUTLER.— A Hand Book to Butler's Analogy. 

With a few Notes. By C. A. SWAINSON, M.A. Principal of Chichester 
Theological College, formerly Fellow and Tutor of Christ's College, Cam* 
bridge. Crown 8vo. It. 6d, 

CAMBRIDGE.— Cambridge Theological Papers. Comprising 

those given at the Voluntary Theological and Crosse Scholarship Examina- 
tions. Edited, with References and Indices, by A. P. MOOR, M.A. of Trinity 
College, Cambridge, and Sub-warden of St. Augustine's College, Canterbury. 
8vo. cloth, 7$, 6d, 

CAMBRIDGE PROBLEMS.— Solutions of the Senate-House 

Riders for Four Years (1848 to 1851). By F. J. JAMESON, H.A. FeUow 
of Caius CoUege, Cambridge. 8vo. cloth, 7«. 6d. 

CAMBRIDGE PROBLEMS.— Solutions of Senate-House 

Problems for Four Years (1848 to 1851). By N. M. FERRERS, and 
J. S. JACKSON, Fellows of Caius College, Cambridge. 8to. cloth» ISt, 6d. 

CAMBRIDGE PROBLEMS, 1854.-Solutions of the Pro- 

blems proposed in the Senate House Examination, January 1854. By the 
Moderators (W. WALTON, M.A. Trinity College, and C. F. MACKENZIE. 
M.A. Fellow of Caius College). In 8vo. cloth, 10«. 6d, 



4, • 



VACIOLLAN & CO.*S PXTBUCATIONS. 9 

GAHBSIDGE.-Xlambridge Guide: Inclading Historical and 

Arohlteetural Notices of the Public Buildings, and a concise Account of the 
Customs and Ceremonies of the University, with a Sketch of the Places most 
worthy of Note in the County. A New Edition, with Engravings and a Map. 
]2mo. cloth, 5s. 

CAMBRIDGE FITZWILLIAM MnSEnM.-^A Hand-Book 

to the Pictures in the Fitiwilliam Museum, Cambridge. Crown 8vo. sewed, 
1«. 6(f . ; or in cloth elegant, 2s. 6d, 

CAMBRIDGE.— Cambridge Mathematical JonmaL VoL L 

Second Edition, 8vo. cloth, 18«. 

CAMBRIDGE.—Cambridge and Dublin MathematicalJonmaL 

Ths Complete Workt in Nine Vols. 8vo. cloth, H. As. 

ONLY ? FXW COriXS OV THS COMPLXTV WO&K »SX4IH OH H4HI>. 

CAMPBELL.— The Nature of the Atonement and its Rela- 
tion to Remission of Sins and Eternal Life, By JOHN M*L£OD 
CAMPBELL. Svo. cloth, 10«. 6d. 

COLEKSO.~Ten Weeks in Natal. A Journal of a First 

Tour of Visitation among the Colonists and Zulu Kafirs of Natal. By the 
Right Rev. JOHN WILLIAM COLENSO, D.D. Bishop of Natal, with * 
Map and Illustrations. Fcap. Svo. cloth, 5#. 

COLENSO.— An Ordination and Three Missionary Sermons. 

By the Right Rev. JOHN WILLIAM COLENSO, D.D. Bishop of NataL 
l8mo. 1«. 

COLENSO.— Village Sermons. By the Right Rev. JOHN WIL- 
LI am COLENSO, D.D. Bishop of Natal. Second Edition. Fcap. Svo. 
cloth, is. 6if. 

COLENSO.— The Commnnion Service, from the Book of 

Common-Prayer, with Select Readings firom the writings of the Kev. F. D. 
MAURICE, M. A. Edited by the Right Rev. JOHN WILLIAM COLENSO, 
D.D., Bishop of Natal. Fine Bditiont rubricated and bound in morocco* 
antique style, ts.; or in cloth, 2s. 6d. Common Paper, lymp cloth. Is. 

COOPER.— A Geometrical Treatise on Conic Sections. By 

, the Rev. J. £. COOPER, M.A. late Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. 

iPreparing. 

COTTON.— Sermons : chiefly connected with Public Events 

of 1854. By G. £. LYNCH COTTON, M.A. Master of Marlborough CoUege« 
formerly Fellow of Trinity Coll^[e, Cambridge. Fcap. Svo. cloth, St. 

DAVIES.— St Paul and Modem Thought : 

Remarks on some of the Views advanced in Professor Jowett's Commentary 
on St. PaoL By Rev, J. LL. DAVIES, M.A. Fellow of Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge, and Incumbent of St. Mark's, Whitechapel. Svo. 2s. 6d. 

DEMOSTHENES.— Demosthenes de Corona. 

The Greek Text, with English Notes. By BERNARD DRAKE, M.A. 
Fellow of King's Coll. Cambridge, Editor and Translator of the "EumenidM 
pf iBschylus." Crown Svo. cloth, 5s. 

At 



4 MACMtLLAN & CO.'S FUBUCATIONS. 

¦DEMOSTHENES.— Translation of Demosthenes on thi 

Crown. By J. P. NORRIS, M.A. Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge aoA 
one of Her Mi^esty's Inspector* of Schools. Crown Svo. doth, 8«. 

DRAKE.— Notes Explanatory and Critical on the Books of 

Jonah and Rosea. By WILLIAM DRAKE, M.A. late Fellow of St. Jobn'^ 
College, Cambridge. 8yo. cloth. 9t. 

EVANS.— Sonnets on the Death of the Duke of Wellington, 

by SEBASTIAN EVANS. 8yo. sewed, U. 

FERRAR.— Lives of Nicholas Ferrar, Fellow of Clare HalL 

By his BROTHER JOHN, and Dr. JEBB. Now first Edited, with lUua- 
trations, by J. £. B. MAYOR, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of SC 
John's College, Cambridge. Fcap. Svo. cloth, 7t. 6tf. 

FLOWERS OF THE FOREST.— A War Ballad for January 

1855. Bv M. A. H. Crown Svo. 6d. / 

FROST.— The First Three Sections of Newton's Principia. 

With Notes and Problems in illustration of the subject. By PERCIVAL 
FROST, M.A. late Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, and Mathe- 
matical Lecturer of Jesus College. Crown Svo. cloth, 10«. 6d, 

FROST.— Thncydides, Book VI. The &reek Text, and English 

Notes: with a Map of Syracuse. By PERCIVAL FROST, Jun. M.A. late 
Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. Svo. cloth, 7$. 6d. 

60DFRA7.— An Elementary Treatise on the Lunar Theory. 

With a brief Sketch of the History of the Problem up to the time of Newton. 
By HUGH GODFRAY, B.A. of S t. John's CoUege, Cambridge. Svo. cloth, 
5* . 6d. 

GOODWIN.— How Christ's Promises are folfiUed. 

A Farewell Sermon preached on the occasion of the departure of the Bishop 
of Natal, and the other members of the Natal Mission. By HARVEY 
GOODWIN, M. A., Minister of St. Edward's, and Hulsean Lecturer in the 
University of Cambridge. Svo. sewed. 1#. 

GRANT.— Plane Astronomy. 

Including Explanations of Celestial Phenomena, and Descriptions of Astrono* 
mical Instruments. By A. R. GRANT, M.A., one of Her Majesty's In- 
spectors of Schools, late Fellow of Trinity CoUege, Cambridge. Svo. boards, 6«. 

HALLIFAX.— Bishop Hallifax's Analysis of the Civil Law. In 

which a comparison is occasionally made between the Roman Laws and those 
of England. A new Edition, with alterations and additions, being the heads 
of a Course of Lectures publicly delivered in the University of Cambridge, by 
J. W. GELDART, LL.D. Svo. bds. Bt. 6(/.; interleaved, lOt. 6d,; double In- 
terleaved, ISs. 6d. 

HARE.— Charges to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Lewes, 

delivered at the Ordinary Visitations from the Year 1 840 to ] 854. With Not^ 
on the Principal Events affecting the Church during that period. By JULIUS 
CHARLES HARE, M.A. Archdeacon. With an Introduction, explanatory 
•f his position in the Church with reference to the parties which divide it. 
I vols. Svo. cloth, li. 11#. erf. 



1£ACMILLAN IfL CO;S PUBLICATIONS. ft 

HARE.— Charges to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Lewes, 

delivered at the Ordinary Visitations in the Years 1848, 1845, 1846. By 
JULIUS CHARLES HARE, M.A. Archdeacon. Never before published. 
With an Introduction, explanatory of his position in the Church with 
reference to the parties which divide it, 6«. 6d. 

BARE.— Miscellaneous Pamphlets on some of the Leading 

Questions agitated in the Church during the last Ten Years. 8vo. cloth, ]2«. 
*«-* As only a very small Edition of the Collected Pamphlets has been made 
up, an early application is requested. 

HARE.— The Victory qf Faith. 

Second Edittoa. 8vo. cloth, 5«. 

HARE.— The Mission of the Comforter. 

Second Edition. With Notes. 8vo. cloth, 12«. 

HARE.— Vindication of Lather from his English Assailants . 

Second Edition. 8vo. cloth, 7«. 

HARE.— The Contest with Rome. 

With Notes especially in answer to Dr. Newman's recent Lectures. Second 
EdlMon. 8vo. cloth, 10«. 6d, 

HARE.— Parish Sermons. 

Second Series. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 

HARE.— Portions of the Psalms in English Verse. 

Selected for Public Worship. ISmo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

HARDWICK— Christ and other Masters. 

An Historical Inquiry into some of the chief Parallelisms and Contrasts 
between Christianity and the Religious Systems of the Ancient World. With 
special reference to prevailing Difficulties and Objections. By CHARLES 
HARDWICK, M.A., Fellow of St. Catherine's Hall, Divinity Lecturer at 
King's College, and Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge. 
Pt. I. 8vo. cloth, 7s. ed. 

:pARDWICK— A History of the Christian Chnrch, daring the 

Middle Ages. By CHARLES HARDWICK, M.A. Fellow of St. Catha- 
rine's Hall, Divinity Lecturer in King's College, and Christian Advocate in 
the University of Cambridge. Author of '< A History of the XXXIX. 
Articles." With Four Maps constructed for this Work by. A. KEITH 
JOHNSTON. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10«. 6d. 

HARDWICK.— A History of tlie Christian Chnrch daring the 

Reformation. By CHARLES HARDWICK, M.A. Crown Svo. cloth, 
10s. 6d. 

*«* These two Books are part of a Series of Theological Manuals 

now in progress. 

HARDWICK.— Twenty Sermons for Town Congregations. By 

CHARLES HARDWICK, M.A. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. Gd. 



( MACMULAN & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

HARE.— Two Sermons preached in Herstanoncenz Clmreli^ 

on Septuagesima Sundfty, February 4, 1855, being the Sunday after the 
Funeral ofthe Venerable Arehdea<^on Hare. By the Rev. H. VENN ELLIOTT, 
Perpetual Curate of St. Mary's, Brighton, late Fellow of Trinity College, 
Cambridge, and the Key. J. N. SIMPKINSON, Rector of Biington, North- 
ampton, formerly Curate of Herstmonceux. * 8vo. 1«. M. 

HEMMING.— An Elementary Treatise on tlie Differential 

and Integral Calculus. For the Use of Colleges and Schools. By O. W. 
HEMMING, M.A. Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. Seeond 
Bdltlon^ with Corrections and Additions. 8to. doth, 9s. 

HEBVET.— The Genealogies of oar Lord and Saviour Jesna 

Christ, as contained in the Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Luke, reconciled 
with each other and with the Genealogy of the House of David, from Adam to 
the close of the Canon of the Old Testament, and shown to be in harmony with 
the true Chronology of the Times. By Lord ARTHXJR HERVEY, M.A. 
Rector of Ickwoith with Horringer. 8vo. cloth, 10«. 6d. 

HEBVE7.— The Inspiration of Holy Scripture. 

Five Sermons preached before the University of Cambridge, in the month of 
December 1855. 8vo. cloth, Si. 6d, 

HOWARD.— The Book of Genesis, according to the Version 

of the LXX. Translated Into English, with Notices of its Omissions and In- 
sertions, and with Noteion the Passages in which it diflfers from our Authorised 
Version. By the Hon. HENRY £. J. HOWARD, D.D. Dean of Lichfield. 
Crown 8vo. cloth, 8«. 6d, 

HOWES.— A History of the Christian Church dnring the First 

Six Centuries. By J. G. HOWES, M.A. Fellow of St. Peter's Coll. Camb. 

[Nearlif r€ad$* 
%• This is part of a Series of Theological Manuals now in progress. 

HULBEBT.— The Gospel Bevealed to Job: or Patriarchal 

Faith and Practice illustrated. By C. A. HULBERT, M.A. 8vo. cloth, lUk 

HUMPHBE7S.— Exercitationes lambicae; or, Frogresdve 

Exercises in Greek Iambic Verse. To which are prefixed, the Rules of Greek 
Prosody, with copious Notes and Illustrations of the Exercises. By E. R» 
HUMPHREYS, LL.D. Head Master of the Cheltenham Grammar School* 
Second Edition. Fcap. cloth, 5«. 6d. 

JEBEMIE.— Two Sermons Preached before the University 

of Cambridge, on April 26, 1854, and March 21, 1855, being the Daye 
appointed for General Humiliation and Prayer. By J. A. JEREMIE, D.D. 
Regius Professor of Divinity. 8vo. 2«. 

JEBEMIE.— Sermon preached before the University of Cam- 
bridge, on July 1st, 1855, on the occasion of the Death of Profsssob Blvvt. 
By J. A. JEREMIE, D.D. 8vo. sewed, 1«. 

JEWELL.— An Apology of the Church of England, and an 

Epistle to Seignior Scipio concerning the Council of Trent, translated from the 
original Latin, and illustrated with Notes, chiefly drawn firom the Author'* 
•« Defence of the Apology.** By A. T. RUSSELL. Fcp. 8vo. bds. 5a. 



MACMILLAK & CO.*S PUBUCATIONa. 7 

JUSTIN MARTTB.— S. Jastini Pliilosophi et MartyriB 

Apologia Prima. Edited, with a corrected Text, and English Introduction 
and explanatory Notes, by W. TROLLOPE, M.A» Pembroke College, Cam- 
bridge. 8to. bds. 7*. 6d. 

JUVENAL.— Juvenal : chiefly from the Text of Jahn. 

With English Notes for the Use of Schools. By J. £. B. MAYOR, M.A. 
Fellow and Classical Lecturer of St. John's College, Cambridge. Crown 8to. 
cloth, lOf. M, 

KENNEDY.— The Influence of Christianity upon Inter- 

national Law. The Hulsean Prixe Essay in the University of Cambridge for 
the year 1854. Crown 8to. cloth, 4«. 

KENGSLET— " Westward Ho !" or, the Voyages and Adven- 
tures of Sir Amyas Leigh, Knight, of Burrough, in the County of DeTon, in 
the Reign of Her Most Glorious M^esty Queen Elixabeth. By CHARLES 
KINGSLEY. Second Bdltion. 3 vols, crown 8vo. 1/. lU. 64. 

EIN6SLE7.— The Heroes: or, Greek Fairy Tales for my 

Children. With Eight Illustrations after Drawings by the Autiior. In 8to. 
beautiftilly printed on tinted paper, and elegantly bound in cloth, with gilt 
leaves, 7«. 6d, 

** If the public accept our recommendation, Mr. Kingsley's little book will run 
through many editions." — Guardidn, March 12, 1856. 

EIN6SLE7.— ^Glaucus ; or, the Wonders of the Shore. 

Second Bdltion* With a Frontispiece. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, St, 6d, 

EINGSLE7.— Alexandria and Her Schools : being Four Lec- 
tures delivered at the Philosophical Institution, Edinburgh. With a Preface. 
Crown 8vo. cloth, 5«. 

CINGSLET.— Phaethon ; or Loose Thoughts for Loose 

Thinkers. Second Bdltion. Crown 8vo. boards, 2«. 

LATHAM.— ^Geometrical Problems in the Properties of Conic 

Sections. By H. LATHAM, M.A. Fellow and Tutor of Trinity Hall. 8vo. 
sewed, it,M, 

LECTURES to Ladies on Practical Subjects. 

Delivered in London during the month of July, 1855, by the Rev. F. D. 
MAUl^ICE, Professor TRENCH. Archdeacon ALLEN. J. S. BREWER, 
J. LL. DAVIE8, CHARLES KINGSLEY, Dr. CHAMBERS, 
Dr. SIEVEKING, Dr. JOHNSON, TOM TAYLOR, Esq., and 
F. J. STEPHEN, Esq. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. Bd, 

LETTERS from Italy and Vienna. 

Small 8vo.. cloth, 5«. M, 



9 WLCmUJLtH k CO.'S POBIilCATIONS. 

LUND.— A Short and Easy Course of Algebra. 

Chiefly designed for the use of the Junior CiMses in Schools, with a nameroat 
colleetton of Original ea«y Exercises. By THOMAS LUND, B.D. late Fellow 
of St. John's College, Cambridge. Second Edition. 12mo. cloth, St. 6d, 

LUSHINGTON.— La Nation Boatiqni^re : and other Poems, 

chiefly Political. With a Preface. By the late HENRY LUSHIN6T0N» 
Chief Secretary to the Governor of Malta. Points Of War« By 
FRANKLIN LUSHINOTON, Judge in the Supreme Courts of the IodJmi 
Isles. In 1 vol. fcap. 8vo. clo^h. S*, 

MACKENZIE.— The Christian Clergy of the first Ten Cenr 

turies: their Influence on European Civilization. By HENRY MACKENZIE. 
B.A. formerly Scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s, 6d, 

MANSFIELD.— Letters from Brazil, Buenos Ayres, and 

Paraguay. With a Map. Edited firom the Author's MSS. With a Sketch 
of his Life. By the Rev. CHARLES KINGSLEY. iJttst ready. 

MANSFIELD.— On the Constitution of Salts. 

Edited from the Author's MS. by N. H. 8. MASKELYNE, M.A. Wadham 
College, and Reader in Mineralogy in the University of Oxford. [In the Preee, 

M COY." Freparing for Publication; to be completed in about Five PartSt 
price 5«. each, forming One Volume 8vo. of about 500 pages, vrith nearly 1,000 
illustrations in the text, drawn and engraved by the Author, 

A Manual of the Genera of British Fossils. 

, Comprising Systematic Descriptions of all the Classes, Orders, Families, and 
Genera of Fossil Animals found in the Strata of the British Isles ; with 
figures of all the Generic Types. By FREDERICK M'COY, F.G.S., Hon. 
F.C.P.S., Professor of Natural History in the University of Melbourne, Author 
of '* Characters of the Carboniferous Limestone Fossils of Ireland," " Synopsis 
of the Silurian Fossils of Ireland,*' one of the Authors of " Sedgwick and 
M'Coy's British Palieozoic Rocks and Fossils," &c. 

M'COY. — Preparing for Publication, in One Volume, crown Svo. with numerons 
Illustrations, 

An Elementary Introduction to the Study of FalsBontology. 

With numerous Figures illustrative of Structural Details. 
*«* This little Work is intended to supply all that elementary information on the 
Structure of Fossil Animals, with reference to the most nearly allied existing 
types, illustrated explanation of technical terms, &c. which the beginner may 
require, but which would be out of place in the Author's systematic voluma 
on the Genera. 

M'COY.— ^Contributions to British Palaeontology; or, First De* 

seriptions of several hundred Fossil Radiata, Articulata, Mollusca, and Pisces, 
firom the Tertiary, Cretaceous, Oolitic, and Palaosoic Strata of Great Britain. 
With numerous Woodcuts. Svo. cloth, 9$. 
*«* This forms a complete Series of the Author's Papers fh>m the '* Annals of 
Natural History." 

MASSON.— Essays, Biographical and Critical ; chiefly on the 

English Poets. By DAVID MASSON, M.A. professor of EngUsh 
Literature in University College, London. Svo. cloth, I2t, 6d. 



HACIOLLAN & CO.*S JPUBLICATIONS. 9 

MAURICE.— A Photograph Portrait of Rev. F. D. Maurice. 

4to. price 6«. 

MAURICE.— Lectures on the Ecclesiastical History of the 

First and Second Centuries. By FREDERICK DENISON MAURIC£» 
M.A. Chaplun of Lincoln's Inn. 8to. clotli> 10«. 6tf. 

MAURICE.— The Unity of the New Testament, being a 

Synopsis of, and Commentary on, the first three Gospels, and the Epistles of 
St. James, St. Jude, St. Peter, and St. Paul. 8vo. doth, Hi, 

MAURICE.— Patriarchs and Lawgivers of the Old Testament. 

Second Edition. With nev Preface. Crown Syo. cloth, 6*. 

MAURICE.— The Prophets and Kings of the Old Testament. 

Crown Svo. cloth. Second Edition. 10«. 6d, 

MAURICE.— Theological Essays. 

Second Edition^ with a new Preface and other additions. Crown Svo. 
cloth, 10«. 6d, 

MAURICE.— The Doctrine of Sacrifice deduced from the 

Scriptures. With a Dedicatory Letter to the Young Men's Christian Associa- 
tion. Crown 8ro. cloth, 7«. 6d, 

MAURICE.— Christmas Day, and other Sermons. 

tTO. cloth, 10«.6d. 

MAURICE.— The Religions of the World, and their relations 

to Christianity. Third Edition. Fcap. Svo. cloth, 5«. 

MAURICE.— The Prayer-Book considered, especially in rer 

forence to the Romish System. Second Editionj Foap. Svo. cloth, 5«. 6d, 

MAURICE.— The Church a Family. Twelve Sermons on the 

OiCcasional Services of the Prayer-Book. Fcap. Svo. cloth, 4«. 6d, 

MAURICE.— On the Lord's Prayer. 

Third Edition. Fcap. Svo. cloth, 2«. 6d. 

MAURICE.— On the Sabbath Day: the Character of the 

Warrior; and on the Interpretation of History. Fcap. Svo. cloth, 2i. 6tf, 

MAURICE.— Learning and Working.— Six Lectures delivered 

in Willis's Rooms, London, in June and July, 1854. The Reli^On Of 
Rome, and its influence on Modem CiTilisation.— Four Lec- 
tures delivered in the Philosophical Institution of Edinburgh, in December 
1854. In One Volume, Crown Svo. cloth. 5«. 

MAURICE.— An Essay on Eternal Life and Eternal Deathi 

and the Preface to the new Edition of " Theological Essays." Crown Svo. 
sewed, U. 6d. 

*«* Published separately for the purchasers <3f the first edition. 

MAURICE.— Death and Life. A Sermon Preached in tiie 

Chapel of Lincoln's Inn, March 25, 1855. Jn filnmUm <K(. B. IS. Svo. 
lewed, U, 



10 HACHILLAN ft CO.*S VUBLICATIOKS. 

MAURICE.— Plan of a Female College for the Help of thd 

Rich and of the Poor. A Lecture delivered at the Working Men'a College, 
London, to a Clasi of Ladies. 8vo. 6tf. 

MAUBICE.— Administrative Reform. 

A Lecture deliyered at the Working Men't College, London. Crown Sto. Sd. 

MAURICE.— The Word "Eternal," and the Prmishment of 

the Wicke^. A Letter to the Rev. Dr. Jelf, Prfaicipal of King's College. 
London. Fiflh Thousand. 8vo. U, 

MAURICE.— The Name "Protestant:" the Seemingly Double 

Character of the English Church; and the English Bishopric at Jerusalem. 
Three Letters to the Rev. Wm. Palmer, Fellow and Tutor of Magdalen 
College, Oxford. Second Bdltion. 8vo. 8f. 

MAURICE.— On Right and Wrong Methods of Sapportiiig 

Protestantism. A Letter to Lord Ashlejr. 8vo. U, 

MAURICE.— Thoughts on the Duty of a Protestant, in the 

Oxford Election of 1847. 8vo. U, 

MAURICE.— The Case of Queen's College, London. 

A Letter to the Lord Bishop of London, in reply to the '< Quarterly Review." 
8vo. 1«. dd, 

MAURICE.— Lectures on Modem History and English 

Literature. [JVspaHiif. 

MAURICE.— Law's Remarks on the Fable of the Bees, witii 

an Introduction of Eighty Pages by FREDERICK DENISON MAURICE, 
M.A. Chaplain of Lincoln's Inn. Fcp. 8vo. eloth, 4«. Bd. 
••This Introduetion diseuHes the' Relifious. PoliUe&l, Social, and Ethical Theories of ear 

dajr, and shows the special worth of Law's method* and how far It Is applieable to onr eir- 

cumstanees.** 

MINUCIUS FELIX.— The Octavius of Minncius Felix. 

Translated into English by LORD HAILES. Fcp. 8vo. eloth, U. M. 

NAHER.— Lord Bacon and Sir Walter Raleigh. 

Critical and Biographical Essays. By MACYET NAPIER, late Editoi 
of the Xdit^urgk Rwiew and of the Sneyclopadia Briiannica, Post 8vo. 
cloth, 7«. 6d, 

NIND.-Sonnets of Cambridge Life. By Rev. W. NIND, M JL 

Fellov of St. Peter's College. Post 8vo. boards, U. 

NIND.— the German Lyrist; or, Metrical Versions from the 

principal German Lyric Poets. By Rev. W. NIND, Fellov of St. Peter's 
College. Crown 8vo. cloth, 3«. 

NORRIS.— Ten School-Room Addresses. 

Edited by J. P. NORRIS, m'.A. Fellow of Trinity College, and on« of Her 
llajesty's Inspectors of Schools. 18mo. sewed, 8^ . 



HACMILLiN k OO.'S FT7BLICATI0NS. II 

PARKINSON.— A Treatise on Elementaiy Mechanics. 

For the Use of the Junior Classes at the University, and the Higher Classes in 
Schools. With a collection of Examples. By S. PARKINSON, M.A. Fellow 
and Assistant Tutor of St. John's College, Cambridge. Crown 8to. doth, 9». 6d, 

FABMINTER.— Materials for a Grammar of the Modem 

English Language. Designed as a Text-book of Classical Grammar for the 
use of Training Colleges, and the Higher Classes of English Schools. By 
GEORGE HENRY PARMINTER, of Trinity CoUege, Cambridge; Rector 
of the United Parishes of SS. John and George, Exeter. Fcap. 8to. clotb| S«. 6tf . 

PAYN.— Poems. 

By JAMES PATN. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 5«. 

PEACE IN WAR. Jfn fiSUmntiam H. H. 

Crown 8vo. sewed, U, 

PEARSON.— Elements of the Calcnlas of Finite Differences, 

treated on the Method of the Separation of Symbols. By J. PEARSON, M.A. 
Rector of St. Edmund's, Norwich, Mathematical Master of Norwich Grammar 
School, and formerly Scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge. Second 
Bditioiij enlarged. 8yo. 5«. 

PEROWNE.-" Al-Ac(Jrumileh." 

An Elementary Arabic Grammar, with a Translation. By J. J. S. PEROWNE, 
M.A. Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and Lecturer in Hebrew 
in King's College, London. 8to. cloth, 5«. 

PERR7.— Five Sermons Preached before the University of 

Cambridge, in November 1855. By the Right Rev. CHARLES PERRY, 
Lord Bishop of Melbourne, formerly Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College, 
Cambridge. Crown 8vo. cloth, S«. 

PHEAR.— Elementary Mechanics. 

Accompanie4 by numerous E^xamples solved Geometrically. By J. B. 
PHEAR, M. A., Fellow and Mathematical Lecturer of Clare Hall, Cambridge. 
8vo. cloth, 10<. 6d, 

PHEAR.— Elementary Hydrostatics. 

Aocompanied by numerous Examples. Crown 8to. cloth, 5«. 64. 

PLATO.~The Republic of Plato. 

Translated into English, with Notes. By Two Fellows of Trinity College, 
Cambridge, (J. LI. Davies M.A., and D. J. Yaughan, M.A.) Crown 8vo. 
eloth, 7«. 6d. 

POWELL.— The Scriptoral Doctrine of the Influence of the 

Holy Ghost, as Illustrated by the Analogy of Nature. The Barney Prise Essay 
for the year 1858. 8yo. sewed, 2«. M, 



U ILLCHILLAN ft Oa'S FUBLIGATIONS. 

PRATT.— The Mathematical Principles of MechanicaT 

FhUoBopby. By J. H. PRATT, M.A., Fellov of Caius College. 
*»* The above work is now out of Print: but the Part on STATICS has been r«- 
edited by Mr, Todhunter, with numerous alterations and additions: the Port on 
DYNAMICS, by Messrs. Tait and Steele, is just published. The other parts will be 
published in separate forms, improved and altered as may seem needful. 

PRINCIPLES of ETHICS according to the NEW TESTA- 
MENT. Croim Svo. 2s, 

PROCTER.— A History of the Book of Common Prayer: with 

a Rationale of its Offices. By FRANCIS PROCTER, M.A., Vicar of Witton« 
Norfolk, and late Fellov of St. Catharine Hall. Crown Svo. cloth, 10«. 6d. 

*«* This is part of a series of Theological Manuals, now in progress. 

PUCELE.— An Elementary Treatise on Conic Sections and 

Algebraic Geometry. With a numerous collection of Easy Examples pro- 
gressively arranged, especially designed for the use of Schools and Beginners. 
By G. HALE PUCKLE, M.A., St. John's College, Cambridge; Principal of 
Windermere College. Crown Svo. cloth, 7s. 6d% 

PURTON.— The Acts of the Apostles. 

With a Paraphrase and Exegetical Commentary. By JOHN SMYTH 
PURTON, M.A. Fellow and Tutor of St. Catherine's Hall, Cambridge. Svo. 

JiPreparing. 

RAMSA7.— The Catechiser's Manual; or, the Church Cate- 
chism illustrated and explained, for the use of Clergymen, Sehoolmastera, 
and Teachers. By ARTHUR RAMSAY, M.A. of Trinity CoUeg^, 
Cambridge. 18mo, doth, 3s. 6d, 

REICHEL.— The Lord's Prayer and other Sermons. 

By C. P. REICHEL, B.D., Professor of Latin in the Queen's University; 
Chaplain to his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland ; and late Douo 
nellan Lecturer in the University of Dublin. Crown Svo. cloth, 7s, Gd. 

ROBINSON.— Missions urged upon the State on grounds 

both of Duty and Policy. An Essay which obtained the Maitland Prise in 
the year 1852. By C. K. ROBINSON, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of 
St. Catharine's Hall, Cambridge. Fcp. Svo. cloth, Ss, 

ROSE (Henry John).— An Exposition of the Articles of the 

Church of England. By HENRY JOHN ROSE, B.D. late Fellow of St. 
John's College, and Hulsean Lecturer in the University of Cambridge. 

[Preparing, 
*ii* This is part of a Series of Theological Manuals now in progress. 

SALLUST.-Sallust. 

The Latin Text, with English Notes. By CHARLES MERIVALB, B.D., 
late Fellow and Tutor of St. John's College, Cambridge, See., Author of « 
** History of Rome," &c. Crown 8vo* cloth, 5s, 



KACVrULAN h 00.'§ FXTfiLICATIONS. IS 

vSEDOWICE AND M'COT'S British Palsozoic FossUs. 

Fart I. 4to. seved, 16«. 

-—-—-—--------— ————--^-¦^-— —^^———- Part II. 4to. sewed, 10*. 

' Part III, completing the 

work, 16«. just ready. 

*«* Thx wholx bouvd XV Two Vols., ito. cloth, £2 2«. 

SELWYN — The Work of Christ in the World. Pour Sermons, 

preached before the University of Cambridge, on the four Sundays preceding 
Advent in the year of our Lord 1854. By the Right Rev. GEORGE 
AUGUSTUS SELWYN, D.D. Bishop of New Zealand, formerly Fellow of 
St. John's College. Third Bdition. Crown 8vo. 2«. 

SELWYN.— A Verbal Analysis of the Holy Bible. 

Intended to facilitate the translation of the Holy Scriptures into Foreign 
Languages. Compiled by THE BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND, for the use 
of the Melanesian Mission. Small folio, cloth, 14«. 

SIMPSON.— An Epitome of the History of the Christian 

Church during the first Three Centuries and during the Time of the Refor- 
mation, adapted for the use of Students in the Universities and in Schools. 
By WILLIAM SIMPSON, M.A. With Examination Questions. Second 
Bdltlon^ Improved. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 6». 

SMITH.— Arithmetic and Algebra, in their Principles and 

Application: with numerous systematically arranged Examples, taken from 
the Cambridge Examination Papers. With especial reference to the ordinary 
Examination for B. A. Degree. By BARNARD SMITH, M.A., Fellow of St. 
Peter's College, Cambridge. Third Edition, enlarged and revised 
throughout. Crown 8vo. cloth j IOa. 6d, 

SMITH.— Arithmetic for the use of Schools. By BARNARD 

SMITH, M.A. Fellow of St. Peter's College. Third Thonaand| with 
Additions. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4m. 6d. 

*^* This has been published in accordance with yery numeroun requests firom 
Schoolmasters and Inspectors of Schools. It comprises a complete reprint of the 
Arithmetic from Mr. Smith's larger work, with such alterations as were necessary 
In separating it Arom the Algebra, and references throughout to the Decimal System 
of Coinage, 

SMITH.— A Key to Mr. Smith's Arithmetic for Schools. 

Crown 8vo. cloth, 8e. 6d. 

SMITH.— Mechanics and Hydrostatics, in their Principles 

and Application : with numerous systematically arranged Examples, taken 
from the Cambridge Examination Papers. With a speciid reference to the 
Ordinary Examination for B.A. Degree. By BARNARD SMITH, M.A. 
Fellow of St. Peter's College, Cambridge. {Pr^aring, 

SNOWBALL.— The Elements of Plane and Spherical 

Trigonometry. Greatly improved and enlarged. By J. C. SNOWBALL, M.A. 
Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. Eiffhth Bdition, with Additions 
and Improvements* Crown 8vo. cloth, 7t. 64» 



U HAdOLLiN & 00.*S PUBLICATIONS. 

SWAINSON.— A Hand Book to Butler's Analogy. 

With a few Notes. By C. A. SWAINSON, M.A. Principal of the Chichester 
Theological College, formeriy FeUow and Tutor of Christ's College, Cam- 
bridge, and Preacher at Whitehall. Crown 8to. U. Bd, 

TAIT and STEELE.— A Treatise on Dynamics, with nume- 
rous Examples. By P. O. TAIT, Fellow of St. Peter's College, and Professor 
of Mathematics in Queen's College, Belfast, and W. J. STEELE, FeUow of 
St. Peter's College. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10«. 6d, {Just readg. 

This is a new Edition of that part of Pratt's Mechanical Philosophy which 
treats of Dynamics, with large additions and improvements. 

TAYLOR.— The Restoration of Belief. 

By ISAAC TAYLOR. Crown 8to. cloth, 8«. 6d, 

CoHTCMTS. I. — Christianity in relation to its Ancient and Modem Anta- 
gonists, , II. — On the Supernatural Element contained in the Epistles, 
and its bearing on the argument. III. — The Miracles of the Gospels con« 
sidered In their relation to the principal features of the Christian Scheme. 

THEOCRITUS.— Theocritus. 

The Greek Text, with English notes, Critical an Explanatory, for the use of 
CoUeges and Schools. By £. H. PEROWNE, M.A., Fellow of Corpni 
Christi College. Crown 8to. [Preparitig* 

THEOLOaiGAL Manuals. 

Just published :— 

CHURCH HISTORY : THE MIDDLE AGES. By CHARLES HARD- 
WICK. With Four Maps. Crown 8vo. cloth, price 10«. 6d. 

THE COMMON PRAYER : ITS HISTORY AND RATIONALE. By 
FRANCIS PROCTER. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10«. Bd. 

A HISTORY OF THE CANON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. By 
B. F. WESTCOTT. Crown 8vo. elotll^ 12«. Bd, 

CHURCH HISTORY: THE REFORMATION. By CHARLES HARD- 
WICK. Crown 8to. cloth, 10<. Bd. 

The following will shortly appear:— 
INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 
NOTES ON ISAIAH. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THE GOSPELS. 

EPISTLES, 

NOTES ON THE GOSPELS AND ACTS. 

EPISTLES AND APOCALYPSE. 
CHURCH HISTORY, THE FIRST SIX CENTURIES. 

17TK CENTURY TO THE PRESENT TIME. 

THE THREE CREEDS. 

THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES. 

*«* Others are in progress, and will be annmmced in due time. 

THRING.— A Constming Book. 

CompUed by the Rev. EDWARD THRING, M.A. late Fellow of King*! 
College, Cambridge, and Head Master of Uppingham School. Fcap. 8to. 
doth, %t, Bd. 



i 



tf ACHniiAN & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS* 15 

THBING.— The Elements of Orammar taught in English. 

By EDWARD THBINO, M.A. Head Master of the Royal Orammar 
School, Uppingham ; late Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. Second 
Bdition. 18mo. bound in cloth, 2«. 

THRING.—The Child's Grammar. 

Being the substance of the above, with Examples for Practice. Adapted for 
Junior Classes. A NttW Bdition. 18mo. lymp cloth, 1«. 

THBUPP.— Psalms and Hymns for Public Worship. Selected 

and Edited by JOSEPH FRANCIS THRUPP, M.A. Vicar of Barrington, late 
Fellow of Trinity College. 18mo. cloth, 2«. Second paper in lymp cloth, UAtU 

THBUPP.— Antient Jemsalem: a New Investigation into the 

History, Topography, and Plan of the City, Environs, and Temple. Designed 
principally to illustrate the records and prophecies of Scripture. With Map 
and Plans. By JOSEPH FRANCIS THRUPP, M.A. Vicar of Barrington, 
Cambridge, late Fellow of Trinity College. 8vo. cloth, 15s. 

TODHUNTER.— A Treatise on the Differential Calculus ; and 

the Elements of the Integral Calculus. With numerous Examples. By 
I. TODHUNTER, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of St. John's College, Cambridge. 
Second Bdition. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10«. 6d, 

TODHUNTER. — A Treatise on Analytical Statics, with 

numerous Examples. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10«. M. 

TODHUNTER.— A Treatise on Conic Sections. With 

numerous Examples* For the Use of Colleges and Schools. Crown 8vo. 
cloth, ]0«. 6tf. 

TODHUNTER.— A Treatise on Algebra, for the Use of 

students in the Universities, and of the Higher Classes in Schools, IPrep, 

A ho by the same Author, 

An Elementary Work on the same subject, for the use of 

Beginners. 

TRENCH.— Synonyms of the New Testament 

By RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH, B.D., Vicar of Itchenstohe, Hants, 
Professor of Divinity, King's College, London, and Examining Chaplain to 
the Bishop of Oxford. Third Edition, revised. Pop. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 

TRENCH.— Hulsean Lectures for 1845-46. 

CoMTXMTs. 1.— The Fitness of Holy Scripture for unfolding the Spiritual Life 
of Man. 2. — Christ the Desire of all Nations ; or the Unconscious Pro> 
phecies of Heathendom. Third Edition. Foolscap 8vo. cloth, 5». 

For VERIFYING DATES. 

A perpetual Almanac for determining Dates past, present, and future; with 
a Lunar Kalendar and Tables of the more important Periods, JEna, Festivals, 
and Anniversaries. Price 6d, 
•» * This is so printed, that if the margin be cut off it may be carried in a pocket-book. 

WATERS OF COMFORT.— A SmaU Volume of Devotional 

Poetry of a Practical Character. By the Author of •* Visiting my Relations." 
Fcap. 9vo§ cloth, 4«, 