HANDBOOK OF LOGIC. 



ADAPTED SPECIALLY 



FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS. 



BY 



J. D. MORELL, A.M. 

OKI OT HER UAJIBSTY'S nrSPBCTOBS OF SCHOOLS. 



SECOND EDITION. 



LONDON: 
ONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, & ROBERTS. 

1857. 



j^4^.^. y^. 



LONDOW: 

Printed by Spottihwoopb k Co, 
New-«treetSqaare. 



PREFACE. 



Thbre can be no doubt, I think, that the whole system of 
English Education has hitherto been greatly wanting in the 
sound development of the powers of ahatract thinking. The 
proper road, nevertheless, to the cultivation of these powers 
appears to me to be very simple. The natural introduction into 
the whole region of the abstract, is undoubtedly an intelligent 
study of grammar : for grammar is the science of language, and 
language shows the natural mode in which we generalise our 
sensations and ideas. Affcer the principles of grammar have 
been well understood, the laws of thought, which are spontane- 
ously involved in language, should be studied more scientificatty : 
and to do this we want a simple introduction to Logic, After 
Logic, the next step should be an elementary treatise on the 
human mind, viewed in relation both to the teacher and the 
taught 

This, then, is the plan of an elementary discipline which has 
been for some time before my mind, and whidh I have now 
partly realised. The ** Essentials of English Grammar** was 
intended to be a simple introduction to the study of granmiar 
generally ; and, consequently, is adapted rather to explain prin- 
ciples, than to enter into all the minutiae of the English Lan- 
guage. Next, ** The Analysis of Sentences ** was intended to 
go somewhat further than English Grammar ordinarily has done, 
in this country, into the general structure of language, as an 
organ of thought. This end, I trust, it has accomplished ; and 
I am pleased here to record my satisfaction at the large amount 
of interest which has already become manifested in the method 
of study there expounded. 

A 2 



IV PREFACi:* 

I now offer the present little work as one farther contrihntion 
to my general plan. The object of a brief coarse of Logic is, to 
exercise the intellectual factdtieSj to accustom them to abstract 
processes, and to giye some idea of the general laws of thought. 
In doing so, I have followed, with the excisption of the introduce 
tion, the usual Aristotelian road ; belieying, as I do, that even if the 
system of Aristotle be capable of gr&at simplification (which no 
doubt it is), yet there will be both a good exercise of the intel- 
lect, as well as some historical interest, in treading along this 
oldpathf which was so diligently beaten by our forefathers in the 
middle ages. The mode of presenting the subject however will, 
I hope, be found here much simplified. As to the illustrations 
and exercises, I have partly made them myself, and partly culled 
them from other books on Formal Logic. The student will 
find, in going steadily through this Handbook, every thing 
essential to the subject ; but if his cariosity leads him to go a 
little further in the same direction, he might study Archbishop 
Whately's excellent treatise, and then the Port Royal Logic, as 
translated by Mr. Baynes of Edinburgh. At any rate I should 
strongly recommend every student to work all the exercises 
given at the end of the book, as he proceeds ; for it is only by 
making such attempts for himself, that he can possibly derive 
much mental discipline from the study of the subject. 

If I can spare sufficient time from my official duties, I hope, 
one of these days, to complete my plan in the form of an Ele- 
mentary Psychology, viewed expressly in reference to Education. 

J. D. MORELL. 
June, 1857. 



ELEMENTS OF LOGIC. 



PRELIMINARY EXPLANATIONS. 

# 

L 

All our knowledge begins, in the order of time, with 
the exercise of the senses. When any part of the ner- 
vous system is affected, and a feeling is produced, of 
which the mind is conscious, such feeling is termed a 
sensation* Sensation does not imply any knowledge 
of the external object affecting us, — not even of its 
existence ; it is confined wholly to the oonsciousness 
of the internal impression. 

2. 

If our mental life consisted merely in the conscious^ 
ness of successive impressions, there would be no unity 
or connexion in it. Very soon, accordingly, in the 
order of the mind's growth, the sensations experienced 
begin to cluster round a central point to which they all 
alike stand related. This central point we term self- 
consciousness ;^\t is the instinctive feeling we possess, 
that all our sensational impressions belong to one sub' 
ject, which we afterwards term self, or the me. 

3. 

With the rise of self-consciousness there is deve- 
loped, contemporaneously, the consciousness of an 

A 3 



I , 

ir 

'I 

I 



I 



external world, — of its primary qualities, and its per- 
petual changes. ' This power, which the mind possesses, 
of passing from the inward feeling to the external 
object producing it, is termed Perception, 

The neuter verb •* I feel '* (strangely), corresponds with a «cti- 
sation ; the active verb ** I feel " (the table), corresponds with 
an act of perception. 

4. 

Perception, — or as it is sometimes termed intuition, 
— is the primary form of human knowledge, that 
which arises from the first direct action of the world 

J without upon the mental factilties. It is by perception 

or intuition, that we come to know the properties of 
matter as they exist in time and space — extension, 
size, resistance, motion, &c. ; and it is by a similar 
I intuitive process, that on the presentation of the proper 

external conditions, we experience the^r^^ elementary 
consciousness of beauty, proportion, harmony, right, 
and reverence. 

All the elements of human knowledge, in fact, exist 
primarily in the form of intuition, before they are 
brought into a more definite state by the processes we 
have yet to explain. 

5. 

The very same effort which leads the mind to per- 
ceive objects external to itself, leads it also to grasp 
them with the greatest possible degree of clearness. 
This efibrt is called attention. 

In directing our attention to an outward phenome- 
non, we pass by the minor points, and seizing naturally 
I'll upon the most striking features of it, retain them with 

more than ordinary distinctness before our view, Thus 
the mind, by virtue of its own activity, constructs a 
new and peculiar aspect of this phenomenon, and by 
so doing prepares the way, as we shall see, for another 
"^erj important process in our mental history. 



\ 



6. 

The more free and active the mind is in performing 
any operation, the more permanent is the result. In 
sensation the mind is least free (or spontaneous) ; and 
consequently we cannot recall a purely sensational im- 
pression with any thing approaching its original inten- 
sity. In perception the mind is more free than 
in sensation ;• and consequently our intuitions can be 
much more perfectly reproduced than our sensations. 
When, however, the mind has had its attention ener- 
getically directed to a phenomenon, when it has seized 
upon the prominent features and constructed a peculiar 
point of view for itself, the idea of it thus formed may 
return with almost the same vividness, with which it 
was first experienced in the presence of the object 
itself. This reproduction we term Memory. 

7. 

In sensation we experience internally a feeling pro- 
duced by some affection of the nervous system. In 
perception we interpret this feeling, and attribute it to 
the object with which we stand, as it were, face to face. 
In attention, we idealise this object by letting the un- 
important features disappear, and by seizing the more 
prominent points of view. Lastly, in memory we rc- 
peat this act of attention when the object is no longer 
present, and thus make an internal representation of 
it to ourselves. This we term a Representative Idea. 

8. 

When we store up a number of these ideas in the 
mind, disconnect them from the external phenomena, 
from which they first took their rise, and then recom- 
bine them into new forms or images, we are said to be 
exercising the imagination. The order in which the 
ideas come and go (the one calling up or suggesting 
the other), depends upon what are termed the Laws of 
Association. 

A 4 



8 



9. 



All the processed we have hitherto described nkay 
go on without the aid of Language.. Our intuitions 
are felt or experienced internally, but they can never 
be adequately expressed. No words can convey to any 
one the full realisation of an object which he has never 
seen. For the same reason memory and imagination 
(as dealing with the elements of our actual experiences) 
lie partially beyond the range of language also. In 
consequence of this the mental images we experience 
in the processes of memory and imaginationy are inde- 
finite and variable^ — merging often, like dissolving 
views, one into the other, just as we often realise them 
in our dreams. It is only when they are embodied in 
* an external sign^ that they first heeome fixed, are held 
clearly apart, and are thus raised above the fluctuations 
of our inward and more individual experiences. 

10. 

When the mind has once created Language, as the 
objective embodiment of its ideas^ it possesses an organ 
by means of which it can proceed to a range of far 
higher intellectual processes than would have been 
possible without it. Every object which we contem- 
plate externally presents to us a cluster of qualities, 
constituting the entire phenomenon that we term a 
thing. We have already seen, that in the process of 
attention, the minor features of such phenomena dis- 
appear, so that we grasp only the more prominent 
points. Now it may so happen, that a great number 
of different things all agree in alike possessing these 
prominent features, on which the attention has become 
fixed. 

Thus all the different kinds of trees are alike distinguished 
by the possession of trunk, branches, leaves, roots, &c., however 
different in other respects. 

Passing by, therefore, their numerous differences, we 



£nd that they all unite in one general representation. 
If the general representation then be in each case fixed, 
and designated by a sign, it will soon become evident 
that the very same term may be equally well applied to 
a great number of individual existences ; that it will 
express what is alike essential to them all ; and that 
it may be henceforth used as the common sign for the 
entire class. This process is termed Generalisation, 

11. 

By a slight variation of the process, we may separate 
any given quality from a number of difierent objects. 
This quality, when thus separated, viewed apart from 
the several objects to which it belongs, and fixed by a 
term,' becomes what we call an abstract idea. The 
process of forming it is then called Abstraction. 

12. 

Having arrived, then, so far, the mind can banish, at 
will, the whole concrete world, with its various images 
and impulses, from the consciousness, and occupy itself 
for a time only with abstractions and generalisations 
as exhibited in words. The mental faculty which deals 
thus with abstract and general ideas, fixes their pre- 
cise meaning, ranges them one over the other in the 
order of their generality^ classifies our knowledge 
under them into definite heads, forms them into pro- 
positions, and draws conclusions from one set of pro- 
positions to another, is called the Understanding. 

13. 

The Understanding proceeds according to certain 
fixed laws, termed the laws of Thought The region 
of our intuitions and of our representative ideas is not 
pervaded by any fixed and absolute laws whatever. 
Much depends in their case on the peculiar constitution 
of the individual mind, and the circumstances in which 
it is placed. The succession of our ideas and the com- 



I 

I 



10 

bination of them into new forms is, we know, to 
great extent arbitrary. Once, however, project the; 
images out of ourselves, — objectify them — emboc 
them in terms which are adequately defined by the 
relation to other terms, and the whole process becom 
subject to definite laws, which the mind is constrain< 
to look upon as absolute. 

14. 

The absoluteness of the laws of thought flows fro 
the very nature of the processes of abstraction ar 
generalisation. In a pure generalisation we sink i 
reference to the intuitions out of which it has be< 
elaborated, and consider the designating term only : 
reference to the other terms which it includes under : 
Thus the word Eagle is used in Natural History 
designate a certain class of birds, including some ar 
excluding otiiers. The meaning of it is wholly dete 
mined by the enumeration of certain qualities. Tl 
abstract idea therefore conveyed by the term Eagle 
definitely fixed by the understanding, though we m? 
have no experience whatever of the thing itself, Ar 
every general term, in like manner, looked at apa 
from any actual experience of the thing, must 1 
reckoned as a sign standing in a given quantitati' 
relation to other signs. 

To investigate these relations is simply performir 
a species of calculation, with words as our cipher 
Language gives us the ciphers ready formed, and h: 
already partially determined, by use, how they shou 
! stand in the order of generality. All we have to d 

II then, is to calculate the precise relations, we m£ 

require to know as existing between any two or mo: 
terms, that language supplies, and thus to make the 
/ti perfectly clear to our comprehension. In this w£ 

our knowledge, so far as it reaches, is rendered precis 
definite^ and explicit. The fixed principles accordir 
to which we are necessarily led to classify our kno> 



11 

ledge in the order of generality, and carry on all com- 
municatioH between mind and mind through the means 
of ideas thus arranged;* are what we mean by the laws 
of thought. 

15. 

The purport of Logic, then, is to investigate these 
fixed laws of thought; to show us the principles hy 
which our understanding is governed ; and to guard 
us in this way against all possible fallacies in rea^ 
soning. 

The above psychological explanations give us a clear deter- 
mination of the real province of Logic properly so called. 
They show us — 

1. That Logic has to do only with the ybrmo/ laws of thinking j 
and takes no cognisance of the truth or falsehood of the ideas 
themselves. 

2. That Logic only investigates the laws of thoughts as em- 
bodied and represented in language; for it is only by means of 
language that the understanding, properly so called, can operate 
at all Hence the philosophic truthfulness of the double meaning 
attached to the Greek term Xoyos. 

3. That Logic is a science and not an art ; investigating a 
system of fixed laws ; and thus influencing the mind as a disci^ 
pline, rather than teaching it a craft 

4. That Logic is the most abstract of the Sciences ; as having 
nothing to do with the matter, but only with the forms of our 
thoughts. 

16. 

DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT. 

Our exposition of the subject will fall under four 
heads. ** 

I. On Concepts and Terms, 
ir. On Propositions. 

III. On Reasoning. 

IV. On Fallacies. 



12 



I. ON CONCEPTS AND TERMS. 

17. 

It has been already shown that the laws of thought 
all flow from the very nature of the processes of ab- 
straction and generalisation. When an abstract or a 
generalised idea has been formed in the mind, we call 
it a Concept; and when expressed by an outward sign, 
we call it a Term, Our next duty, then, will be to 
explain what Logic has to teach us in reference to 
concepts ; since much will henceforth depend upon a 
proper understanding of them. 

This branch of Logic has been usually termed, the doctrine 
of simple apprehension. This expression, we consider, is open 
to objection. We apprehend things in various ways — by 
perception, by the imagination, by the reason, etc., whereas in 
Logic we have only to do with the apprehension of generalised 
and abstract ideas in the understanding. The word concept 
exactly answers to this latter signification ; — it is a single idea 
in which a number of particulars are held together. The ex- 
pression, moreover, was often used by the old English writers, 
only written conceit instead of concept; and it has more recently 
been brought anew into use by Sir W. Hamilton. 

18. 
THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF CONCEPTS. 

This has been partly explained already in describing 
the processes of abstraction and generalisation. The 
mind, we will suppose, has stored up a vast variety of 
images, or ideas, formed from its actual perceptions. 
Amongst these ideas, it finds a number, which possess 
certain resemblances to each other. By confining our 
attention to these points of resemblance, and neglecting 
every thing else, we form one general idea, which in- 
cludes in it all the given individuals. This general 
idea is what we term a concept; which, it will be seen, 
is merely an ideal whole formed in order the more 
conveniently to classify our knowledge ; t. e. to gather 
up the details of it under certain general heads. 



13 

The function of a concept, therefore, is to give us 
not a full, but only a partial or inadequate knowledge 
of the things to which it relates. It is indicated by 
a mark. or sign, which designates indeed a certain 
number of individuals, but does so only in so far as 
they agree in some common point of resemblance. It 
exists, therefore, as a unity, only in thought^ and not 
at all in nature. 

For Example, We gain by perception a great number of 
experiences respecting Birds^ of all sizes, shapes, and colours. 
In all these experiences we seize upon a certain common re- 
semblance — and designate the general idea thus formed by the 
term Bird, 

Bird, therefore, as thought by us, is a concept, holding within 
its meaning a certain number of individuals ; or, regarded ver- 
bally, it is a mark, connoting certain other marks with it. 

It is also a purely ideal creation, having nothing answering 
to it in nature, as a whole; but is simply created by the mind 
out of the different experiences, to which it has a common 
reference. 

Once more, it conveys only an inadequate knowledge of the 
things themselves ; for it marks only the common property of 
Birds, and neglects all the other details respecting them. 

Its use is finally to classify our knowledge, and prevent the 
necessity of infinite detail in the employment of terms, and in the 
expression of our thoughts. 

19. 

CLASSIFICATION OF TERMS. 

Terms are divided into two great classes, the one 
called singular, the other universal, 

A singular term is one which is applied only to one 
thing ; that is, which only marks an individual : as, 
Julius Caesar ; the Queen of England. Such a term 
is really abstract in its character, since it does not 
mark any one given experience, but denotes a ge- 
neral idea of the individual object, formed out of all 
the detailed experiences which we hare had respect- 
ing it. 

A universal term is one which can he ^^^Vis.^ \.^ 



14 

several things in the same sense: as, man; horse; 
tree. 

Various other classifications of abstract terms have been made 
which are not of sufficient importance to the science of liOgic to 
claim any special attention. 

Thus, terms have been divided into 

1 . Substantives = Nouns. 

2. Attributives » Adjectives. 

Again into 

1. Concrete « viewed in connexion with the individual 
object 

2. Abstract = viewed apart from such connexion. 

Again into 

1 . Positive = denoting a reality. 

2. Negative 8= denoting the a6«enre of reality. 

Again into 

1. Definite = marking oat the precise object 

2. Indefinite = not marking out the precise object 

Cum multis aliis. 

20. 
EXTENSION AND COMPREHENSION. 

The process of Generalisation may proceed only to 
a very small degree, and thus form a concept, having 
a very few objects noted under it ; or it may proceed 
to a very high degree, and include an immense number 
of objects all united into one concept, by extremely 
general resemblances. 

Thus the term Englishman is less general than 
European ; European less general than Man ; Man 
less general than Animal ; Animal less general than 
Organised Being ; and Organised Being less general 
than Substance. 

By the extension of a term, then, we mean the 
precise degree of generality that is attached to it. 
Thus an individual or singular .term has the least ex- 
tension ; a universal word, like " substance,'' the 
greatest extension. 

The comprehension of a term signifies just the 
reverse of the extension. In proportion as any term 



15 

becomes less general, it comprehends a greater number 
of ideas under it, and is more complex in its significa- 
tion. Thus the word European comprehends more 
ideas in it than the word Man ; and Man more than 
Animal. 

While the extension of a term, accordingly, depends 
upon the number of individuals it includes ; the com- 
prehension depends upon the complexity of tlie ideas. 
The term substance involves all possible individual 
existences; i.e, has the greatest possible extension. 
The individual term Caesar comprehends in it on the 
other hand all the ideas which are involved in the 
more general terms European^ Man, Animal, Or- 
ganised Being, and Substance. The one marks the 
universality oi un idea, — the other marks Ms complexity* 

Hence the greater the extension of a concept the 
less the comprehension ; and, vice versa, the greater 
the comprehension the less the extension. 

21. 
PREDICABLES. 

To predicate is to affirm one thing of another. In 
making an aihrmation tlie thing predicated must neces- 
sarily be more general* than that respecting which the 
affirmation is made. Thus if I say, Animals are Men, 
the proposition is untrue in its whole extent. If I 
say. Human Beings are Men, the proposition is true, 
but merely verbal. If I say. Men are Animals, then 
there is a valid assertion made, which is universally 
true. 

In the first, the subject of the assertion is more 
general than tlie predicate ; in the second they have 
both the same degree of generality ; while in the third, 

* Sometimes the predicate is, literally speaking, of the same 
generaliiy as the subject, only consisting of more intelligible Ian- 
gunge, But in these cases the affirmation only amounts to ^ 
piere definition (^terma^ and does not convey any new truth. 



16 

the predicate is more general than the subject. All 
predicates, then, are of necessity general (or universal) 
terms; but some, of course, more general than others- 
The doctrine of the predicables is an attempt to classify 
them in reference to their generality ; that is, to arrange 
in due order, under certain heads, every kind of truth 
that can be properly predicated of any subject. 

If I affirm of an individual thing that it belongs to 
a certain class; as "This flower is arose," I designate 
in so doing the species. If I affirm of a flower, that 
it is a vegetable production, I now designate the 
genus. If I say Man is rational, I designate neither 
genus nor species distinctively, but the particular 
quality which distinguishes him from all other beings. 
This is termed the differentia. Once more, if I say 
" Man is vertebrated," I designate again a universal 
property in man — though not the distinguishing one. 
This then is termed simply Proprium, Lastly, if I say, 
" That man is red-haired," I designate a fact which is 
a mere accident to the individual — (Accidens). 

Thus, then, we may predicate of a thing : — 

1. Its Genus. 2. Its Species. 3. Its Diflerentia. 
4. Its Properties 5. Its Accidents. 

Genus. The Genus is the most universal of the 
predicables ; so universal that it always has one or 
more species under it. It is not always, however, of 
the same degree of generality ; hence the distinction of 
summum genus, and genus suhalternum. The suni' 
mum genus is that which has no more universal term 
over it ; such as ^^ substance.^^ If a genus, on the con- 
trary, has other genera over it, though of course several 
species under it, then it is called Genus subalternum. 
Thus the word " dog" has the term animal above it, 
and many different species of dogs below it. It is 
therefore a subaltern genus. 

Species. Species denotes, primarily, a class having 
only individuals under it. It is frequently used how-* 
ever to denote species of a more general kind; hence 



17 

the distinction between species infimay and species 

suhaltema. If a species denote the lowest possible 

class, it is called species infima ; if it have classes as 

well as individuals under it, it is termed species sub- 

alterna. Hence summum genus and species injima 

stand at the two extremes of generality ; while aU the 

intermediate steps may either be termed a subaltern 

species, or a subaltern genus, according as they are 

regarded in relation to more general terms above them, 

or less general ones beneath them. 

Thus " dog" is a subaltern genus in reference to the yarious 
species of dogs; but a subaltern species, in reference to the 
different kinds of animals. 

Differentia. The differentia is the one particular 
property which marks a species^ and distinguishes it 
from all others. Thus the property " rational " is the 
distinguishing feature of man, in reference to all other 
animals. 

Proprium. By proprium we mean logically a pro- 
perty which is universal and necessary to a whole 
genus or species ; but which is possessed at the same 
time by certain other genera or species as well. It 
coincides with the differentia in being a universal at- 
tribute, but differs from it, in not being peculiar. 

Accidens. An accident is a property which may or 
may not belong to an individual viewed in relation to 
a species ; or to a species viewed in relation to a genus. 
Some accidents are termed separable, others insepa- 
rable ; — the former when they can be separated in 
thought from the individual, the latter when such 
separation is impossible : e.^., "M. Cousin is an inha- 
bitant of Paris," denotes a separable accident, because 
he might live elsewhere ; but " M. Cousin is a native 
of Paris," is an inseparable accident, since the fact can 
never possibly be otherwise. 

The following table gives a synoptic view of the 
Predicables. Taking Man as the subject, the words 

B 



18 



in italics will give predicates of the kind denoted by 
each one of the subdivisions. 

Eyerj predicate expresses either 



1. The whole essence 2. or, Part of its 3. or, Something joined 
of the subject, Essence. to the Essence. 

t. 6. the species, I 

rational aninuU, 



Genus, 
animal 



Differentia, 
rational. 



¦.\._. 



Property. 



Accident. 



Universal hat 

not peculiar, 

vertebrated* 



Peculiar but 

not universal, 

poeticaL 



Universal and 

peculiar, 

risible. 



Separable, 
Inhabitant a/ Paris, 

22. 
CATEGORIES. 



Inseparable, 
Native of Paris, 



As the Fredicables give us a classification of all 
possible predicates to any given subject, so the Cate- 
gories were intended to classify under a given number 
of heads, all the subjects respecting which any thing 
can be predicated. Aristotle's classification is as 
follows : — 

1. Substance. 

2. Quantity. 

3. Quality. 

4. Relation. 

5. Action. 

6. Passion. 

7. Place. 

8. Time. 

9. Posture. 
10. Habit. 



19 

This classification is now^ generally allowed to be 
both useless and incorrect. The attempt to classify all 
our ideas is so purely a metaphysical problem, that it is 
for the most part excluded from treatises on Formal 
Logic, and assigned over to the proper science to 
which it really belongs. 



23. 
DIVISION. 

By division we mean the distribution of a logical 
wuole into its several parts. This process is exactly 
the opposite of Generalisation. In Generalisation we 
lay aside the difierences, and form a mental unity out 
of a number of individuals agreeing in some given 
point. In division we start from a generalised idea, 
and by adding on the differences before laid aside, 
redistribute it into its more specific parts. Thus, by 
adding the points of distinction, we may divide the 
word ** metal " into gold, silver, iron, lead, etc. 

The use of division is to assist us in the accurate 
apprehension of any given term; which it does by 
presenting the several things which are really included 
under the one common name. To divide a subject 
accurately, the following rules should be observed : — 

1st. The division must be adequate; t. e., the parts 
must be exactly equal to the whole, neither more nor 
less. Thus, if in enumerating the parts of speech we 
were to leave out the preposition, or insert the par- 
ticiple, we should err in the first instance by defect, 
in the second by redundancy. 

2nd. The division must be distinct; i, e., the 
parts must really be disjunct and opposed to each 
other. When we fail in this respect, t. e, when we 
depart from the principle of classification with which 
we set out, and enumerate some two or more terms 
which really include each other, we are guilty of what 

B 2 



20 

is called a cross division. Thus to divide all the land 
into continents, islands, and peninsulas, would be n 
cross division ; inasmuch as first and third term may 
include each other. 

3rd. The division should be made into parts which 
stand in the same order of generality in reference to 
the whole. If this rule be not observed, some one of 
the terms of a lower degree of generality will most 
probably be included in one of the others. Or if this 
is not the case, then the division will be inadequate. 
The best division is that^ in which the subject is divided 
into its proximate parts ; i. e., into parts only one de- 
gree removed in the order of generality from the sub- 
ject itself. 

There- is nothing more important for giving clearness and 
order to onr mental operations than to divide the subject on 
i^'hich we are thinking with the utmost logical accuracy. The 
above rules, if rigidly adhered to, would obviate many a diffi- 
culty, and render simple what otherwise seems inextricably 
confused. 

It will add much to the facility with which a division is effected, 
if we keep in mind the different sentea in which the term whole 
is emi)loyed. 

1. A logiccd whole, means a genus, while the parts of it are 
the species. 

2. A formal whole, is one which is made up of the parts of 
definition. Rational animal, is a formal whole, of which the 
parts are rationality and animal existence, 

3. An essential whole, is viewed in reference to the component 
parts. Thus man is a whole^ the body and the soul the parts. 

4. An integral whole, is made up of separable parts, A plant 
is a whole ; the root, stem, leaves, and blossom, the parts. 

It is simply the first kind of whole that we are immediately 
concerned with in a logical division, as that only depends upon 
the laws of generalisation. 

24. 

DEFINITION. 

-fe- 

% Definition, in Logic, means the perfect explanation 

of what is implied by a given Term. General terms 



21 

are frequently learned by us, the real process of 
whose formation we know nothing about. Hence the 
necessity of their being properly defined^ in order that 
we may employ them correctly. To understand a 
Terra accurately, we must know two points respecting 
it : first, in what respect it agrees with other Terms ; 
secondly, in what respect it differs from them. Now, 
we show the agreement when we point out the genus 
to which it belongs; and we show the disagreement 
when we point out the differentia. Hence the rule for 
the logical definition of a Term is — that we assign its 
genus, and its differentia ; for in that way we express 
the whole essence of the thing in question. 

Care should be taken that a definition is ac^e^t^a/e, i, e, 
neither too extensive, nor too narrow. If we define a 
violin to be " a musical instrument with four strings," 
the definition is too extensive; or, in other words, the 
differentia is not correctly assigned. So, if we define 
an animal to be ''an organised being with a vertebrated 
spine," the definition is too narrow. 

Species alone admit of real definition. The 
summum genus, and the individual, can only be de- 
cribed; for we cannot point out either their genus or 
differentia. The same may be said of indefinite and 
negative terms, of aggregates and concretes. 

Metaphorical terms are more or less used by all writers and 
speakers, and used frequently when they are hardly aware of 
it. It is needless to say that such terms do not admit of exact 
definition. They must rather be explained — stripped of their 
figurative dress — put into a purely abstract form — and then 
defined. * 



B 3 



22 

n. ON FEOPOSITIONS. 
25. 

Hitherto we have treated only of individual terms 
and concepts. We have shown how they are formed, 
how classified, how they may he regarded in relation 
to their extension and comprehension^ how divided, 
and how defined. A single term does not express, 
however, a complete thought; to do this we require a 
proposition^ that is, according to the usual definition, 
" A judgment clothed in words." 

Every proposition, logically considered, consists of 
three parts : the subject, the predicate, and the copula. 
The subject is that of which something is afiirmed ; 
the predicate is that which we declare respecting the 
subject ; the copula (consisting of the substantive verb 
" to be ") connects the two terms together. 

Sub, Cop, Pred. 

Man is mortal. 

In Logic the proposition is always regarded as existing in one 
particular form, namely, as consisting of two terms coupled 
together by the verb **to be." It is needless to say that, gram- 
maUcaUy speaking, the proposition assumes a variety of other 
forms ; the copula being often concealed in the finite verb. 



26. 

SUBSTANCE OF PROPOSITIONS. 

With regard to their substance, propositions are 
either simple or compound, A simple proposition is 
said to be categorical, because it makes one direct 
assertion, without any condition or qualification. 

All men are mortal. 

Compound propositions occur in various forms. 
Some are copulative, some disjunctive, some hypothe- 
tical, and some adversative. Of these we shall speak 
hereafter. • 



23 

Categorical propositions are sometimes divided into pure and 
modaL A pure categorical proposition is one which asserts a 
truth without any qudification whatever. A modal proposition 
is one which asserts a truth in some particular form, or with 
some particular qualification : as, 

John is gone home — Pure, 

John is probably gone home — ModaL 

In modal propositions the assertion is called the dictum; the 
qualification the modus. Every modal proposition may be con- 
verted into a simple one, by turning the dictum into a subject 
and the modus into a predicate, and then forming a new pro* 
position of them ; thus : That John has gone home is probable; 



PURE CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS. 

27. 

QUALITY, 

Every categorical proposition possesses Quality. 
By the quality of a proposition is meant its power of 
expressing an afiSrmative or a negative judgment. 

Gold is a metal — Affirmative, 
Salt is not a metal — Negative, 

The negation in propositions is expressed variously : 
sometimes by the negative particle, as above; and 
sometimes by no^ neither, not any, etc. : as, 

No fools are admired. 

If the negative particle affects only the predicate, 
the proposition may be treated as affirmative : as, 

Sub, Cop, Fred, 

These men are no fools. 

28. 

QUANTITY. 

Every proposition has quanHty, By the quantity 
of a proposition is meant the power it has of affirming 
something of the whole^ or of only some part of the 

B 4 



24 

subject. A proposition which affirms something 
respecting the whole extent of the subject is called 
universal: as. 

All men are mortal. 

A proposition which affirms something respecting a 
part only of the subject is called particular: as. 

Some men are wise. 

Thus the quantity of a proposition depends upon 
whether the subject is taken in the whole of its exten- 
sion or only a part of it. 

A. The following subjects are considered as taken 
universally, that is, (in technical language,) as being 
distributed. 

1 . Singular terms : as, John is happy. 

2. Terms with some adjective prefixed (whether 
affirmative or negative) which denotes universality : as 
all, every, no, not any, etc. : — as. 

Ail men, or every man i ^^^ I mortal. 

No man, or not any man is to be despised. 

3. Indefinite terms, so used as to imph/ universality : 

as, Bees are wise insects. 

B. The following subjects are considered as taken in 
a particular sense ; t. e., as being undistributed, 

1. Terms with an adjective prefixed tliat denotes 
particularity : — 

Some men are wise. 

2. Indefinite terms so used as to imply a particular 
rather than a universal signification : — 

Cherries are ripe. 

The way in which the quantity of indefinite terms is decided 
18, by considering the matter of the proposition itself. When the 
tmth expressed implies necessity or universality, an indefinite 
term is taken in its whole extension} when a mere contingent 
truth is expressed, an indefinite term is to be regarded as parti- 
cular. It u universally true, for example, that Bees are wise 



25 

insects, but only contingently so that Cherries are ripe. Hence 
** Bees " is regarded as a uniyersal term, ** Cherries " as a parti- 
cular one. 



29. 
QUANTITY OF THE PREDICATE. 

The quantity of a proposition, taken as a whole, 
depends upon the subject being either universal or 
particular, as the case may be ; but it is equally im- 
portant for us to consider the quantity of the predicate, 
since there are various important conclusions de- 
pending upon it. 

The general rule for the extension of the predicate 
is: that in all affirmative propositions it must be 
regarded as particular ; while in all negative propo- 
sitions it is universal. 

The reason of this will be evident, when we consider 
that all we assert in an affirmative proposition is, that 
the predicate includes the subject. Thus in the pro- 
position. 

All stones are minerals, 

we only employ the word minerals in so far as it coin- 
cides with the word stones : that is, only in a part of 
its extension. 

On the other hand, in a negative proposition, we 
assert that no part of the subject is contained in any 
part of the predicate. Thus when I say. 

No stones are metals, 

I exclude the notion "stones" from the entire extension 
of the word " metals ; " and consequently use it in its 
whole generality. 

If the quantity of the predicate were properly expressed, i,e. 
the exact extent in which tlie term is employed, in each case, 
clearly noted, it woald add much to the simplification of all the 
succeeding logical forms, whether in the conversion of proposi- 
tions, or in the mechanism of the syllogism. As this idea, how- 



26 

ever, first proposed by Sir W. Hamilton, has not yet been gene- 
rally adopted, we shall present the syllogism in the usual 
manner, merely indicating where simplifications might be made 
by means of the quantification of the predicate. 



30. 



We have now explained — 1. Of what parts every 
proposition consists ; viz, of a subject, predicate, and 
copula. 2. We have shown how propositions may be 
classified, in reference to their substance. 3. In re- 
gard to simple, categorical propositions, we have 
pointed out what is meant by their quality, and their 
quantity. 4. And we have shown, last of all, how to 
determine the quantity of the predicate. 

For convenience' saie, Logicians have agreed to re- 
present propositions, in reference to their quality and 
quantity, by the four vowels, A, E, I, 0. Thus, as 
there are two kinds of quality, and two of quantity, the 
four kinds of proposition resulting from their combi- 
nation are as follows : 

1. Universal affirmative = A. 

2. Universal negative =E. 

3. Particular affirmative=I. 

4. Particular negative=0. 

We have next to show, when any given proposition 
is presented to us, what other propositions may be cor- 
rectly and logically drawn from it. 

Let us take as an example, the oft-repeated pro- 
position, 

All men are mortal : 

What can we at once conclude from this? i, c, what 
other propositions can we affirm as included in it ? 

First, then, if we know that all men are mortal, we 
can positively affirm the less general truth, " Some 
men are mortal." This conclusion of a particular 
truth from a universal^ is termed subaltemation. 



27 

Secondly, hj transposing the terms we can also 
affirm that " Some mortals are men." This is termed 
conversion. 

Thirdly, by turning the affirmative into a negative, 
we can again predicate that, "No men are not mortal." 
This is termed opposition. We must next explain, 
therefore, the laws of subalternation, of conversion, 
and of opposition. 



31. 

SUBALTERNATION. 

By subalternation we mean the conclusion of a par- 
ticular truth from a universal. The correctness of the 
conclusion depends upon the relation which a logical 
whole bears to its parts. If the whole includes the 
parts, then what is true of the whole must be true of 
each part taken separately. The universal truth is 
called the subalternans, and the particular one, deduced 
from it, the subalterna. The two rules of subalter- 
nation, then, are as follows: 

1. From the truth of the subalternans follows, ne- 
cessarily, the truth of the subalterna. 

All men are mortal — Subalternans, 
'.* Some men are mortal — Subalterna, 

2, From the truth of the subalterna nothing can be 
concluded respecting the truth of the subalternans. 
From the proposition, " Some birds are rapacious," you 
cannot conclude anything whatever respecting all birds. 



32. 

CONVERSION. 

To convert a proposition means to transpose the 
terms, and thus draw another proposition from it of 
the same quality. 



28 

In some propositions this is very readily accom- 
plished, a simple transposition of the terms being all 
that is necessary to do so. 

Thus from the proposition, No stones are metals^ it 
follows at once that No metals are stones. So also it 
follows from the proposition, Some birds are rapacious^ 
that Some rapacious things are birds.. 

But a simple transformation will not always hold 
good. Thus we cannot conclude from the proposition, 
All metals are minerals^ that All minerals are metals : 
nor from the proposition, Some minerals are not stones^ 
that, Some stones are not minerals. 

From the above instances we see, that the two kinds 
of propositions in which a simple transposition can take 
place are, a universal negative, E, and a particular 
affirmative, I. And the reason of this is plain ; — for as 
in E both subject and predicate are distributed^ there 
is no change made in the extension of either term by 
a simple transposition of them. So also, as in I both 
terms are undistributed, they are both taken exactly in 
the same extension when converted. 

On the contrary, if we take a universal affirmative, 
A, such as All metals are minerals^ here the subject is 
universal, and the predicate particular (§ 29). But if we 
transpose the terms, immediately the predicate, which 
wa^ particular, becomes universal; and the subject, 
which was universal, becomes particular ; so that 
any conclusion thus drawn, would violate the rules of 
subalternation (§31). To convert a proposition A, 
therefore, we must not only transp3se the terms, but 
limit the quantity , and conclude another proposition 
in I. Thus from the proposition. All metals are 
minerals, you can simply conclude, by transposition, 
that Some minerals are metals. This is called conversio 
per accidens, or otherwise, conversion by limitation. 

But then, what are we to do with O, which can be 
converted in neither of these two ways ? The simplest 
method is to attach the negative to the predicate; 



29 

then becomes I^ and can be simply converted. 
Thus from, — 

Sub. Cop. Pred, 

Some minerals are not stones, 

it follows that Some things that are not stones are mi" 
nerals. This is termed conversion by negation. 

As a proposition in E can be converted by limitatioti 
as well as simply ; and a proposition in A can be con- 
verted by negation as well as by limitation^ the whole 
of the possible methods of conversion may be thus 
summed up : — 

E, I, are converted simply. 

A, E, are converted by limitation. 

A, O, are converted by negation. 

If the exact qaantity of the predicate were expressed in each 
case, then every proposition might be simply converted ; for then 
each term being affirmed of every other in a precise sense, the 
simple transposition would take place without violating any of 
the rales of subaltemation. 



33. 
OPPOSITION. 

By opposition we mean the difference in quality be- 
tween propositions which have the same subject and 
predicate. Take the two following opposites : — 

All stones are minerals. 
Some stones are not minerals. 

Now here there is a positive contradiction, of such 
a nature that if one of the propositions be true, the 
other miLst be false. Hence, if you know the truth of 
either of these propositions, you can at once conclude 
on the falsity of the other; — an inference which directly 
follows from the laws of subaltemation. 

Again, if I affirm as true, No stones are metals, it 
is equally certain that the proposition^ '^ Some stones 



30 

are metals^** is false ; and for the same reason as that 
above stated. 

In these two cases it will be seen there is a com- 
plete opposition, not only in quality, but also in quart- 
tUy, between the two propositions in question ; hence 
they are calledc ontradictories. Contradictories, then, 
are so related that one of them must be false, and the 
other true. This may be exemplified in the following 
couple : — 

All men are good ; 
Some men are not good ; 

where we see by a moment's reflection that we have 
one false proposition, and one true one. Logic has 
nothing to do with determining which one is false, and 
which true ; it merely decides their relation to each 
other. 
But again, take the following two propositions : — 

All stones are minerals. 
No stones are minerals. 

Now of these two propositions you may immediately 
conclude, as before, the falsity of one from the known 
truth of the other. But it may also happen that both 
of them are false, which will certainly be the case if 
the predicate happens only partially to agree with the 
subject, as in the following couple : — . 

All men are good — (false). 
No men are good — (false). 

Opposition, then, between two universal affirmative 
propositions, is called contrariety ; and the two pro- 
positions are called contraries to each other. 

Once more, take the two following propositions : — 

Some stones are minerals. 
Some stones are not minerals. 

Now both of these propositions may be true, but they 
cannot possibly both be false. It may easily be the 



. 31 

case, however, that the one is true, and the other false. 
Opposition between two propositions, such as these, i.e. 
between two particular affirmations, is called subcon' 
trariety ; and the propositions themselves, are called 
suhcontraries. 

The laws of opposition, then, maj now be summed 
up in few words. Opposition can take place in three 
ways: — 

1. Between two universal propositions. 

2. Between two particular propositions. 

3. Between two propositions, the one of which is 
universal, and the other particular. 

The first are called contraries. 

The second are called subcontraries. 

The third are called contradictories. 

In the first, both may be false, but both cannot be 
true ; and if one is true the other mtist be false. 

In the second, both may be true, but both cannot 
be false ; but if the one is false, the other must be 
true. 

In the third, one must be false, and. then the other 
must be true. 

With regard to the question, which of the propo- 
sitions is true, and which false, in each instance ? this 
of course depends upon the matter, whether it be 
necessary, or impossible, or contingent. In necessary 
matter the affirmative will always be true, and the 
negative false ; in impossible matter the negative will 
always be true, and the affirmative false ; while in 
contingent matter the particular will always be true, 
and the universal false. 

Opposition between two singulars is reckoned as contradiction^ 
not contrariety, because they absolutely exclude each other. 

The following scheme conveys to the eye the whole 
of the principles of opposition: — n. i. c. meaning 



32 



respectively, necessary, impossible, and contingen 
matter ; and t. and f. meaning true, and false ; thei 
n. t. will mean, in necessary matter, true ; i. f. ii 
impossible matter, false, etc. 



n. t. 
i.f. 
c. f. 



Contraries.- 



E 



n. t 
i. f. 
c. t. 




n. f. 
i. t 
c. I. 



Subcontraries.- 



n. f. 



34. 




COMPOUND PROPOSITIONS. 

We have shown the most important points to be 
noted respecting simple categorical propositions. It 
only remains, under this division of the subject, to ex- 
plain briefly the varieties of the compound proposition. 

1. The copulative proposition is that in which the 
parts are joined by the copulative particle "and," 
as: — 

England and France are in Europe. 

Here, for the proposition to be true, aU the parts 
must be true. 



33 

2. The disjunctive proposition is that in which the 
parts are united by the disjunctive particle "or," 
as: — 

John or Marj is to blame. 

Here, for the proposition to be true, only one of the 
parts need be correct. 

3. The adversative proposition is that in which the 
parts are related by an adversative particle, such as 
" though/' or " although : "— 

Though Cicero was a Roman, he was also a 
philosopher. 

4. The hypothetical proposition is that in which 
the parts are united by some conditional particle, such 
as "if:"— 

J£ animals think, they have souls. 

While a term simply answers to a generalised idea, a proposi' 
Hon answers to a complete thought, in which there is a perceived 
relation between two ideas of a different degree of generality. 
The copula simply expresses this relationship. Thus, if I say 
** Coal is black," all that I mean, logically, is that the cluster of 
other qualities forming the phenomenon coal, is always asso- 
ciated with the one quality black. So, if I say ** Coal is a 
mineral," all I mean, logically, is that the qualities peculiar to 
coal are only found in connexion with the general qualities which 
make up the concept ** mineral" Thus every logical proposition 
is a species of equation having qualities for the terms employed ; 
and all logical statements may be thus shown to admit of an 
algebraical form. — Vide Boole*8 ** Investigation of the Laws 9/ 
Thought** 



34 



m. ON REASONING 
35. 

In explaining the nature of subalternation, conver- 
sion, and opposition, we showed how, from a given 
proposition, a number of other propositions might be 
correctly drawn. In these cases, however, the new 
propositions did not contain any new truth ; they were 
simply different ways of arranging the very same terms, 
so as to present the contained truth in a variety of 
different forms. 

In reasoning, however, we deduce from two or more 
given propositions, a new truth which is not directly 
contained in either of them. 

When reasoning is stated in a purely logical form, 
it is termed a Syllogism. Our object, therefore, in 
the present division of the subject, will be to explain 
the nature of syllogisms, — their mechanism, and their 
laws. 

The following is a syllogism in regular form : — 

All philosophers are studious, 
Caius is a philosopher, 
Caius is studious. 

Let us see of what it consists. 

Proximately it consists of three propositions. The 
two first are called the premises, and the last is called 
the conclusion. 

If we look more closely into each of these propo- 
sitions, we shall find that they are altogether made up 
of three terms. The question which has to be dis- 
cussed, and the conclusion we desire to draw, is the 
fact contained in the last of the three propositions, 
viz., Caius is studious. In this proposition, as in all 
Sy the subject is necessarily less extensive than the 




35 

predicate. Hence, the predicate of the conclusion has 
been named the major term, and the suhject of the 
conclusion the minor term. This is invariahlj the case 
in all regular syllogisms. ' 

Now to compare the two terms, Caius and stttdious, 
and prove their congruity, we select a third term, 
which we know to be related to both ; so that by 
showing the agreement of the major and minor with 
this third or middle terra, we can determine their 
agreement with each other. 

The process is in form similar to that by which we 
ascertain any two objects at a distance to be of the 
same length. As we cannot compare one with the 
other directly^ we compare them both with some com- 
mon standard, and, by means of their relation to it, 
conclude upon their relations to each other. 

In making this comparison in the above syllogism, 
we first take the major term studious, and compare it 
with the middle term philosophers ; thus, — 

All philosophers are studious : 

This is called the major premiss, because it is that 
which contains the major term. 

Next we take the minor term, Caius, and compare 
it also with the middle term ; thus, — 

Caius is a philosopher : 

This is called the minor premiss, as containing the 
minor term. Then from the two — 

All philosophers are studious, and 
Caius is a philosopher, 

we deduce, — 

Caius is studious : 

which is the conclusion. 



2 



86 



36. 
CONCLUSIVENESS OF SYLLOGISM. 

Let us now see on what the conclusiveness of the 
syllogism (t. e. the ms consequentitB) depends. The 
whole theory is founded upon the relation of a logical 
whole to its parts ; consequently it springs primarily 
out of the very nature of the concept^ as a valid act of 
generalisation. The relation of a logical whole to its 
parts is such, that whatever can he afllrmed or denied 
of a genuSy can also be affirmed or denied of all the 
species or individuals included in it. 

Now in every syllogism there is something affirmed 
or denied of a genus in the major premiss. The 
major premiss, accordingly, really involves the con- 
clusion, only in too disguised a manner, frequently, 
to be at first seen. The truth, e.g., that all philosophers 
are studious, involves the truth that Caius is studious ; 
only it has to be shown that Caius is really a philo- 
sopher, to make that conclusion self- apparent. 

The major premiss, then, states the general truths 
upon the knowle^e of which the whole argument is 
based;-— the minor premiss next draws the subject of 
the conclusion into the scope of this general assertion, 
by showing that it is a species under the very genus, 
respecting which the first affirmation was made. This 
being done, the conclusion follows^ that the species or 
individual (Caius) must also agree with that same 
term studwtes, with whieh the genus it has been 
shown to belong to (viz. philosophers) also agrees. 
This is the principle expressed by the celebrated axiom 
of Aristotle generally called the " Dictum de omni et 
nullo," which may be thus expressed : — " That what' 
ever is prediceUed of a term in its full extension, 



37 

whether affirmatively or negatively^ may^ in like man- 
ner he predicated of every thing contained under it, 

37. 
GENERAL LAWS OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

We have explained what the nature of a Syllogism 
is, and on what general axiom its validity is hased. 
The principal things to he kept in mind are — First, 
that in every syllogism there are three termSf the 
major, the minor, and the middle term. Of these the 
major has the greatest extension, the minor the least, 
while the middle term has an extension hetween the 
two. Hence the major and minor terms are some- 
times called the extremes. Secondly, that in every 
syllogism there are also three propositions ; the major 
premiss, comparing the major and the middle term, 
the minor premiss, comparing the minor and the middle 
terms, and the conclusion, comparing the extremes. 
The whole object of the syllogism is to compare these 
extremes with each other by means of their mutual 
relation to a third term. 

In the syllogism which we have already adduced, 
all the three propositions are universal affirmatives 
(A A A). Such, however, need not be the case. All 
four kinds of propositions, affirmative and negative, 
universal and particular, may take their place in a 
regular syllogism ; as in the following : — 

E. — Xo stones are metals. 
A. — All flints are stones, 
VE. — No flints are metals. 

And again : — 

A. — All stones are minerals, 
L — Some marbles are stones, 
•.•I. — Some marbles are minerals. 

Now there are certain rules which apply to all syl- 
logisms, the violation of any one of which would pro- 

C 3 



38 

duce an illegitimate and false conclusion. These rules 
are easily reduced to six; three respecting quantity, 
two respecting quality, and one respecting both. 

Rule T. — The middle term must be once distributed, 
i.e. taken in its whole extension. Were this not the 
case there would be no fixed standard of comparison 
between the extremes — since one of them might agree 
with one part of the middle term, and the other with 
another part : so that in fact there would be two middle 
terms employed. Thus from the following premises no 
conclusion could be drawn : — 

Some philosophers are studious, 
Caius is a philosopher : 

for the philosophers that are studious, and the 
philosophers to which Caius belongs might be two 
difiTerent species, and have no relation to each other in 
respect of studiousness. 

Rule IL — Neither of the extremes must be taken 
more universally in the conclusion than they are in 
the premises ; for if they are, we draw a broader in- 
ference than the premises warrant. Take the following 
example i — 

Many animals chew the cud, 
Men do not chew the cud, 
vMen are not animals. 

Here "animals" is taken only in part of its ex- 
tension, in the major premiss, and in the whole of its 
extension in the conclusion (§ 29). We have, there- 
fore, an illicit process of the major. If it were true 
to say. All animals chew the cud, then the conclusion 
would be justified. 

Rule III. — If both premises be particular, no con- 
clusion whatever can be drawn. For in this case 
either the middle term will be undistributed, or there 
will be an illicit process similar to that given under 
the last rule. 



39 

Rule IV.— If both premises be affirmative^ the con- 
clusion must be so too. Self-evident. 

Rule V. — If both premises be negative, no con- 
clusion whatever can be drawn. For in this case, the 
middle term is shown to disagree with both the major 
and the minor, so that it cannot serve as any standard 
of comparison between them. 

Rule VI. — The conclusion always follows the weaker 
part. That is, if one of the premises be particular, 
the conclusion must be particular : and if one of the 
premises be negative, the conclusion must be negative 
also. The first arises from the laws of sub-alternation, 
which does not allow us to conclude any thing respect- 
ing a whole genus from what is true of a species. 
'I'he second arises from the fact, that agreement can- 
not be inferred from disagreement. 

38. 
OF MOODS. 

It has been already shown, that all the four kinds 
of propositions, viz. A, E, I, O, may enter into a cor- 
rect syllogism. It does not follow from this, that 
an^ combination of them will suffice to form an 
argument, valid in form. Many combinations, we 
see at once, would violate several of the general rules 
laid down in the last paragraph — such as A £ A; 
A I E, 8cc. Now the combinations which a syllo- 
gism can take in relation to the quantity and quality 
of its three propositions, are called Moods ; and it is 
important to determine both how many moods are 
possible and how many are valid. 

With regard to the possible number of moods, this 
is a mere question of Arithmetic. There are four 
kinds of propositions (A, E, I, O), and three proposi- 
tions in each syllogism. Now any one of these four 
kinds of propositions may be in the major premiss, and 
any one of them also in the minor. This will give 4x4, 

4 



40 

or 16^ different forms for the two premises. But each 
of these 16 premises may have any one of the four 
kinds of proposition for a conclusion — consequently, 
the possible combinations of them in the syllogism 
are in number 16 x 4, or 64. 

Now of these 64 possible combinations, no less than 
53 are excluded. For 28 will be found to violate the 
3rd and the 6th of the general rules; 18 violate the 
5th rule ; 6 violate the fourth ; and one is useless as 
giving a particular conclusion, when a general one is 
admissible. Eleven moods therefore remain as valid 
for framing a legitimate syllogism. These are AAA; 
AAI;AEE; AEO; All; AOO; EAE; 
EAO; EIOj lAI; O A O. 

39. 
OF FIGURE. 

It has been already shown, that the middle term 
appears both in the major and minor premiss of a 
syllogism. It is not necessary, however, that it should 
always hold the same place there. 

In most of the syllogisms, which we have already 
cited, the middle term stands as the subject of the 
major, and the predicate of the minor premiss. But it 
may be also the subject of both, or the predicate of 
both, or the predicate of the major, and the subject of 
the minor. Now these four different positions, which 
the middle term can take in the premises of a syllo- 
gism give rise to what are called the ^figures. 

In the 1st figure, the middle term is the subject of 
the major and the predicate of the minor : 

All stones are minerals, 
Marble is stone, 
*•* Marble is a mineraL 

In the second figure, the middle term is the predi- 
cate of both premises : 



41 

No good man delights in hurting the feelings of 

others, 
Libellers delight in hurting the feelings of others, 
VNo good man is a libeller. 

In the third figure, the middle term is the subject 
of both premises : — 

All true penitents will find meroy, 
Some true penitents have been great sinners, 
V Some, who will find mercy, have been great sinners. 

In the fourth figure the middle term is the predicate 
of the major and the subject of the minor : — 

All stones are minerals. 
No minerals are organised, 
\*No stones are organised. 

40. 

' OF MOOD AND FIGURE COMBINED. 

We have before seen, that there are 1 1 moods which 
do not violate any of the general laws of the syllogism. 
Of these 1 1 moods there are 6 which will hold good 
in each figure. Taking, then, mood and figure to- 
gether, there are 24 conclusive forms of the syllogism. 
Several of these, however, are useless, as giving us a 
pai*ticular conclusion, where a universal one is equally 
legitimate, so that the one is really involved in the 
other. Leaving out, therefore, the useless moods, wo 
find that there are 4 which can staitd in the first 
figure, viz. AAA;EAE;AII; and E I ; 
that there are 4 which can stand in the second figure, 
viz. E A E ; A E E ; E I ; and A : that 
there are 6 which can stand in the third figure, viz. 
AAI; lAI; All; E AO; OAO;andEIO: 
and that there are 5 which can stand in the fourth 
figure, viz. A. A I; A E E; I A I; E A 0: and 
£ I 0. — Nineteen available moods in all. 



42 

To aid the memory of the student these moods have 
been combined into the following 5 hexameter lines. 
Fig. 1, Barbara^ celarent, Darii, ferioque prions- 
Fig. 2. Cesare, camestres^ festino^ haroko secundse. 
p. q fTertia, Darapti., disamis, datisi, felapton, 

®' * \ BokardOfferison habet ; quarta insuper addit, 
Fig. 4. Bramantipy camenes, dimaris, fesapo^ fre- 

sison. 
In these lines the three vowels in each of the words 
printed in italics give the moods of each figure. 
Adopting, therefore, this phraseology, we can speak of 
a syllogism being drawn in Barbara, in Camestres, 
&c., the very mention of which words determines at 
once the mood and tlie figure, when the five hexameters 
have once been committed to memory. 

41. 

SPECIAL RULES OF THE FIGURES. 

As each of the four figures places an argument in a 
particular form, determined by the position of the 
middle term in the premises, so each is subject to 
certain special rules, in addition to the six general 
rules before explained. 

SPECIAL RULES OP THE PmST PIGURE. 

1. The major must be universal, 

2. The minor must be affirmative. 

For if the minor is negative, the major must be 
affirmative (Rule 5), and the conclusion negative (Rule 
6). Then the conclusion being negative, the major 
term would of necessity be taken universally in the 
conclmion (§ 29): whereas it could only be taken 
particularly in the major premiss, as being the predi- 
cate of an affirmative proposition ; so that Rule 6 would 
be violated. Also the major must be universal, or else 
the middle term (being particular in the minor) would 
not be once distributed, and Rule 1 would be violated. 



43 



SPECIAL RULES OF THE SECOND FIGURE. 

1. The major must be universal, 

2. The conclusion must be negative. 

For in the second figure the middle term is the pre- 
dicate of both premises. Hence one of them must be 
negative (or the middle term would not be taken once 
universally), and consequently the conclusion must be 
negative. Also the major must be universal, otherv^ise 
the major term^ being taken universally in the conclu- 
sion (as being the predicate of a negative proposition), 
would only be taken particularly in the premises. 
(Violation of Rule 6.) 

SPECIAL RULES OP THE THIRD FIGURE. 

1. The minor must be affirmative, 

2. The conclusion must be particular. 

In the third figure the middle term is the subject of 
both premises. Now if the minor were negative the 
major would have to be affirmative, and consequently 
tlie major term would be particular ; whereas the con- 
clusion being negative it would be there taken univer- 
sally. (Violation of Rule 6.) 

The conclusion must also be particular because one 
of the extremes at least must be particular where they 
are both the predicates of the two premises. Were 
til is not the case, both premises would be negative, and 
no conclusion whatever could be drawn. 

SPECIAL RULES OF THE FOURTH FIGURE. 

The special rules of the fourth figure are merely 
hypothetical ; namely, 1. If the major is affirmative 
the minor must be universal. 2. If the minor is af- 
firmative the conclusion must be particular. 3. If 
either premiss be negative, the major must be universal. 

As the fourth figure is an awkward, and in fact use- 
less, form of syllogistic reasoning, we need not dwell 
upon these special rules any farther than merely men- 



44 

tioning them. The student hy a little thought can 
easily verify them for himself. 

The first, second, and third figures, have all certain 
advantages, according to the kind of argumentation we 
are desirous of carrying on. 

The first figure is in form by far the most perfect. 
All syllogistic reasoning, be it observed, proceeds upon 
the subordination of a part to a whole ; ue, on the 
dictum^ that what is true of the genus is true of all the 
species under it. The syllogism therefore should be so 
framed, as to show this subordination through the in- 
tervention of the middle term, in the clearest possible 
way. Tliis is accomplished only in the first figure, 
where everything proceeds regularly according to the 
dictum de omni et nullo : — 

All men are mortal, 
John is a man, 
John is mortal. 

The second figure, having always a negative con- 
clusion, is well adapted for disproving something that 
has been affirmed by an opponent : — 

None who despise charity are truly virtuous. 
Bigots despise charity, 
Bigots are not truly virtuous. 

The third figure is a convenient form in which to 
establish a particular objection to some sweeping affir- 
mation : — 

Every animal has feeling, 
Some animals are men, 
Some men have feeling. 

The fourth figure should never be employed at all. 

42. 

REDUCTION. 

The first figure being much more perfect in form 
than the rest, Logicians have invented methods, by 



45 

which all the moods of the other three figures may be 
reduced to this. The process by which this is effected 
is called Reduction. 

The whole art of reduction depends on the laws of 
conversion. (§ 32.) 

Sometimes we need only to convert simply one of 
the premises, and the syllogism at once takes the form 
of the first figure. 

Thus let the syllogism be Cesar e: — 

No mineral is organised, 
All plants are organised, 
\*No plants are minerals. 

Convert the major simply, and we have: — 

No organised being is a mineral, 
All plants are organised beings, 
vNo plants are minerals ; 

which is a syllogism in Celarent of the first figure. 

Sometimes again the premises must be transposed 
as well as converted. 

Thus let the syllogism be Camestres: — 

Every plant is organised, 
No mineral is organised, 
*.*No mineral is a plant. 

Here by converting the minor and then transposing 
the premises, we have : — 

No organised being is a mineral, 
Every plant is organised, 
VNo plant is a mineral ; 

which is a syllogism in Celarent of the first figure : 
and we only need to convert the conclusion to get the 
very same truth as was expressed in the conclusion of 
the first syllogism. 

When reduction takes place simply by means of con- 
version and transposition, it is called Ostensive, 

There is another mode of Reduction, which is called 
reductio ad impossibile* 



46 

The process is as follows. If the conclusion be false, 
then the contradictory of it will be true. Take the 
contradictory and put it in the place of the minor pre- 
miss. In this way we shall have a conclusion which is 
the contradictory of the original minor. But that 
original minor was true by hypothesis ; therefore the 
contradictory of it is false. If the conclusion, then, be 
false, one of the premises must be so ; and this can be 
none other than the new minor : i.e. the contradictory 
of the original conclusion. Hence the original con- 
clusion is true. 

This is the mode of reasoning commonly known as 
a reductio ad absurdum. 

Let us take an instance in Baroko : — 

All plants are organised. 
Some productions of nature are not organised, 
*.' Some productions of nature are not plants. 

Now if the conclusion be false, its contradictory is 
true, viz.. All productions of nature are plants. Assume 
the truth of this and put it in the place of the minor 
premiss. Then we have a syllogism in Barbara : — 

All plants are organised. 
All productions of nature are plants, 
V All productions of nature are organised. 

Now this conclusion contradicts the original minora 
which is true by hypothesis : it must consequently be 
false. A falsity, therefore, must lie in one of the pre- 
mises, and that the minor (for the original major is 
true by hypothesis). But the new minor is the con- 
tradictory of the original conclusion : so that if it be 
false, the original conclusion must be true (§ 33). 

The four Mnemonic lines above quoted are so formed 
as to show not only what moods are conclusive in each 
figure, but how the moods of the second, third, and 
fourth figure may be reduced to the first. * 

The four initial consonants B, C, D, F, show to which 



47 

mood of the first figure each of the others may be 
reduced. Each one, namely, may be reduced to that 
mood of the first figure which begins with the same 
letter. 

Moreover the other consonants show how that re- 
duction is to be effected. 

Thus, s. means that the proposition immediately pre- 
ceding it must be simply converted ; p. that it must be 
converted per accidens ; and m. that the propositions 
between which it stands are to be transposed. Lastly, 
k. shows that we must employ the reductio ad impos- 
sibile, and that the proposition immediately preceding 
it must be left out, and the contradictory of the con- 
clusion assumed in its place. 

Thus in Dimaris, the initial D shows that it can be 
converted to Darii, of the first figure ; m. shows that 
the major and minor premises are to be transposed ; and 
s. shows that the conclusion is to be simply converted. 



Note. 

In the preceding sections we have explained the common 
doctrine respecting the four figures, and the method of reducing 
all the moods of the last three figures to corresponding moods in 
the first. It can hardly fail to strike any one, on first looking 
over this system of logical forms, that it is remarkably cumbrous 
in its structure, and on that account by no means likely to be a 
perfect representation of our mental operations. As all logical 
reasoning depends on showing the subordination of the pans to 
a logical whole, by means of a middle term, we should naturally 
look for some common symbol of reasoning, in which this process 
is made apparent by the very form of the syllogism. Such a 
symbol, as we before showed, exists in the syllogisms of the first 
figure ; so that we ought to regard this as the true type of every 
deductive argument. 

The real cause why such an extensive apparatus of moods and 
figures has been invented is to be found primarily in the Inde- 
finiteness, which attaches to the quantity of the predicate^ in each 
of the premises. Just as the process of conversion is rendered 
uniform and simple by a duly expressed quantification of the pre- 
dicate (Sec 32), 80 also wiU the whole apparatus of mood and 
figure be obviated by the same simple operation. 

All the special laws of the four figures only hold ^oodvoL ^^\!l> 



48 

seqaence of the indefiniteness of the predicates. Quantify the 
predicates, and these laws are shown at once to be false. 
The special laws of the first figure are : — 

1. That the major be universal. 

2. That the minor be affirmative. 

But in the following two syllogisms both these laws are set at 
nought. 

Some men are certain foolish people, 

All rational beings are all men, 

SSome rational beings are certain foolish people. 

Again ; 

All metals are certain minerals, 

No stones are metals, 

No stones are certain minerals. 

In the first of these syllogisms the major is particular ; and 
in the second the minor is negative : yet both are conclusive, 
and both in the first figure. 

In like manner the special rules of all the other figures may 
be shown unnecessary. In fact, if the syllogisms of the second, 
third, and fourth figures be properly arranged according to sub- 
ordination of parts to a whole, it will be found that they will all 
naturally fall into the form of the first figure. 

Take the following syllogism (Cesare of 2nd fig.) : — 

No metals are stones. 
All amethysts are stones, 
*/ No amethysts are metals. 

Here there is no subordination of parts to a whole clearly 
shown^ but only one implied; namely this : No stones are metals; 
but all amethysts are stones ; */ no amethysts are metals. The 
first syllogism is therefore only an awkward and imperfect way 
of stating the last Put the terms in the proper order of logical 
subordination, and a regular syllogism of the 1st fig. immediately 
becomes apparent. 

This new analysis of the process of reasoning has been for 
many years adopted by Sir W. Hamilton ; and may be found 
pretty fully expounded in Mr. T. S. Baynes' Essay on the new 
Analytic of Logical Forms. 

The one universal canon of logical reasoning which renders 
the special rules of the Figures nugatory, and includes all the 
general ones in a single propositioiif is thus stated : — 

** What worse relation of subject and predicate subsists be- 
tween either of two terms and a common third term, with which 
both are related — and one at least positively so — that relation 
subsists between the terms themselves." 

. Vide Baynea* Essay ^ p. 53. 



49 



NON-CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISM& 



43. 
IRREGULAR SYLLOGISMS. 

We have now explained pretty fully the nature of the 
categorical syllogism. We must next advert to those 
which are not couched in the purely categorical form. 
Non-categorical syllogisms may be divided into two 
classes: 1. Irregular, and 2. Hypothetical. 

Irregular syllogisms are those which present either a 
deficiency or a redundancy in their mode of statement. 

1. In common language we more generally than not 
employ an elliptical mode of reasoning, — leaving some 
one or other of the premises to be supplied by the mind 
of the hearer. For example, nothing would be more 
natural than to make such a statement as this; — '^ John 
is successful^ because he is prudent.'' The force of this 
reasoning, of course, depends on the generally acknow- 
ledged sentiment, that prudence is the road to success. 
More commonly than not, indeed, we may suppress the 
major premiss in an ordinary argument, because the 
mind at once supplies it, as a generally received prin- 
ciple. A defective argument of this nature is called 
an Enthymeme. 

2. A redundant syllogism is one in which there is 
some subordinate statement supplied to maintain one 
or other of the premises. Take the following : — 

Every thing known by direct intuition is true; [since 
upon direct intuition all knowledge, and all 
reasoning, is primarily based.] 

But our Mental Identity is known by direct Intui- 
tion, 

•.• Our Mental Identity is true. 

This is called an Epicherema ; or an Epicherematic 
Syllogism. The reasoning in an Epicherema may 

D 



50 

always be reduced to two or more simple syllogisms. 
Thus, in the above case, it could be so stated — 
That upon which all knowledge and reasoning is 

primarily based is true. 
But all knowledge and reasoning is based upon 

direct Intuition, 
V Every direct Intuition is true. 
Again : Everything known by direct intuition is true. 
Our Mental Identity is known by direct Intuition, 
•,• Our Mental Identity is a truth. 
Here, it will be seen, the conclusion of the first syl- 
logism is made a premiss of the next. A string of 
syllogisms of this kind, all aiming at one final conclu- 
sion, forms a Sorites : only, to render the reasoninoc 
closer, the intermediate conclusions are suppressed till 
we come to the end. 

The English are a brave people, 
A brave people are free, 
A free people are happy, 
•/ The English people are happy. 

44.' 

HYPOTHETICAL SYLLOGISMS. 

Hypothetical syllogisms are of two kinds : — h Con- 
ditional, and 2. Disjunctive. 

1. A conditional syllogism is one which has a con- 
ditional proposition for its major, or for its minor, or 
for both. If both the premises are conditional, the 
conclusion must be so too ; if, however, the major only 
is conditional, it is termed conditional ex parte. 

antecedent 

« ^ < 

As, — If Napoleon was the Scourge of Europe, 
consequent. 



he deserved to be banished. 

But he wds the scourge of Europe, 
•.• He deserved to be banished. 



51 

In conditional syllogisms there are two modes of 
procedure, 

1. From the position of the antecedent to the posi- 
tion of the consequent. This is called the modus 
ponens, or constructive mode, because you affirm in the 
consequent the truth of what is stated conditionally in 
the antecedent, and thus get an affirmative conclusion. 
The syllogism above stated is an instance of this. But, 

2. We may proceed from the remotion of the con- 
sequent to the remotion of the antecedent. This is 
called the modus tollens, or destructive mode. 

antecedent. 



Thus — If no bigot is a wise man, 

consequent. 



No bigot is worthy our notice. 
But no bigot is a wise man, 
•.• No bigot is worthy our notice. 
Here from the negation of the consequent we con- 
clude the negation of the antecedent, *and thus get a 
correct negative conclusion. 

The illicit modes of reasoning are, to proceed from 
the position of the consequent to the position of the 
antecedent ; or from the remotion of the antecedent to 
the remotion of the consequent. 

1st false procedure. 
antecedent: consequent 

If great philosophers.be virtuous, they will be admired. 
But great philosophers are admired, 
V They are virtuous men* 

2nd false procedure. 
antecedent. 



t » 

If Catiline betrayed his fellow conspirators, 

consequent 



he was a wicked man. 

j> 2 



52 

But he did not betray his fellow conspirators^ 
*•* He was not a wicked man. 

45. 

2. A disjunctive syllogism is one which has for its 
major premiss a disjunctive proposition affirmative in 
quality. 

Here^ as in the conditional, there are two legitimate 
ways of proceeding — 

1. From the position of one of the parts to the re- 
motion of all the rest. Or, 

2. From the remotion of all the rest of the parts, to 
the position of some one of them. — Thus, taking the 
disjunctive proposition — 

Caius lives either in Rome, or Naples, or Florence, 
we may affirm one part ; viz. 

that he lives in Rome ; — 

and from this affirmation we negative all the rest — 

•.• He lives neither in Naples nor Florence. 

Or we may deny all the parts but one^ 

He lives neither in Naples nor Florence ; 

and conclude that — 

He Mves in Rome. 

There is yet another form of the disjunctive syllo- 
gism, viz., that in which from the remotion of each of 
the parts, the remotion of the whole is concluded. 
Thus Cicero argues epicherematically respecting pain — 

If pain is to be feared^ it must be so either because 
it is long in duration, or intense in degree, — 

But it is not so when long in duration (for then it 
cannot be severe), nor when intense in de^^ree (for then 
it cannot last long) ; 

%* Fain ia not to be feared at alL 



63 

46. 
DILEMMA. 

The dilemma is a syllogism that partakes partly of 
a conditional, and partly of a disjunctive character. 

It is an argument such that when all the suppo* 
sitions of a case are stated, any one of them puts the 
opponent to inconvenience. 

The most usual, and the most legitimate form of it, 
however, is — when there are only two suppositions^ 
either of which, being granted, overthrows the position 
maintained by the opposing party. Hence the origin 
of the expression, *' to fix a person on the horns of a 
dilemma." 

Thus we may state Cicero's argument respecting the 
power of a wise man to endure pain in the following 
way: — 

If pain is either short' in duration, or moderate in 
intensity, a wise man can bear it. 

But it is always either short in duration, or moderate 
in intensity ; 

Therefore a wise man can always bear it. 

The validity of the dilemma, as an argument, rests 
fundamentally upon a correct enumeration of parts in 
the statement of the conditions. 

Thus if I were to argue — 

If a man be a Christian he worships the true God ; 

If he be a heathen he worships an idol : 

But he must be either a Christian or a Heathen ; 

Therefore every man must worship either the true 
God or an idol : 
there would evidently be an error in the enumeration 
of conditions. Some men might not be either Chris- 
tians or Heathen : they might be Mohammedans or 
Atheists. 

In the same way as we have seen respecting condi- 
tional syllogisms, so the dilemma may be either con- 

D 3 



54 

structive, or destructive. It may be either simple, 
having a categorical conclusion, like the first of those 
above quoted ; or complex, having a disjunctive con- 
clusion, like the secbnd. 

JVbte. 

The Classification of non-Categorical Syllogisms may be 
presented in the following scheme. — Non-Categorical Syllogisms 
are: ' 

L Irrsgulab. 

a Enthymeme. 
h Epicherema. 
a + i Sorites. 

n. Hypothetical. 

a ConditipnaL 
b Disjanctive, 
a + 6 Dilemma. 



66 



IV. OM FALLACIES. 

47. 

In discussing the nature and mechanism of the syl- 
logism, we have shown what kind of arguments are 
valid and what kind inconclusive as to their form. 
Sometimes^ however, we meet with arguments which 
inform are perfectly correct, but yet lead to a wrong 
conclusion. It is these that we have now briefly to 
discuss, under the head of Fallacies, 

Most of the writers on Logic divide the different 
kinds of fallacious reasoning into two classes, viz. 
Fallacies in dietionCy and Fallacies extra dictionem. 
The first class, as the name indicates, includes all 
those cases where the fallacy lies in the expression ; 
the second class includes all those, where the fallacy 
lies in the subject- matter, 

48. 
FALLACIES IN THE EXPRESSION. 

Under fallacies in expression we designate all those 
cases of incorrect reasoning, which arise from the am- 
biguity of particular words or expressions. We may 
divide them, for convenience' sake, into five different 
classes, which we shall briefly explain in order. 

The first two species of this class of fallacies (which 
may easily be explained together) are the " Homo- 
nymia," and the *' Amphibolia." The former arises 
from one of the words which compose the middle term 
being in tV^e^^ equivocal, t. e, capable of more than one 
signification ; the latter from \Vi^ txi\^<^^ \&xxa.\i^vcw«^'5w 



66 

phrase, rendered doubtful by its position or gram- 
matical construction. 

The instances in which particular terms assume an 
equivocal aspect are very numerous. Sometimes (e.g.) 
words having accidentally the same /orm are totally 
different in meaning ; other terms, again, are not un- 
frequently chosen to express technically some precise 
and restricted idea, when in popular use they are em- 
ployed in a more loose and general sense, the one being 
termed the first, the other the second intention. Si- 
milar indefiniteness arises from the use of analogical 
and elliptical words, all of which, when employed as 
middle terms in a syllogism, give rise to the logical 
error which we express by Homonymia. A single and 
glaring instance (since principles are best seen in ex- 
treme cases) may suffice to exemplify this fallacy. 
Employing the equivocal use of the word "Christians," 
the following syllogism might be formed from it : — 

All Christians are good men, 
All Englishmen are Christians, 
*/ All Englishmen are good men. 

The different forms of Amphibolia are not less nu- 
merous. Ambiguity (e.^.) arising from the two dif- 
ferent cases in which a word might be understood in 
the construction of a sentence is not unfrequently 
found in modern, and far more frequently in the an- 
cient languages of Greece and Rome. The relative 
clause again may often be referred to two different 
antecedents, and indeed any kind of subordinate clause, 
is very often applicable to different parts of the whole 
passage in which it stands. Fallacies arising from 
such causes as these may be easily solved by showing 
that in every case the syllogism has really two middle 
terms, and that there is, therefore, no standard of com- 
parison by which the agreement of the major and the 
minor may be tried. 

The two next Sophisms "in dictione" are those 



57 

called the fallacies of Composition and Division. These 
sophisms, which are the most important of their class, 
arise from employing the middle term once distribu- 
tively and once collectively, and thus destroying the 
standard of comparison. In the former case, (t. e. 
in the fallacy of Composition,) something is established 
of the separate individuals in a class, and then in- 
ferred of that class taken collectively. This may be 
familiarly illustrated by the well-known fable of the 
father, who to impress upon his sons the importance of 
union and harmony aniongst themselves, showed them 
that each separate stick of a bundle might be easily 
broken, while the whole together were irresistibly firm. 
The fallacy of Composition would have led them to the 
conclusion, that if all the rods were fragile taken se- 
parately, they would be equally so when bound toge- 
ther. The fallacy of Division is the reverse of this ; 
and, to take the same illustration, it would have led to 
the conclusion, that if the bundle above mentioned 
were incapable of being broken when taken collec- 
tively, the separate rods would present the same re- 
sistance to our physical efforts. This latter sophism 
frequently arises from the ambiguous use of the word 
"all," which may be taken both distributively and 
collectively, as in the following syllogism. 

All the angles of a triangle are equal to two right 
angles. 

A, B, C, is the angle of a triangle, 

•.• A, B, C, is equal to two right angles. 

These cases may easily be solved by enquiring in 
the outset, in what precise sense the word * • all " is to 
be employed. 

The logical fallacy in these two sophisms is spe- 
cifically the same as in the last two, arising, that is, 
from the ambiguity of the middle term. The middle 
term, it will be seen, is taken distributively in the 
major and collectively in the minor when we err by 
Composition ; while the case is precisely reversed when 



58 

we err by Division. In both cases therefore two 
middle terms are involved, which vary essentially in 
their meaning. 

The 5th and last kind of Sophism in this division 
is that termed — *^ fallacia figurse dictionis.'' 

The most common form in which this fallacy pre- 
sents itself is in the case of paronymoui words, in 
which two terms of the same root, and closely con- 
nected with each other etymologically, are employed, 
as though on that account identical in meaning, when 
through conventional use their actual meaning has 
become considerably modified. The following syl- 
logism is an example of this error : 

None but immortal beings will live for ever, 
But all men are mortal, 
vNo men will live for ever. 

Here through conventional usa^e the word tm- 
mortal is applied to the soul, and mortal to the 
body; so that the words not being really opposed, 
cannot be substituted for each other as in the above 
syllogism. Other instances of the '^fallacia figurie 
dictionis,** occur from the use of a word first in its 
etymological and then in its popular sense ; or from 
employing a grammatical termination so as to render 
the real meaning of the sentence ambiguous. To these 
some logicians add sophisms which arise from em- 
ploying figurative language^ and reasoning upon it as 
if it were real ; but these may, perhaps, he better 
classified as instances of false parallels, which we shall 
mention under the next division. 

Viewing this general division as a whole, it is evi- 
dent that all the cases might be reduced to the head 
of ambiguity f since it is in an ambiguity of one form 
or other, that the error in every instance consists. 
Or to render the generalization rather more definite, 
and distinctive, we might form them into two classes, 
one in which the ambiguity anaes ?tom l\i^ vaord^ and 



59 

the other from the phrase, and thus by an extension 
of the first two species^ include under them the re- 
maining three. 

49. 

FALLACIES IN THE MATTER. 

We proceed next to the fallacies ^^ extra dicHonem,^ 
or fallacies in the thought itself, a class far more fre- 
quently to be met with, and by no means so easy in 
the majority of instances to be detected. 

These will fall, according to Aristotle's arrange- 
ment, under seven heads, which we shall take up 
successively, in order at once to explain their nature^ 
and the various forms under which they are found. 

L The first of these is the ^^fallacia accidentis." 
In forming a class out of individuals, we always have 
some particular point or points of resemblance, by 
virtue of which we unite them. These individuals, 
however, may still have many points of dissimilarity 
which do not affect the classification, and which are 
usually called accidents* Now we often afiirm of a 
class of things generally something that is only true of 
it accidentally, and, reasoning upon this affirmation, 
arrive very soon at a false conclusion. Thus it is 
generally true that Lions are fierce animals ; but we 
cannot conclude from this that Lions, which have been 
under a particular course of training, are so. This is 
an accident, which modifies the general conditions of 
the case. It is by a fallacy of this kind that all the 
errors and weaknesses of a party are often attributed 
to an individual simply because he happens to belong 
to it. In all such instances we have the old fallacy of a 
two-fold middle term ; and need only point out the 
ambiguity which arises from using it in one instance 
particularly, and then universally (thus destroying the 
uniformity of the standard by which the extremes are 
to be tested), in order to solve the case. 
2. The next fallacy is tliat ot t^^^ot^xi'^ '''' ^ ^^^ 



60 

secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter,'* which is in 
fact only the reverse of the fallacia accidentis, and 
is resolved on precisely the same principle. The 
error here lies in reasoning, not as hefore, from the 
absolute to the conditional^ but from the conditional to 
the absolute; or in other words, in inferring that to be 
truly predicated of a subject when viewed dhsoliUely 
which is true of it only upon the supposition of some 
modifying conditions. 

Thus, were I to argue that, because arsenic is not 
unfrequently used in medicine to preserve health, it is 
not destructive of human life, I should be inferring a 
general conclusion of arsenic taken in its whole essence 
from a particular case in which the essential qualities 
of the poison are modified by other accidental additions. 
Here, as before, the error lies in there being really 
four terms to the syllogism. Thus if I were to argue, 
that because the natives of Europe are white men, a 
Hottentot born in Europe must be white also, I should 
be taking the middle term, '* native of Europe,*' in two 
different senses, one meaning the natural inhabitants 
of this quarter of the globe, the other including any 
one who might accidentally be born in it. 

3. We come next to a very important sophism, 
termed " ignoratio elenchi." The error in this is of a 
nature entirely different from any other we have before^ 
noticed. The syllogism may be in itself correct, the 
conclusion following properly from sound premises, 
while yet that conclusion is not applicable to the real 
point in question. 

An elenchus is properly a syllogism the conclusion 
of which is the contradictory to the conclusion of 
another which it is our intention to refute ; and it is 
evident that if the point established be not contra- 
dictory to the one we are opposing, they may be both 
true, or both false, without materially interfering with 
each other. 
Sometimes an argument ia stated vaawt^^slVj^ and 



61 

then triumphantly refuted; which is popularly called— i 
setting up a man of straw, and then knocking him 
down. Sometimes the very point in question is m»- 
iaken and then disproved — a case exceedingly common 
in almost every kind of moral argumentation. Ano- 
ther instance oi'ignoratio elenchi, is when an argument 
is drawn from a case supposed parallel, hut not really 
80 ; as when Berkeley proves the possibility of there 
being an invisible agency at work in the creation, from 
the existence of animal spirits, which he takes for 
granted to be actual though invisible realities. Errors 
arising from the use of figurative terms as though 
they were literally true, may be ranged likewise under 
this head. 

The last kind of this species of fallacy is that of 
imputing consequences and then arguing from them to 
the detriment of our opponent. In every case of 
ignoratio elenchi we must show what the real question 
is, and point out, when we have placed the conclusion 
of the elenchus by its side, that the one does not 
logically contradict the other. 

4. The fourth species of fallacy is one which presents 
itself under a grest variety of forms, and is, perhaps, 
more frequently than any other employed for purposes 
of false and deceptive reasoning, namely, the petitio 
principii, or begging the question. The essence of 
this fallacy lies in taking for granted the very thing to 
be proved, or assuming some point which equally 
requires to be established by additional evi<lence. In 
every argument it is required that there should be a 
middle term, and that this should be something with 
which the extremes may be advantageously compared, 
in order that we may estimate by it, as a known 
standard, their comparative agreement or disagree- 
ment. Hence the middle term must be something 
better known than the extremes^ otherwise it can be 
of no utility as a test. 

When, therefore, we take a \ive9A\xui <A YtQSi1^^V\^v 



62 

IS quite as little known, and requires quite ^s much 
demonstration as the very point in question, we are 
guilty of one form of the petitio principii, A simUar 
fault is committed when the middle term, though 
differently expressed, is really identical with one of 
the terms of the question ; and this is peculiarly 
liable to take place in a language which, like our 
own, is compounded of the radical parts of two or 
three others, so that we can readily express the same 
idea by employing totally different phrases. We may 
include, indeed, under the petitio principii all instances 
in which either of the premises in an argument are 
insufficiently supported, and consequently unduly as- 
sumed. The sophistry involved in such reasoning is 
often by no means easy to detect, especially when it 
occurs in the enthymematic form, and the suppressed 
premiss is the very point in which the fallacy lurks. 
A remarkable modification of this fallacy is that termed 
reasoning in a circle, i. e., when two propositions are 
made mutually to prove each other ; each being one 
of the premises from which the other is deduced. This 
error is often committed by Christian apologists who 
prove the truth of the Bible from the doctrines it con- 
tains ; and then, prove the truth of the doctrines from 
their being in the Bible. 

5. The fifth species of fallacy is that termed the 
non causa pro cau?ll, which, like the last, presents itself 
under several modifications. In some instances a 
cause is assumed which has no title to be called a vera 
causa at all, i. e., which has no real observed or de- 
monstrated existence. Such is the case when men 
amuse themselves with framing hypotheses upon slen- 
der grounds, and then reduce to them as general 
principles or laws, observed facts in the operations of 
nature. 

Another form of this fallacy is that termed non talis 

causa pro tali, or assigning a cause which is insufficient 

to account for the effect. T3udw \\i\^ loAtid may be 



63 

classed the objections made against Christianity, from 
the feuds and animosities which have often accompanied 
it, since it is totally unfitted to account for them with- 
out the supposition of the other and more real causes 
existing in human nature. A further case under this 
same head is that termed, post hoc ergo propter 
hoc, or supposing two things to be mutually cause and 
effect, because they are respectively antecedent and 
consequent in time to each other. The two former 
modes of this fallacy are evidently cases of petitio 
principii, and may be shewn to be inconclusive, from 
tlie gratuitous nature of the premises ; the last is a 
species of the fallacia accidentis, and may be solved 
on the principle there pointed out. 

6* The sixth .fallacy (fallacia consequentis) is the 
converse of the last. There the antecedent was false, 
here the consequent is so. For example, we may 
build an argument upon the converse of a propo- 
sition which is not logically converted, or violate in 
a similar manner the laws of opposition and illation, 
and thus arrive at a conclusion far from being warranted 
by the premises. The way in which this fallacy is to 
be solved is, by pointing out the proper rules of con- 
version, etc., which are violated, and showing thus that 
the conclusion is not necessitated. Thus, were a 
Russian to argue that his country is far happier to live 
in than our own, because there are fewer taxes to be 
piaid to the government, we might show that a country 
without taxes is not opposed to an unhappy, or a 
country with taxes to a happy one. 

7. The seventh and last sophism which we have to 
consider, is that termed fallacia plurium interroga- 
tionum, in which a complex question is proposed in 
such a manner as to elicit, if possible, a simple or 
categorical answer. If the sophist succeed in this, on 
whatever side the answer may be returned, he can 
employ it equally to silence his opponent. This faXloA^ ^ 
whether containing two or more awXi^^^V^ ot V«^ <s^ 




64 

more predicates, maj be exposed, hj pointing oat the 
separate parts of which the question consists, and then 
giving a disjunctive answer. 

Thus, were a sceptic to ask whether all such forms 
of religion as Heathenism, Christianity, I^Iohamme- 
danism, etc, are not mere delusions of a superstitious 
mind, we could not answer him cat^oricallj, but 
should have to separate the subject of the question 
into its component parts, and then answer each of 
iktm singly. 

In viewing this second division of fallacies as a class, 
one of two kinds of errors, we observe, occurs in every 
instance ; either the premises themselves are faulty, or 
the coHciusiomy though deduced from correct premises, 
is vicious or irrelevant to the question. The great 
points, therefore, upon which we should keep our eye 
fbc^d, (as thoc$e in which sophisms are most liable to 
lie concealed,) are, first, to see that the middle term is 
unambiguous^ guarding thus against the fiillacies in 
dictione ; secondly, to see that the premises are really 
legitimate data ; and lastly, to be assured that thd 
conclusion is c<Mrrect and relevant to the subject in 
dispute. 

5a 

CO^^CLUSION. 

We have now given a brief sketch of the principal 
points usually included in the Science of Fonniil Logic. 
In doing so we have shown the nature of Ahsiract 
Idtas — their varieties and charwrteristics. Next we 
hftve di8c«saedlileiV0|pasalKm,and p<nnted out all the 
dftfemtt diange» which it may nndergow And, lastly, 
v« Iat9 axhibtlad the laws of correct reasoning as 

kuMdi^poa te natiure of abstraction and geaeraUsatiooL 

It ia M^pogtMit thfl^ ei» stndent should bear in mind 

OTM%^ whai « proposed by this invesiigaliott. Some 



66 

processes employed for the investigation of truth, and 
expounds everi/ method by which we can arrive at a 
conclusion. Whatever grounds might be assigned for 
giving such an extension to the term Logic taken 
alone, yet assuredly there can be no reason for putting 
such an interpretation upon the term Formal Logic. 
Formal Logic (of which alone we have proposed to 
treat) has a perfectly distinct field of its own : it em- 
braces simply the laws of generalisation, the modes in 
which we express our judgments, and the principles 
of accurate deduction. 

It should always be kept in mind that there are 
two applications of the power of thinking, essentially 
different from each other. We may employ our 
reason either in investigating new truths; or we may 
employ it in criticising what is already virtually 
known, in arranging it into due order, and in drawing 
particular inferences from the data actually before us. 

Now as to the apprehension of new Truths, there 
are many ways in which we arrive at them. We may 
do so through the medium of the senses, — that is by 
means of personal experience ; or we may do so by 
means of the testimony of others; or we may do so by 
induction from facts presented to us either through 
experience or through testimony. All these different 
methods of investigation form distinct objects of study. 
We may lay down the canons of Kxperience ; or 
arrange in order the laws of Testimony ; or pursue 
the philosophy of Induction, each as a subject by it- 
self. These questions, however, have nothing directly 
to do with Formal Logic ; thei/ are all different 
methods of productive thought: whereas Logic is 
simply critical and analytic. 

It has been not unfrequently taken up as an ob- 
jection against the utility of the syllogism, that it 
does not teach you to arrive at new truths, but simply 
draws out into a definite conclusion what is already 
contained in the premises. It m\»\i\» «>.^ ^^\k^ ^- 



66 

jected to Grammar that it does not teach us new- 
languages or help us to speak our own. Grammar 
teaches us the general laws of language, and Logic 
teaches us the general laws of thought. The one as 
well as the other is a mental discipline that tends not 
to new discoveries, but to clear the mind in the use 
of the knowledge it has already in its possession. 

And this is an end assuredly which it is of the 
utmost importance to aim at. The mere possession of 
a vast multiplicity of ideas — of facts — of experiences 
is by itself of comparatively little use. To make 
them of use we need that degree of mental discipline 
which enables us to govern facts, to harmonise them, 
to combine them into a body of connected truth. 

We do not promise, accordingly, from tlie study of 
Logic to unfold any new fields of positive knowledge; 
we do not pretend either to give any direct organum 
for the investigation of new truths; but we do promise 
to afford some amount, at least, of that mental disci- 
pline which shall give precision to the intellect, a dis- 
criminating power to the judgment, and a facility for 
arranging and systematising our ideas. Those who 
think this of equally great importance with the accu- 
mulation of the mere crude material of truth, will not 
regret the time and the labour that is spent upon what 
is intended merely as a Mental Discipline. 



EXERCISES. 



SECTIONS 1—15. 

1. Explain tlie exact meaning of the following words, 
illustrating each by examples : — 

Sensation, Perception, Attention, Memory, Imagination. 

2. What distinct mental operations depend upon the 
use of Language, and why r Explain the nature of 
Generalisation, and Abstraction. 

3. What is meant by the Understanding? and what 
by the Laws of Thought ? 

' 4. What is the purport of Logic ; and what the use ? 

SECTIONS 16—20. 

5. What is meant by a Concept; what is its origin, 
and what its nature ? 

6. Classify "Terms," giving examples of each kind, 
and showing in what their difference consists. 

7. What is meant by the Extension, and what by the 
Comprehension of a Term ? 

8. Arrange the following terms; 1st. in the order of 
their Extension, and 2ndly, in the order of their Compre- 
hension : 

Rapacious animal — Lion — Vertebrate animal — Black 
Lion — A nimal — Quadruped — Sensible ob je<it — §>\ifof5Xasssye; 
— Native of Africa, 

£ 2 



I 



68 



SECTION 21. 

9. What is meant by the Predicables ? Explain what 
is meant by G^nus — Species — Differentia — Proprium, and 
Accidens ; with examples of each. 

10. What is meant by a Summum Genus, and to what is 
it opposed ? Give examples of both. 

11. What is meant by Species infima, and to what is it 
opposed ? Give examples of both. 

12. Give the different varieties of the proprium^ and the 
accidens^ with examples of each. 

SECTION 22. 

13. What is meant by the Categories ? What is Aris- 
totle's classification ? and what is its worth ? 

SECTION 23. 

14. TVliat is the use of Division? What Rules should 
be observed ? What faults avoided ? 

15. Explain the different senses in which the term 
*^whole*^ is employed. 

16. When is a division inadequate? when indistinct ? 
when a cross division? and when not arranged according 
10 proximate parts? 

SECTION 24. 

17. Of what parts does a perfect logical division con- 
sist? Why do a Summum Genus, and a Species infima 
not admit of definition ? 

18. Define logically the following terms : A propo- 
sition — An Army — ^Astronomy. 

SECTIONS 25, 26. 

19. Explain the partfl of which a logical proposition 
eonaJsts. 

20, How are propositions divided aa \o Swbxtaiicel 



69 

SECTIONS 27—30. 

21. What is meant bj the Quality, and what by the 
Quantity of a proposition ? 

22. By what special means are the quality and the 
quantity of propositions expressed? 

23. How is the Quantity of the Predicate determined ? 
Show the reason of the case. 

24. Denote the following propositions, as to their quantity 
and quality, by the proper vowel symbols : 

All negroes are black. 

Some birds cannot fly. 

Many men are unwise. 

No rools are esteemed. 

Not many intemperate men live long. 

Ants are wise insects. 

Currants are ripe in July. 

Wherever A is there is fi. 

SECTIONS 31, 82. 

25. What is meant by Subalteraation ; and what rules 
are to be observed for its accurate performance P 

26. What is meant by the Conversion of a Proposition ^ 
and what are the different modes of Conversion ? 

27. In what different ways may each of the propo- 
sitions denoted by A, E, I, O, be converted ? 

28. Convert the 8 propositions in Question 24 according 
to the proper rules. 

SECTION 33. 

29. How many kinds of Opposition are there ? Ex- 
plain them. 

30. State the Laws of opposition. 

31. State the Opposites of the following propositions 
and show in each case what kind of opposition it is : 

Some quadrupeds are not rapacious. 
All men are mortal. 
Some wise men are not wealthy. 
Homer wrote the Iliad. 
No government is perfects 

£ 3 



70 



SECTION 34. 

32. State and explain the different kinds of Compound' 
Propositions. 

SECTIONS 35, 36. 

33. What is a Syllogism ; and of what Elements does 
it consist ? 

34. On what Laws does the conclusiveness of the 
Syllogism depend? Explain the ** Dictum" of Aristotle. 

35. Express the following passages in the form of 
Syllogisms ; and point out in eacn case what is the major, 
the minor, and the middle term : 

Many things allowed amongst men are hateful in the 
sight of God, because eyery thing sinful is hateful in his 
sight. 

Many Christians have practised persecution, and there- 
fore could not have been good men. 

The ancients believed in magic, and must therefore have 
been frequently led astray. 

SECTION 37. 

36. State the General Laws of the Syllogism; and 
show the reason of them. 

37. Which of the six rules do the following Syllogisms- 
violate, and why? ' 

Willows prefer a moist soil. 

Alders are not willows, 

' . * Alders do not prefer a moist soil. 

Some literary men have been exiled, 
Some kings are literary men, 
* . * Some kings have been exiled. 

Men are not quadrupeds, 
Horses are not men, 
'. ' Horses are not quadrupeds. 



71 

Many men are wise, 
Europeans are men, 
•,• Europeans are wise. 

Many senators have been philosophers, 
Many philosophers have gone mad, 
*.* Some senators have gone mad. 

The innocent should be protected. 
This person should be protected, 
' . • This person is innocent. 

Every rational agent is accountable. 
Brutes are not rational agents, 
' . ' Brutes are not accountable. 



38. Which of the following Syllogisms would conclude 
correctly, and which incorrectly, and why ? 

E AE— E A A— A 1 1— I A A— O A 0~E 10— I E I 
—All— A 0. 

SECTIONS 38—40. 

39. What is meant by Mood? How many modal com- 
binations are possible, and how many legitimate f 

40. What is meant by Figure ? How many figures are 
there, and how many available moods in each figure ? 

41. Give the Mnemonic word answering to each of the 
following Syllogisms : 

No animal is a stone. 
Every man is an animal, 
' . ' No man is a stone. 

Every man is an animal. 

Some living things are not animals, 

*.' Some living things are not men. 

Every animal has feeling. 
Every animal has life, 
• . • Some living things \i«ve te^Vvci^- 

i& 4 



72 

Every man is an animal, 
No animal is a stone, 
* . * No stone is a man. 

No animal is a stone, 

Some bodies are animals, 

' . * Some bodies are not stones. 

Things which are equal to the same are equal to each 
other, 
A and B are equal to the same, viz. to G, 
' . * A and B are equal to each other. 



SECTIONS 41, 42. 

42. Give the special rules of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd 
figures respectively, and prove them. 

43. In what respect is the 1 st figure superior to the 
other three ? 

44. Show in what mood and figure each of the following 
syllogisms is drawn ; and that each conforms to the special 
rules X)f the figure : 

No vicious habit ought to be indulged. 
Some vicious habits promote a temporary interest, 
* . * Some things which promote a temporary interest ought 
not to be indultred. 



o 



All true penitents will find mercy. 

Some true penitents have been great sinners, 

•. Some great sinners will find mercy. 



Libellers delight in hurting the feelings of others, 

No good man will delif;ht in hurting the feelings of others, 

' . * No good man is a libeller. 



Many philosophers have contradicted their principles by 

their practice, 
A 11 who contradict their principles by their practice are 
d/shonestf 
Some dishonest persons have been "yViilLo^^^T^. 



73 

45. What is Reduction and how many different kinds of 
it are there ? 

46. Show how the mnemonic lines Barbara, Celarent, 
&c. ^uide us in reducing syllogisms of the 2nd, 3rd, and 
4th figures to the 1st. 

47. Reduce the syllogisms in Quest. 43 to some mood 
of the 1st figure. 

48. Give an account of the method by which Sir W. 
Hamilton proposes to simplify the doctrine of mood and 
figure. 

SECTION 43. 

49. What is an Enthymeme? and what an Epichere- 
ma ? Give examples of each. 

50. In the foUowinnr examples of reasoning supply the 
suppressed premiss; and form them into regular syllo- 
gisms : 

It is already day, because the sun shines. 

We shall hear thunder, because there was a flash of light- 
ning. 

France u misgoverned, and therefore is unhappy. 

The Epicureans cannot be considered true philosophers, 
because they did not consider virtue to be essentially 
good. 

Ireland is distressed ; therefore it is misgoverned. 

The star twinkles ; and is therefore a fixed star. 



51. Expand the following Epicherema into two or more 
separate syllogisms : 

Every thing the knowledge of which we obtain by in- 
tuition is true, because upon such intuitions all reasoning 
and all knowledge are primarily based. But our mental 
identity is a fact which we know by intuition, since the 
belief of it is immediate, irresistible, universal ; therefore 
the fact of our mental identity is grounded on Truth. 

52. Place the following passages in the order of a regular 
Sorites : 

Onesimus was a resident at Golosse ; because he was the 
servant of Philemon, who was a hearer of AxQ.Viv^Y^v^^ 
minister ofColosse, 



74 

This doctrine is true, because it is maintained by A. B. 
who is a divine of the Church of Ens;land — a church whose 
doctrines are in accordance with the Scriptures. 

53, Show that the reasoning in the 13th prop, of the 1st 
Book of Euclid maj be put in the form of a Sorites. 

SECTIONS 44, 45. 

64. What is a conditional and what a disjunctive syl- 
locrism? Show the two legitimate modes of illation in 
each. 

55. In the following conditional syllogisms show which 
are and which are not legitimately drawn and why : 

If Judas was not rightly made an apostle, he deserved to 
be rejected ; but he was rightly made an apostle : therefore 
he did not deserve to be rejected. 

If riches be the supreme good, they ought to be the chief 
object of human desire ; but they ought not to be the chief 
object of human desire : therefore they are not the supreme 
good. 

If great poets be virtuous, they will be highly admired ; 
but they are highly admired, therefore they are virtuous 
men, 

56. Put the following arguments into the form of a dis- 
junctive syllogism, and prove that you have drawn them 
correctly : 

If the earth be neither eternal, nor made by chance, it 
must be the work of an intelligent being ; and there are 
numerous grounds on which the first two suppositions may 
be shown to be absurd. 

Rebellion is sometimes justifiable, because we sometimes 
have the alternative presented to us of obeying princes 
contrary to conscience or of rising against them. 

SECTION 46. 

57. Explain the nature of the dilemma, and show on 
what fundamental principle its validity rests. 

58. State the following examples in the form of a 
dUemma : , 

The story told by the Roman soVdiexa «^o\x\i V5Dkft %\«83aTi^ 



75 

of our Lord*s body from the tomb bj the disciples is absurd ; 
because if they were asleep how could they know that it 
was so ; and if they were awake why did they not prevent 
it? 

Either you did not know the way when you undertook to 
be my ffuide, or you did. On neither supposition will I pay 
you. For if you knew the way you have made me too lat« 
purposely; and if you did not know the way you were 
dishonest in undertaking to guide me. 

Clergymen who have no cure of souls are without 
excuse ; for if they are capable of the office they ought to 
fulfil it ; and if they are incapable of it they should never 
have undertaken it. 

SECTIONS 47—49. 

59. Give a classification of Fallacies, and explain on 
what principle the classification proceeds. 

60. Solve the following Fallacies^ and show to which 
class of Sophisms they belong : 

Hector slew Fatroclus, 

Achilles slew Hector, 

' . * Achilles slew Fatroclus. 

Meat and drink are the necessaries of life. 

This man spends all his money on meat and drink, 

* . * He spends all his money on the necessaries of life. 

He who calls you an animal speaks truly, 
He who calls you a goose calls you an animal, 
* . ' He who calls you a goose speaks truly. 

What I am you are not, 

I am a man, 

' . * You are not a man. 

No evil should be allowed that good may come, 

All punishment is an evil, 

^ . * No punishment should be allowed that good may come. 

The Bible commands us to honour rulers. 

The Czar of Russia is a ruler, 

'. • The Bible commaods us to Yionowi OaftC»x«a oS^^Mai^^, 



76 

I 

The Gospel promises salvaUon to Christuuis, 

Some wicked men are Christians, 

* . * The Gospel promises salvation to some wicked men. 

Murder should be punished bj death. 

The soldier is a murderer, 

'.* The soldier should be punished bj death. 

The plays of Shakespeare cannot be read in a day, 
Macbeth is a play of Shakspeare, 
*.' It cannot be read in a day. 

Five is one number, 

Three and two are five, 

'.* Three and two are one number. 

All the Reformers were zealous Protestants, 

Marcus Aurelius was a Reformer, 

*.* Therefore he was a zealous Protestant. 

Leaving off animal food has improved his health greatly ; 
because he has never experienced a headache since. 

The child of Themistocles governed his mother, 

The mother governed Themistocles, 

Themistocles governed Athens, 

Athens governed Greece, 

Greece governed the world, 

* . - The child of Thembtocles governed the world. 

' Nature abhors a vacuum, therefore the water rises in 
the pump. 

The nature of heavy things is to tend to the centre of 
the universe, and of light things to go off from it. 

Now experience shows that heavy things tend towards 
the centre of the earth, and that light things go off from 
it. 

*.* Therefore the centre of the earth and the centre of 
the universe are the same. 

All Christian doctrine is contained in Scripture, 
But infant baptism is not mentioned in Scripture, 
'. * Ltfant baptism is not a OVun&tl\asi dQK:^arav<^ 



77 

We know that there is a God because it is so stated in 
the Bible ; and we know that the Bible is true because it 
is of divine origin. 

A. B. must be a fanatic because he is a Mormonite. 

The French are a light-hearted people, 

A. B. is a Frenchman, 

• . • Therefore he is light-hearted. 



THE ENO> 



LOKDON : 

Printed by Spcttiswoodh & Co. 
New-street Sq>iaie. 



THE ESSENTIALS 



OF 



ENGLISH GRAMMAR and ANALYSIS. 

By J. D. MORELL, M.A. 

ONB OF HER MAJKSTY'S INSPECTORS OF SCHOOLS. 

Second Edition, price ScL 



Taken from the above. 



ESSENTIALS 

OF 

ENGLISH GRAMMAR. 



In Two Parts, 32mo. Part I. 2d. ; Part II. 3d. 



Tliie is an English Grammar in a small 
conlpaBs, the object of which is to give 
the general principle of language as ap- 
plied to the study of English, without 
those minute details winch perplex the 
scholar instead of rendering him any 
real service. The first part explains the 
Classification of Wor Is, in which some 
new and improved principles have been 
adopted. The second gives the system 
of inflections, as seen in the English 



language especially. The third part is a 
Syntax based entirely upon the nature 
and analysis of the sentence. Three 
progressive modes of Parsing are given, 
according to the stages of progress made 
by the pupil. The first part, comprising 
the ClasaUlcation of Wordt^ price 2d., 
and the second paH, compnsinfjf the 
Inflections of Word*, price 3d., prmted 
in a smaller size, may M haid separately, 
as above. 



THE 

ANALYSIS OF SENTENCES 

EXPLAINED AND SYSTEMATISED : 

WITH AN EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF SYNTAX. 

By J. D. MORELL, M.A. 

ONB OF HER MAJESTY'S INSPECTORS OP SCHOOLS. 

Seventh Edition, revised, and furnished with Illastrative Exercises, 

price 2s. 



The object of this little work is to ox- 
tend the study of Eng ish Orammar, so 
as to include a complete exiKtsition of the 
structure of the sentence from its sim- 
plest to its most comi)lex form. Similar 
methods of gaining an enlarged mental 
exercise from grammatical studies have 
for some time been practised on the Con- 
tinent; in the present instance, the plan 



is adapted, for the flrKt txme, to the use 
of the English scholar. The " Analysis 
of Sentences" has already met with 
much approbation in this country, is 
coming more and more into extensive 
use, and has been adopted by the Com- 
mittee of Council on Kducation as one of 
the 1)est books for the examination of 
candidates for certificates of merit. 



Loudon : LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, U>^G^N>^^, ^.^O^^^BTt^. 



ELEMENTS OF I'SYCHOIOGY: 



BjJ. D.MOBELL, MA. 

Price 7i. 8d. 

of 'actual flip«rlcii«. HilvIiw 

»»..* w ^..^^ ^-^^^^.^^ ..,..^.. _ , — — ^^iiFswuvd tli« vay, i have dLvlded 

MlliBrtofoUowed.uiilUiFendtDwlilrli Ibi Kli(Je poiltlrB luveitlnllon ' '- 

it ji Kaidlly I«uUde. Id tlie Bnl c)ia|>- Uin« v°n> ! I. Tlul nlaCng b. 

iv 1 taxine^ni a Inr abnrrHUmi human inulUiNii« i >- ttia relating 

.^Wip^iiutlba«»n«Uonarm«i- loUia IMlliiRti andS. ThalTelaltnHta 

UdMEoiwIth OHadouBorDaum, UiewUl. )nUM|iiwntToli»iiel1i»e 



I WBTTantad riini^ anuyied 

¦ Into tha Maim at llie Inl 
-_ ,„. la |iunl]r imlntadrnt the . _ 

anaenliUt* and tnuwandaDtaL Itai- muitrliyihetmhal'Durawntenilia 

tJiniuionaUuttie pmvec Idea oTUie ^T^e anilyris orthe Itellnca and thi 

foul, to a^ilaln iu oriJElD, and look n'UJ are reiorved fur a Second FiirL. 



, „ , dliw 

, (rwD the oiH Into tha Maim atUie InlallKliul jnncara, and 

Tha tUnl chapUr la |iunl]r iwliitad nit the maUidda by which w* 



The TAird Edilioa, in ftp. 8ro, price 58. clotb, 
PYCROFT'S 

COUESE OF ENGLISH BEADING, 



fturcdolti. 

afnl companion lo any lover of Ut«TatuTe. and more pfirtlcniarl/ to 
. It UtJie beet dT all acboolyrliea." UkHn.BBiAii'«Mjoi£IMi. 



Hon to Btody Hlilory p 



Piinlliig, ifciiliitoTS. J 
How to Htudy the Snrlptur 



Tba'Cetli ( 
LoodoB ; LO.VGMAM, BBOWN, GRtBll, U>t;G»l.'S%,*i^S«S.^=^'''- 



NEW AND IMPROVED EDITIONS OF APPROVED 
EDUCATIONAL WORKS. 

By T. Tate, T.R.A.S., late of Kneller Training College. 



ALGEBEA MADE EAST, 

CHIEFLY INTENDED FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS. 

By THOMAS TATE, F.E.A.S. 

LAT£ OF KNELLER TRAINING COLLEGE. 

12ino. 28. 



Jlso by T. Tate, F.R.A.S., I^ew Editions, 

The PHILOSOPHY of EDUCATION; or, Principles and Practice of 
Teaching^. The fSecond Edition, revised and considerably enlarged. 

Fcp.'svo. 68. 6d. 
EXERCISES on MECHANICS and NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 12mo. 

28.— KEY, 38. 6d. 
The ELEMENTS of MECHANISM 12mo. Ss. fid. 

MECHANICAL PHILOSOPHY 8vo. lOs. Cd. 

On the STRENGTH of MATERIALS 8vo. 58. 6d. 

FIRST PRINCIPLES of ARITH M ETIC 12mo. Is. 6d. 

SYSTEM of MENTAL ARITHMETIC ...8vo. Is. 

NEW COINAGE in relation to School Arithmetics 12mo. 8d. 

GEOMETRY, MENSURATION, LEVELLING, &c 12mo. 38. 6d. 

FIRST THREE BOOKS of EUCLID 12rao. Is. 6d. ; ISmo. Is. 

DIFFERENTIAL and I NTEGRAL CALCULUS 12mo. 4s. 6d. 

MATHEMATICS for WORKING MEN, Part 1 8vo. Is. 

DRAWING for LITTLE BOYS and GIRLS 4to. Is. 6d. 

DRAWING for SCHOOLS 4to. 5s. 6d. 

The LITTLE PHILOSOPHER; or. the Science of Familiar Things. 

Vol. I. 3s. 6d. ; or in 3 Parts, Is. each. 

COURSE of NATURAL and EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY, 2 vols. 
78. ; or in 7 Parts, Is. each, as follows :— 

MECHANICS and the STEAM-ENGINE 18rao. Is. 

ASTRONOMY and the USE of the GLOBES 18mo. Is. 

LIGHT and HEAT 18mo. Is. 

HYDROSTATICS, HYDRAULICS, PNEUMATICS u. 

ELECTRICITY for BEGINNERS 18mo. Is. 

MAGNETISM, ELECTRODYNAMICS, &c 18mo. Is. 

EXPERIMENTAL CHEMISTRY 18mo. Is. ; 12rao. Is. 6d. 



London : LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, \-O^O^k^?»,«i^Q^^^:^?k 

— — ^ ¦ — Nr^ 



39, Paternoster Row, LONDOX: March 1857. 



(§mn^ ^^pttM JTists 



Off 



SCHOOL-BOOKS 

VUSLISHED BT 

Messrs. LONGMAN, BEOWN, and CO. 



AI6XBBA. 

Colenso's Slements, Part I. ISmo. CKey, Ss.^ As. 6d. 

^ n Part n. 12ino. (Kegr, 6s.) . .^ .68. 

„ •• complete, for Teachers and 49tudent6,4vo 128. 6d. 

,, JLlgetea fat National «nd ElementAnr fiohotfls, ISmo.CKej, 9b. «d.) Is. 6d. 

„ Examples and Eqnatkm Papera, tlEaao 2s. 6d. 

Lund's Short and Easy Coarse of AQgdbra, lop. 8vo. (K^. te.) 2b. 6d. 

Reynolds^ Elementary Algebra for Beginners, 18mo. (Key, 3d.) Is. 

Scott's Arithmetic and Aflgebra for flhe use of Sandhurst College, '8vo 16s. 

TsteTs Algcfhra made Easy, iBfteaded chiefly fin"tfae tne of Schools, 12mo. ..28. 

Thomson's Elementary Treatise, 12mo. (Key, 48.^.) 5s. 

Wood's Elements, for TTniversity Students, by Lund,«8vo IBs. 6d. 

Limd'-s Companion to DiMo, 8ve 68. 6d. 

Toong's Slementaty Treatise, ISmo. (Key, \fy 6pA!Qer,>6s.) 6s. 

ASTTHMETIG. 

Colenso's Arithmetic for Schools, 12mo. (Key, by Maynard, 68.) is. 6A. 

„ Text-Book of Elementary Azitdocmetic, Iteko. (with Answers, 8s.8d.) 1«. 9d. 
£^ Colesso's EUmentary Arithmetifi xnay be had in Five Paris, as follows >- 

1. Text- Book 6d. I 3. E]ianipIeB,Pt. II. Comfiomnd Ariihmetfk m».id. 

2. Ezaniples,Pt.I.S«mp{eilrtMm«fte4c(. I i.YxKm^\m^\ll.Fra^ion»JQfcifndUfiuodteimaUid. 

6. Answers to the Examples, with 'Solutions <tf fhe mese Aifllcmlt Qnestiona It. 

CioAby's Walkingame's Tutor's Assistoiit, % Mi^irard, ISmo. (Key, Ss. 6d.) Ss. 

Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Arithmetic, 12mo. 28. ; doth iSa. 6d. 

Hiley's Arithmetical Companion, 18mo. (Key, Is. 6d.) ^. 

Hughes's Manual of Arithmetic; fcp.€vQ. (with JLegr^. 88. €d.) ls.6d. 

Joyce'/i System of Pradical Arithmetic, b)' M^jstard, 12mo. (Key,:8B.) 4ts. 

Lardner's Treatise on Arithmetic, fcp. 8vo 88. 6d. 

M'Leod's Course of Arithmetical Questions, 2 parts, Umo.. each Is. 

M Manual for Elementary lustniotioEuilSme , ]«. 

M Extended Multiplioation andPence Tablet^ pwdoien jte. 

HoAineux's Arithmetic, 2 parts, 12ma each (JCeys, Sixpence eaeh) ^ fs. Sd. 

Scott's Arithmetic and Algebia for the use of Sandhurst College, 8vo 16s. 

„ Decimal Arithmetic for the use of Schools, 12mo v. ^.— . . . As. 

Tate'B Treatise on the First Principles of Arithmetic, 12m&i. . .-..-^ — .? "Kjk.^ft.. 

^ Mentdl Arithmetic for Teachers. %vo * *— . *• > — ''^** 

Tttbt On the "New Coinage in relation to our ^diocA. ^A>3EaaiS*3«»>'fi«8ft»-. '• 

LondBu: LONGMAN, BBOWN, GHEX.!!;, VOlSfiCM^fcrs^'^ *»^ 



2 Stminl ^ists of Scl^ool-^oohs. 

ASTBOKOKT, HEIEO£lOI0eT ana NATTCFATIOIT 

Anen'iPopuluABtruQomi', translated br Smyth and licanl.TD]. 1. 8vci. 



jBuia'iFroMeiniilnABtronoiny Suneyln^, and Niiigitloo, Umo. (ta. 

„ HindlwokfartheStargot'tbeFlntsndSacondAli^tnde.Sra. .. Sa.ti. 
TalVi AMiaiuHnjaiidlliallMortbaaiobWilW'Beftlnun.ISmo. U. 



„ i5Bn*r!ilAtla3 frfodern and AniaeDt Geography, royal Ko Mi. 

a Atlas »rilD<]EniGHi|;rBphy,roifal 9(0. It). 

H JuiiorUDdemAtlaa.rorBlSi'a. <a.Cd. 

H>U'aFLr<tcrEl9nuintaiyAtlaii>tiar»l(^ind3l]>[a,DUlaDK4tD. U U. 

„ sfap-PrnJocUoiu, 1». Hull's OntUrsMBB" I* 

Hn^WI'i Qeosral Atlas Jbr Elementary School!, ISdo, [coloured, 1I.M.) ,. ll. 

„ Allu of Phyitcal. I>DlltLcal.snd'Caminerclidaa>)tniih7, laja ertklOi. M. 
H Si;hii»lAtlMarFliy9lcslaedBrs|Ay,l£nio. Ii.Sd. 

„ iIanil-AtLaxofOsi»rii<G«igraphr,i9(ull-ro]o11redMnpi.l9ma... tM.M. 
„ ClosE-Atiss II rPA^ifeiit acagraphy, 30 __ . . 

„ FbjricalAUHOCGnatBiltilnu" 

sioQB&rar. 

Angn'i LlfH or MBtlnpilabfd SdenUlla Uto, Sr 



CALCTTLtrs and LO&AHITHHS. 

Cumicfaul'i rMatiBcoBlheCalnilnBOf 

Tarloy's Tables of Sii-BriroLotrarithmt . 

Tata's PiinclpleiofthBllUlaniitiil and lilUsnlCiilculiu,I!mi>. ,. 



6(hillliie»D(Tn»rimemidChcnii.try,ltino.U.M.| Wmo. U, 

Jsoi/sScboolChomiBtrj-jfrp.ffvo, -,., .,....,...,., 7B, 



(Sjemral psts of ^rj^ool-^oohs. 3 



%^^.^h^k^^^^^^^*^^^^<%*%^*^*^^^k^^%^^^»^^*^^^fc^^ 



GHBOKOLOOT. 

Blair's Chronological and Historical Tables, edited by Sir H. Ellis 81s. 6d. 

Brewer's Poetical Chronology of Inventions, Discoveries, Battles, &c., 12mo. Ss. 6d. 

„ Elementary Atlas of History and Geography, royal 8vo 128. 6d. 

Hort's Introduction to Chronology and Ancient History, 18mo is. 

Howlett's Tables of Chronology and Regal Genealogies, ito 5s. 8d. 

„ Metrical Chronology, post 8vo 7s. 

Jaquemet's Compendium, edited by the Rev. J. Alcorn, M. A., post 8vo 7s. 6d. 

Nioolas's Chronology of History, fcp. 8vo Ss. 6d. 

School Clironology, or the Great Dates of History, squai'e 12mo Is. 

Slater's School Chronology, or Sentontiee Chronologlcse, 12mo 8s. 6d. 

„ ColouredChronological Chart toaccompanytheabove(onroller,0s.6d.) 6s. 
Valpy's Poetical Chronology of Ancient and English History, 12mo 28. 6d, 

CIVIL LAW and FOLHIGAL ECONOMY. 

Humphreys's Manual of Civil Law, for Schools and Candidates, fcp. 8vo 88. 6d. 

„ „ PoliticalSclence, for Schools & Candidates, fcp. 8vo. 8b. 6d. 
Marcet's Conversations on Political Economy, fcp. 8vo 7s. Gd. 



CLASSICAL DICnONABIES and MYTHOLOGY. 

Barker's Lempridre's Classical Dictionary, edited by Dr. Cauvin, 8vo 12s. 

Hort's New Pantheon, or Introduction to Mythology, 18mo is, 6d. 

Lempri6re's Classical Dictionary, 8vo 9s. 

Kich's Illustrated Companion to the Latin Dictionary and Greek Lexicon, 
with upwards of 2,000 Wood Engravings, post 8vo 21s, 

GONCHOLOGY. 

Catlow's Popular Conchology, or the Shell Cabinet arranged, poet 8vo lis. 

COPY-BOOKS. 

M'Leod's Graduated Series of Kine Copy-Books, each 8d. 

DBAWDTG-BOOES, &c. 

Malan's Aphorisms on Drawing, post 8vo Ss. Cd. 

Tate's Drawing for Schools, with numerous Illustrations and Exercises, ito. 5s. Cd. 
„ Drawing-Book for Little Boys and Girls, with 180 Exercises, ito Is. 6d. 

ENGLISH COMPOSITION and ELOCUTION. 

Brewer's Guide to English Composition, fcp. 8vo 5s. 6d. 

Graham's English, or the Art of Composition, fcp. 8vo 68. 

Hlley's English Composition, Past I. or Junior <Sf«riet, 18mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.) Is. 6d. 

,. Practical English Composition, Past II. 18mo Ss. 

MoreU's Handbook of Logic, for Schools and Teachers, fcp. 8vo 28. 

Parker's Progressive Exercises in English Composition, 12mo Is. 6d. 

Roget's Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases oUssifled, crown 8vo . . . . lOs. 6d. 

London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN» LO^OliK.'^^, wA ^^^J^^Ss::^'^. 



EDUCATION in GENERAL. 

Domestic Economy, Hoosekeei^ng, Cookery, &c. (in QUkft SeHm), ISeao^^ liu 

Pilbms's Contributions to the Cause of Education, 8vo IM, 

Stow's Training System, &c.,. for Trainers and Governesses, poet 8vo. 6b. 

Sydenham's^Notes of Lessons, 12mo.. ^ S^ 

Tate's Pliilosophy of Edaoation, or Principles &a^ ef Teaching iep, 8vo 6Bi. 6d. 

ENGLISH PICnONARIES. 

Haunder's Treasury of Knowledge fuid Litnrary of Reference, fbp. 8vo 10s. 

Smart's Walker's Pronouncing Dictionary Remodelled, 8vo 12s. 

M *t If M Epitomised, I6mo Ga. 

Sullivan's Dictionary of Derivations, 12mo 2s. 

„ „ „ the English Language, 12mo Ss. 6d. 

ENGLISH ETTMOLOGY. 

Black's Student's Manual (OreOc), 18mo. 2b. 6d. ; Sequel {taHn\ 18mo 5s. 6d. 

Ross's Etymological Manual of the English Language, 18mo 6d. 

ENGLISH GBAMUABS and EXEBCISE-BOOES. 

Downe's (Viscount) Elementary English Grammar, ISrao I». 

Hiley*s English Grammar and Style, 12mo Ss. 6dL 

„ Abridgment of English Grammar, 18mo ls.tdb 

M Cliikl's First English Grammar, 18mo Is. 

„ Exercises adf^pted to the Engfish Grammar, 12mo« (Key, SB.X 28. 6d. 

Hunter's Text-Book of English- Grammar, 12mo. 2e. 6d. 

M'Leod's Explanatory English Grammar, for Beginners, ISmo Is. 

Marcet's Game of English Grammar, with Conversations, post Svo Ss. 

„ Mary's Grammar, interspersed with Stories, ISmo Ss. 6d. 

„ Willy's Grammar, interspersed with Stories, 18mo 2s. 61. 

Morell's Analysis of Sentences explamed and illustrated, 12mo 28. 

M Essentials of English Grammar and Analysis, fcp. Svo. 8d. 

M Essentials of English Qrammar, ISmo. Part I. 2d. \ Part II. .¦ 9d. 

Smart's Course of English Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, &c. 5 vols. 12mo 238. 6d. 

Stepping-Stone to English Grammar, in Question and Answer, ISmo Is. 

Sullivan's Attempt to Simpli^ English Granmiar, ISmo Is. 

ENGLISH PASSING. 

Hunter's Exercises in English Parsing, 12mo r.. .«.- 6d. 

Lowres's System of English Parsing and Derivation, ISmo Is. 

ENGLISH POETBY. 

Connon's Selections from Milton's ParcMlise £o«^, 12mo Ss. <d. 

Cook's First Poetry-Book for Elementary Schools, ISmo 9d. 

„ Selection of School Poetry, with short Notes, 12mG; 28. 

Graham's Studies from the English Poets, or Poetical Reading^Bo(^, 12mo. 7s. 

Hagbes'a Select Specimens of English Poetry, 12mo Ss. 6d. 

iir!2:aod'5 Second Poetical ReadLng-Bo<)k,l%mo l8.8d. 

'PUliBer'B Afodem Poetical Speaker. cMetiy for li»aieA* «6br»\&,'Qxiu>. %ik«. 



'^»odon: LONGMAN, BRO^N, GUEEN, I.01S0NUiS;^, wi^^QSKKC^. 



ENGLISH BEADDTG-BOOES. 

Hughes's Graduated Beadlng^Lesson-Books, fcp. 8vo. S SXBZ18» each Ss. 6d. 

„ Select Specimens of English Prose, 12mo 4e. Od. 

Jones's Litorgical Class-Book, from the best authorities, 12mo Is. 6d. 

M'Leod's First Book to teach Reading and Writing. 18mo 6d. 

., „ Beading>Book,18mo.Sd.; or as Reading-Lessons, in SO Sheets Ss. 

Mami's Lessons in General Knowledge, fcp. 8vo Ss. 6d. 

Haunder's Universal Class-Book for Every Day in the Year, 12mo 6s. 

Pycroft's Course of English Reading, fcp. 8vo 58. 

Sewell's School Speaker and Holiday Task-Book, 12mo 6e. 

Simple Truths from Scripture, in Easy Lessons, 18mo Cd. 

Smart's Historioo-Shakspearian Readings, 12mo 6s. 

Sullivan's Literary Class-Book, or Readings in Literature, 12mo 28. Cd. 

EKGUSH SPELLING-BOOKS. 

Carpenter's Scholar's Spelling Assistant, 12mo. Is. fid. 

„ „ „ „ edited by M'Leod, 12mo Is. 6d. 

Homsey's Pronouncing Expositor, or New Spelling-Book, 12mo 28. 

Mayor's English Spelling-Book, Genuine Edition, 12mo Is. 6d. 

Sullivan's Eng^h Spelling-Book Superseded, 18mo. Is. id. 

ENGLISH SYNONTMES, fte. 

Graham's English Synonymes, classified and explained, fcp. 8vo. 78. 

Boget's Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases, crown 8vo 168. Gd. 

EUCLID. 

Colenso's Elements of Euclid, from Slmson's Text, 18mo. (with Key, 66. 6d.) 4s. 6d. 

„ Geometrical Problems (without Key, Is.), with Key, 18mo 8e. Cd. 

Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Euclid, Books I. and II. 12mo Is. 

Tate's First Three Books of Euclid's Elements, 12mo. Is. 6d. ; 18mo Is. 

FOBTIFIGATION AND THE MILITABT ABT. 

Hodge's Catechism of Fortification, for Students and Candidates. 12mo 28. 6d. 

Macdougall's Theory of War, post 8vo. with Plans of Battles 10s. Cd. 

FRENCH GBAHICABS and EXEBCISE-BOOKS. 

Albitks' How to Speaic French, 12mo 48. 6d. 

Cambier's Sandhurst College French Grammar, 12mo 5«. 

Contauseau's Compendious Grammar of the French Language, 12mo 48. 

„ Guide to French Translation, 12mo Ss.Cd. 

Harael's New Universal French Grammar, 12mo 48. 

„ Grammatical Exercises on the French Language, 12mo. (Key, Ss.) 48. 

„ French Grammar and Exercises, by Lambert, 12mo. (Key, 48.) &tf. Cd. 

Sadler's French Pronunciation & Conversation, in Question & Answer, ISmo. Is. 

Tarver'B Eton French Grammar, 12mo. 8a* \ 

n f* ** Exerdses, Familiar* Conver«aUoTi«JL,\^sfto.^CKAi*^*^^*-^*^ ^ 
M French Phraseology explidned and comvax«&,\2sxvo ^** 

London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GR^^N, U>iaO^Kl^^> %tA'»OJWS.'^ 



A l 



FBENCH DICnONABIES. 

Ck)ntan8eau'B New Practical French and English Dicticmary, poet 8vo Ite. 6d. 

Kngent'8PocketDictionaryofFrench&EnKl.Langnage8,18mo.40.6d.; 12mo. 78. 6d. 
Tardy'8 French Pronouncing Dictionary, 12mo 7», 

FBENCH, ITALIAN, and OEBHAN BEABHTO-BOOKS. 

Camhier's Sandhurst College French Reading-Book or Becueil, limo. St. 

Charente's French Grammar, Exercises, and Reading-Book 

Ck)ntanseau'8Pro8ateursetPo6te8Fran9!us,or SelectionsfromFrenchWritan 7b. 6d. 
Eztraits Choisis from Modem French Writers, by the Author otAmpHtrbert 
Lacaita's Italian Reading-Book, or Selections from best Italian Writ«rB,12mo. Sa. 

Metcalfe's History of German Literature 

Muller's' German Reading-Book 

Rowan's Morceauz choisis des Auteurs Modemes, h I'usage de la Jeunesse 68. 
Tarver's Eton French Reading-Book,— Prose, Verse, and Phrasecdogy, 12mow 78. 6d. 

,, Choix en Prose, 12mo. Ss. 6d. ; Choix en Vers, 12mo Ss. 8d. 

^nntzer'8 First German Reading-Book, for B«gimierB,fcp.8vo. St. 

GBEEK CLASSICAL ATJTHOBS, fte. 

Axibtotlb's Politie$t with English Notes, &c., edited by Eaton, 8to lOi. 6d. 

EtJSiPiDSS, the 5 Plays, with English Notes by Mqjor, post 8to Sit. 

HxBODOTUS, with English Notes, &c., edited by Stocker, 2 vols, post 8vo. . .188. 

HoHES's lUad, with English Notes, &c., edited by Yalpy, 8to lOi. 6d. 

Linwood's Anthologia Oxonientia (Greek, Latin, and English), 8vo .lit. 

4, Treatise on the Greek Metre$t 8vo lti.6d. 

Sophocles, with English Notes, &c.,editedbyBra8seandothers,2yol8.p.8To. Sis. 

„ edited, with short Latin Notes, by Linwood, 8vo lOi. 

TheatreoftheGreeks, edited by Donaldson, 8vo Hit, 

Walford's Handbook of the Greek Drama, fcp.Svo 68. 

XBiroPHOir's AnabcuUt with English Notes, &c., edited by White^ 12mo. . . 78. 6d. 

„ Memorabilia, with English Notes, &c., edited by Hickie, p. Sva 88. 6d. 

GBEEK QHAirMAKS, EXEBCISE-BOOES, &c. 

Collis's Praxis Graeca, LEtymology, 28.6d. ; II. Syntax^ Gs. ; ULAccentuaUon Sa. 

„ „ lambica : Exercises in Greek Tragic Senarii 

Howard's Introductory Greek Exercises, 12mo. (Key, 28. 6d.) 58. 6d. 

Kennedy's Greek Grammar (Grsecse Grammaticse Institutio Prima), 12mo. . 48. 6d. 

„ Palsestra Stili Ghrseci, or Greek Prose Materials, 12mo. 

„ „ Musarum, or Greek Verse Materials, 12mo fo. 6d. 

Moody's New Eton Greek Grammar, in English, l&no 48. 

Pycroft's Greek Grammar Practice, 12mo Ss. 6d. 

Yalinr's Elements of Greek Grammar, with Notes, 8to 68. 6d. 

„ Greek Primitives and Leading Words, 12mo 68, 

Yalpy's Greek Delectus, improved by White, 12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.) 48. 

„ Second Greek Delectus, or New Analecta Minora, 8vo Os. Bd. 

Walford's Card of the Greek Accidence, 8vo. Is. ; of the Greek Prosody, Svo. Is. 

„ „ „ „ A.Qcex)Xfi,hth Edition , 6d. 

Yonge's Exercises in Greek Prose Composition, 12mo. (Key, Is.) Ss. Cd. 

OBEEK LEZICOirS, fto. {»ee ''Latin and Greek"). 
iMdon t LOyOMAK, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, and RO»BRTS, 



GEOGBAPEYy GAZETTEEB8, ftc. 

Adams's Geographical Word-Expositor, Second Edition^ 12mo 28. Gd. 

Arrowsmith's Geographical Dictionary of the Holy Scriptures, Sro 15s. 

Bowman's Questions on Hall's First or Elementary Atlas 28. 

Butler's Ancient Geography,post 8vo.4s. ; Butler's ModemGeogn^hyiPOst 8vo. 4b. 

„ Modem and Ancient Geography complete, post 8vo 7b. 6d. 

Cabinet Gazetteer, by the Author of the Cabinet Lawyer ^ teg. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Challener's Catechism of English Descriptive Geography, ISmo Is. 9d. 

Cunningham's Abridgment of Butler'g Oeoffrc^hv, fcp. Svo 2s. 

Dowling's Introduction to Qoldemith'a Oeoffraphp, 18mo 9d. 

„ Questions on Goldsmith's Qeographyt 18mo. (Key, 9d.} 9d. 

Falmouth's Conversations on Geography, or Child's First Introduction, fcp. 7s. 6d. 

Goldsmith's Grammar of Greneral Geography, fcp. Svo. (Key. 18mo. Is.) Ss. 6d. 

Hartley's Geography fbr Youth, 12mo. (Outlines, 18mo. 9d.) 4s. 6d. 

Hiley's First Geography for the Elementary Classes, ISmo 9d. 

„ Progressive Geography, in Lessons and Exercises, 12mo 2s. 

Hughes's (E.) Geography fbr Elementary Schools, ISmo Is. 

„ Outlines of Physical Geography, 12mo Ss, 6d. 

n Examination-Questions on Physicdl GeogrojpAyt fcp. Svo. .... 6d. 

„ Outlines of Scripture Geography and History 48. 6d. 

Hughes's (W.) Manual of (Geography, Physical, Industrial, and Pcditical . . 78. 6d. 

„ „ British Geography, fcp. Svo 28. 

„ „ Mathematical Geography, fq;>. Svo. 48.6d. 

„ General Geography, in G2ej0r'« iScAooZ Series, ISmo Is. 

„ British Geography, in Qleig's School Series, ISmo Is. 

„ Child's First Geography, in Qleig's School Series, ISmo. 9d. 

Johnston' s New General Gazetteer of the World, Svo S68. 

KeithOntheGlobe8,lqrTaylor,LeMesurier,andMiddleton,12mo.(Eey,28.6d.) 6s. Od. 

M'Leod's Geography of Palestine or the Holy Land, 12mo la. 6d. 

„ TravelsofSt. Paul, 12mo 

„ Geography of Old Testament CaaairiesiexceptinffPalestine^ 12mo. 

Mangnall's Compendium of Geography, for Schools, 12mo 78. 6d. 

Maunder's Treasury of Geography, completed by W. Hughes, fq;>. Svo 10s. 

Stepping-stone to Geography, in Question and Answer, ISmo Is. 

Sterne's School Geography, Physical and Political, 12mo S8.Gd. 

Sullivan's Geography Generalised, 12mo 28. 

„ Introduction to Geography and History, ISmo Is. 

Wheeler's Geography of Herodotus developed,explained.and iUa0trated,Svo.lSs. 

GEOMETBY. 

Lund's Geometry as an Art, with Easy Exercises, fcp. Svo Ss. 

„ „ a Science, with Easy Exercises, fcp. Svo Is. 6d. 

Narrlen's Elements of Geometry, for Sandhurst College, Svo 108. 6d. 

Tate's Principles of Geometry, Mensuration, Trigonometry, &c., 12mo Ss. 6d. 

GRADTJSES. 

Brasse's Greek Gradus, or Prosodial Lexictm, Svo. 158. 

Maltby's New and Complete Greek Gradus, Svo ^'^<> 

Yonge's New Latin GraduB ad Paniassum, poet 8^o.(:<nVCIci'BiM3m^^'^^^^ .,'^- 



\ 



/ 



Diotionaiy of Latin Epithets, poftt dvo. 
/ London: LONOMAN, BROWN, GRIKN, lX>^GiVlKS:«»» ^^^^^^'^^ 



8 (^mttd psfs of S-c|^00l-§00fes* 



mSTOBIGAL and MISGELLAKEOirS SCHOOL-BOOSIS. 

Anthony's Footsteps to Modern History, fcp. 8vo 5s. GJ. 

Balfour's Sketches of English Literature Ts. 

Brewer's Elementary Atlas of History and Geography, royal 8vo. 128. Gd. 

Browne's Ancient Greece, 18mo. Is.; Browne's Ancient Rome, ISmo Is. 

Burton's History of Scotland, firom 1689 to 1748, 2 vols. 8vo 2Cs. 

Child's Fii St History of Rome, fcp. 8vo 2s. Gd. 

Ck>mer's Historical Questions, or Sequel to ManffnaH^i» 12mo 5s. 

Farr's School and Family History of England, 12mo 58. Gd. 

First History of Greece, by Author ofthe ChUd'»Fir$tni»torjfcf Borne fispJSyo. 8s. Gd. 
Gleig's England, or First Book of History, ISmo. (cloth, 2s. 6d.) 2s. 

t, British Ck>lonies, or Second Book of Ifistory,18mo. Is. 

•, „ India, or Third Book of History, 18mo Is. 

„ Sacred History, or Fourth Book of History, 18mo. (doth, 28. 6d.) . . 28. 

mstorical Questions, Part I. On the above Four Histories, 18mo Is. 

Gleig's France, 18mo Is. 

Gnmey's Historical Sketches, SSnxmdSleries, St. Louis and Henri iy.,fcp.8vo. 6s. 

Keightley's Outlines of History, fcp. 8vo Ss. Gd. 

Mackintosh's England, 2 vols. 8vo Sis. 

Hangnail's HLstorical and Miscellaneous Questions, 12mo 4s. Gd. 

Mann's Lessons in General Knowledge, or Elementary Reading-Book, fcp. 8vo. Ss. Gd. 

Marcet's Conversations on the History of England, ISmo 5s. 

Maunder's Historical Treasury, fcp. 8vo 10s. 

Menzios' Analysis ofthe Constitution and History of England, 18mo Is. 

Merivale's Romans under the Empire, Yols.LtoIII.8vo.428.; Vols. IV.&V. 82s. 

„ Fall ofthe Roman Empire, 12mo 7s. Gd. 

Mure's Language and Literature of Ancient Greece, 3 vols. 8vo. 868. ; Vol. IV. 15s. 
Schmitz's Greece, mainly based on Thirlic<iW$, 12mo. with 187 Woodcuts. . . Ts. Cd. 

Scott's Scotland, 2 vols. fcp. 8vo 7s. 

Stafford's Compendium of Universal History, 12mo 3s. 6d. 

Stephen's Lectures on the History of France, 2 vols. 8vo 24s. 

Stepping>Stone to English History, in Question and Answer, 18mo Is. 

„ „ French History, in Question and Answer, 18mo Is. 

„ „ Roman History, in Question and Answer, 18mo Is. 

Sterne's Questions on Generalities, IstA 2d Series, 12mo. each (Keys, ea. 48.) 28. 

Thirlwall's History of Greece, 8 vols. 8vo. £3 ; or in 8 vols. fcp. 8vo 288. 

Turner's Anglo-Saxons, 8 vols. 8vo SGs. 

„ England during the Middle Ages, 4 vols. 8vo 508. 

Tytler's Elements of General History, 8vo 14s. 

Valpy's Latin Epitome of Sacred History, 18mo 2s. 

JVYESILE WOBES. 

Journal kept during a Summer Tour Abroad, fcp. 8vo 5s. 

Marcet's Rich and Poor, 18mo Is. 

„ Seasons, or Stories for very Young Children, 4 vols. 18mo. eadi. ... 2s. 

„ Willy's Holidays, or Conversations on Government, 18mo 2s. 

M M ;6ftorie8 for Young Children, ISmo 2s. 

" M Traveis on the Railroad, ISmo ^.^. 



*»<fo/i / LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, lX)^G^Mft^» w^«^ ^O^Y.^T&. 



(§meral ^iste of Sfx^d-'^jjoks. 



LAND-S UK V KIINS aad MEBTSIKEAIIOK. 

Lund's Elements of Qeometry and MensuTatfon, ftp. 8vo 

Nesbif 8 Treatise on Practical Land-Sonreyii^, witti 250 Examples, Svo. 128. 

tt ft ,1 Mensnratiofn, 12mo. ^Key, Ss.) 6s. 

Scotf s MenstButlon and Trigonometry, for Sandhurst CoUege, 8vx> 9s. 6d. 

Tate's Principles of Mensuration, Land-Surveying, LeyeQingr ftc.. 12mo Ss. 6d. 

lATOr GEAMMASS, EXSRCISE-BOOEft, te 

Barrett's Little Arthur's Latin Primer, 12mo. , Is. 

t, Latin Exercises for the Lowest Form, 12mo 3s. 6d. 

Bradley's New Latin Prose ExerciJaes, 12mo. (Key, 5s.} Si. 6d. 

Collis's Praxis Latina, Ft. I. for£^n7Mrs. 2s. 6d.; Pfe. II. fas Advanced Pit»a» Ss. 

EQley's Elements of Latin Grammar, 12mo Ss. 

„ Progressive Exercises on Latin Accidence, 12mix 28. 

Howard's Introductory Latin Exercises, 12mo 2s. 6d. 

„ Latin Exercises Extended, 12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.) Ss. 6d. 

Kennedy's Elementary Grammar of the Latin Language, 12mo Ss. 6d. 

„ Latin Yocabxilary, on Etymological Principles, 12mo Ss. 

„ Child's Latin Primer, or First Lessons, 12mo 2s. 

„ Tirocinium, or First Latin Beading-Book, 12mo 2s. 

„ Paloistra Latina, or Second Latin Beading-Bool;; 12mo 58. 

,. M Still Latini, or Latin Prose Materials, I2mo (A. 

„ Examples of Latin Style for Oral Use, I2mo 

„ Palaestra Camenarum, or Latin Verse Materials, 12mo 

Moody's l^ew Eton Latin Grammar, in English, 1^0. (Accidence* Is.) .... 28. fid. 

Pycroft's Latin Grammar Practice, 12ma. 2s. M. 

Rapier's Second Latin Terse-Book, by Arnold, 12mo. (Key» 2s. 6A^ Ss. 6d. 

Valpy's Elements of Latin Grammar, with short English Notes, 12mo. .... '28. Gd. 

,. Elegantise Latins, 12mo. (Key, 28. 6d.} ^6d. 

„ Latin Delectus, improved by White, 12mo. (Key, 38. fid.) 28.6d. 

„ Manual of Latin Etymology, £cp.4to 7s. 

„ Sacrse Blstorise Epitome, with English Notes, 13mOr 28. 

Walford's LatinElegiacs,2 Series,12mo.each 28.fid. -, KejtaFint Striet^Asno^ 58, 

„ Shilling Latin Grammar, 12mo. la. 

„ Grammar of Latin Poetry, 12mo. , la. 

„ Hints on Latin Writing, royal 8vo , lB.6d. 

„ Exercises ill Latin Prose, adapted to the above JSr»«<8»12mo.. 28. fid. 

„ Card of Latin Accidence, 8vo Is. 

„ „ „ Prosody, Is. ; Walford's Card of Latin Syntax Is. 

White's New Latin Grammar, complete, 12mo 28. fid. 

„ Latin Accidence, 12mo. Is.; White's Eton Latin Grammar, 12mo. Is. 9d. 

„ Second or Lai^er Latin Grammar, 12mo Is. fid. 

Wilkins's Notes for Latin Lyrics, for the use of Schools, 12mo 48. fid. 

Yonge's Exercises for Latin Verses and Lyrics out of ** Own Sense," 12mo. . 48. fid. 

„ „ in Latin Prose Composition, 12mo. (Key, Is.) 5B.fid. 

Zumpt's Latin Grammar, translated and adapted by Dt. L. SdbasSfisi...^^^ "^A^- N 

„ School Grammar of the La!ttaljtti^jua«6,^i^\iia«BSB^'^^ ..^^^-. 

London : LONGMAN, BROWN, QR.%1^^, TJ^lflQiVUw^'^ **^ 



10 (gjemral fists 0f S^cl^ooU^ookB. 



LATIN and GBEEE LEXIOOKS, DICTIOKABIES, fte. 

Bloomfleld's Oreek^English Lexicon to the New Testament, fcp. 8vo lOs. 6d. 

Englishman's Greek Concordance of the New Testament, royal 8ro. 42s. 

JUch's Ulttstrated Companion totheLatin Dictionary and Greek Lexicon, p.8ro. Sis. 
Riddle's Latin-En^ish and English-Latin Dictionary, 8vo. Sis. ; andsq.lSmo.lSs. 

Diamond Latin-English Dictionary, royal SSmo 48. 

Copious and Critical Latin-English Lexicon, 4to Sis. 6d. 

Latin-English Dictionary, 8vo. ISs. ; square ISmo 7s. 

English-Latin Dictionary, 8vo. 7s. ; square ISmo Ss. 6d. 

and White's New Latin-English Dictionary, royal Svo 

and Arnold's English-Latin Lexicon, Svo S5s. 

„ English-Latin Dictionary, by Ebden, square i)ost8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Robinson's Greek-English Lexicon to the New Testament, 8vo 18s. 

Rost and Palm's Edition of Passow's Greek Lexicon, translated by 

Frftdersdorfi; and edited by Riddle and White 

Tonge's Dictionary of Latin Epithets, post 8vo Ss. 6d. 

M New English-Greek Lexicon, 4to Sis. 

„ Latin Gradus, i>ost Svo. 9s. ; or with Appendix ofEpUheU 12s. 

LATIN CLASSICAL ATTTEOSS. 

Cjbsab's Comme7itaTie»t with English Notes, Jkc. by Anthon, ISmo 4s. 6d. 

It M Anthon's Edition, as above, improved by Hawkins, ISmo. 48. 6d. 
CiCBso'8 Seleet OratiotUt with English Notes, by Anthon, ISmo 6s. 

„ Cato Major and Lalius, with English Notes, &c. by White, ISmo. Ss. 6d. 
Cosinsi.nTS Nbpos, English Notes, &c. by Bradley, improved by White, ISmo. Ss. 6d. 
EuTBoynTS, with English Notes, &c. by Bradley, improved by White, ISmo. Ss 6d. 
HobjlCB, with English Notes by the Rev. J. E. Yoi^, Past I. Odes and Epodes 

„. English Notes and Strictures, by Girdlestone and Osborne, ISmo. . 78. 6d. 

„ with short English Notes, by Yalpy, 18mo 6s. 

LiVY, the First Five Books, with English Notes, &c by Hickie, post Svo. . . 8s. 6d. 
Ovii)'sir0toiNorpAoa««,Eugl.Notes,&c.byBradley,improvedbyWhite,lSmo. 4s. 6d. 
OvTS and TiBTTLLirs, the Eton Selection, with EngUsh Notes by Valpy, ISmo. 4s. 6d. 
Vksdvub, with English Notes, &c. by Bradley, improved by White, 12mo. Ss. 6d. 

SiiiLirsT, with English Notes, Commentary, &c. by Anthon, ISmo 5s. 

Taoitus, Qermania and Agrieola, with English Notes, &c. by White, ISmo. 4s. 6d. 
TBBBircB, from Beinhardt's Text, with English Notes, &c. by Hickie, ISmo. 9s. 6d. 
ViBGiL, Wagner's Text, with Notes and 6000 References, by Pycroft, ISmo. 7s. 6d. 

„ with short English Notes by Valpy, ISmo 78. 6d. 

UUSICBOOKS, tQ, 

Conversations on Harmony, with Music interspersed, Svo. ISs. 

Formby's Young Singer's Book of Songs, 4to Ss. 6d. 

„ Collection of Forty Amusing Rounds and Catches Is. 

„ Sacred Songs, 4to Ss. 6d. 

„ Sixty Amusing Songs for Little Singers, 4to 28. 6d. 

Stepping-Stone to Music, in Question and Answer, 18mo Is. 

Tnrle and Taylor's Singing^Book, or the Art of Singing at Sight, 16mo 6s. 

London: LONGMAN, BROWiJ, GREEN, LONGMANS, and ROBERTS. 



"^ 



0^0^0^^^r^^^^^^^^*^*^*^^ 



MATHEMATICS. 

Cape's C!our8e of Mathematics, for Addiscombe CoUefte, 2 vols. Svo SSs. 

Salmon's Treatise on Conio Sections, Svo 12s. 

Tate's Mathematics for Working.Men, Part L Arithmeito and Alff^ira, Svo. 28. 

Waddinghom's Oeometrical Treatise on Conic Sections, Svo 6s. 

Wrigleyts Collection of Mathematical Examples and Problems, Svo 8s. 6d. 

MENSUEATIOK (tee <' Land.Siirveying''). 

K ATT7BAL HISTOBT. 

Lee's Elements of Natural History, or First Principles of Zoology, fcp. Svo. 7s. 6d. 

Marcet's Lessons on Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, ISmo 2s. 

Maunder's Treasury of Natural History, fcp. Svo. lOs. 

Stepping-stone to Natural History, in Questi(m and Answer (doth, 2s. 6d.) . 2s. 
Van Der Hoeven's Handbook of Zoology, translated by Clark, Vol. I. Svo. .SOs. 

PTJBLIG SFEAEINO. 

Bowton's Debater, or New Theory of Public Speaking, fcp. Svo 68. 

BELIGIOirS and MOEAL WORKS. 

Bloomfield's larger Greek Testament, with copious English Notes, S v. Svo. 4Ss. 

„ College and School Greek Testament, English Notes, fcp. Svo.. . 7s. 6d. 

„ „ „ Lexicon to the Greek Testament, fcp. Svo. . . 10s. 6d. 

Conybeare & Howson's Life & Epistles of St. Paul, 2 vols, square crown Svo. Sis. 6d. 

Cotton's Short Prayers for Boys, iSmo Is. 6d. 

Englishman's Greek Concordance of the New Testament, royal Svo 428. 

„ Hebrew Concordance of the Old Testament, 2 vols, royal Svo.78s. 6d. 

Gleig's Sacred History, ISmo. idoth^ 28. 6d.) 28. 

Home's Introduction to the Study and Knowledge of the Scriptures, i y. Svo. 78s. 6d. 

„ Compendium of Ditto, 12mo 9b. 

Humphreys's Manual of Moral Philoeophy,fop. Svo. 28. 6d. 

Jones's Liturgical Class-Book, 12mo Is. 6d. 

Kalisch's Commentary on Bxodu$, Svo. 158. ; and (Abridged) 128. 

Paley's Evidences of Christianity and Horn Paulina, by Potts, Svo. lOs. 6d. 

Beadings for Every Day in Lent, from Jeremy Taylor, fcp. Svo 5s. 

„ a Month preparatory to Confirmation, fcp. Svo 48. 

Bobinson's Greek and English Lexicon to the Greek Testament, Svo. ISs. 

Sewell's Catechism of Early English CHiurch History, fcp. Svo 2s. 

Stepping-stone to Bible Knowledge, in Question and Answer, ISmo. Is. 

Taylor's Gallery or Collective Bible Lessons, 12mo Ss. 6d. 

„ Word-Pictures from the Bible, 12mo is. 6d. 

Tomline's Introduction to the Study of the Bible, fcp. Svo 5s. Od. 

Tumcr'sSacredHistory ofthe World, S vols, post Svo. 81s. 6d. 

Yalpy's Latin Epitome of Sacred History, ISmo. 2s. 

Wheeler's Popular Harmony of the Bible, fcp. Svo "^^^ 



/ 



London! LONGMAN, BROWN, QRER^, UO^O^Wsl^, «Ba.^'^^'^^^'^ 



12 (Btmxul ^iste of Sc|^00l-§00k^» 






SCIEKCE in GENERAL, NATUBAL PHIL0S0PH7, &c. 

Book of Domestic Economy, in Gleig's School Series, 18mo Ig. 

Braade's Lectures on <>rganicCniend8try,fcp.8vo.Woodcats Ts.GcL 

BrewHter's Treatise on Optics, fcp. 8vo Ss. 6d. 

Downing's Xlements of Practical HydranHcs, 8vo Ss. 

Faraday's Lectures on the Non-metallic Elements, fcp. 8vo Ss. fid. 

Galbraith and Haugfaton's Manual of Hydrostatics, 12mo • . . . Ss. 

t, „ M MechamcB, 12inQ. ^.«^ ^. Sa. 

1, «t *, Optics, 12mo 2s. 

„ a. Scientific Manuals, each 2s. ; or eleth ^ . . -fls. fid. 

Her8chersPreliminaryDiscourseontheStudyofNaturalPlulo8ophy,fqp.8vo. Ss. 6d. 

Hunt* 8 Researches on Light, 8vo. Woodcuts lOs. 6d. 

Lardner and Walker's Electricity, Magnetism, & Meteorology, 2 v. fcp. 8vo. 7b. 

liardner's Cabinet Cydopeedia, 138 vols £ist 198. 

„ Treatise on Heat, fcp. 8vo. Tignette, &c. . . .^ Ss. 6d. 

Main and Brown's Marine Steam-Engine, 8vo 12s. Gd. 

„ „ Questions and Examination-Papers on ditto, 8vo 4s. €d. 

Mann's Book of Health, in Gleig's School SerieSt 18mo Is. 

Marcet's Conversations on Natural Philosophy 10s. 6d. 

„ „ Land and Water, §vo. Ss.'fid. 

„ „ Tagetahle Physiology «b. 

Maunder'8 SQieatlfic.and Literaoy Treasury, fcp. 8to. 10s. 

Hoselesr'B nhurtratiainB of PnMft&cal MeohanioB, fcp. 8vo Ss. 

Fereira's Lectures on Polarised Light, edited by Powell, ficp. Svo. 78. 

Peschel'B Elements of Physics, translated by £. West, -8 vote. Ifop. 8fO». .... 218. 

Phillips's Guide to Q0ology,4ei IKMos. iep. 8vq. Plates £s. 

4. Sreati8e<m Geology. 2 TdlB. fcp. 8iro.V3gnettaB,Jte. 7s. 

Powell's History of Natural Philosophy, fop. 8vo. Vignette Ss. 6d. 

Steiving-^teme to Anfaaal and Vegetable PhyaiQlogy, Iten. Is. 

Tate's Course of Natural and Experimental PhOosophy, £ vols. ISma 7s. 

M Electricity, simplified Ibr Begisnen, Ifimo . la. 

M Elements of Mechanism, 12mo 88.6d. 

•M Hydrostatics, HydrauUc8,a]id Pmeuxaattea, for Begiimera,!l8ttke Os. 

„ Xessons on Medianios and Natural Philoeoqpfay, ISmo. (I«y, 8b. 8d.). . ft. 

M Lightand Heat fianiliarly explained for Beginners, 18mo. Is. 

M Little Philo6opber,<orScienee of Familiar Things, ToLLSBmo. .... Ss. 6d. 

.„ Magnetism, Voltaic Electricity, and Elactro-iDynamieB, ISbbo. Is. 

„ Mechanics and Steam-Engine simplified for Be^nners, 18mo Is. 

„ Principles of Medianicsd PhiloBophy apidied, 9m Ms.tSd. 

TBIGONOMETBT. 

Colenso's Plane Trigonometry, Part L withZo9ariMfm,12mo. CKey, 88.6d.}. . 9a. 6d. 

„ „ ,a Part n. with Problems, 12mo. (Key, 5s.) ts. Bd. 

Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Trigonometry, 12mo 28. 

Jeans's Plane and Spherical Trigonometry, Part 1. 12mo. 4s. ; Part n 48. 

Scott's Plane Trigonometry and Mensuration, for-Sandhurvt College, Bro.. . 9b. 6d. 

Jaadoo! LONGMAN, BROWN, €til&£)(. UmQ^iai«^-nEidL«.£nEfit?C«. 



f^rrsj) BT ffPomswooDB aitd co., wx^-ffrasat «q:cKsa, -uyxxMn. 