O YUM ORGANON 
RENOYATUM. 


By WILLIAM WHEWELL, D.D., 

MISTER OP TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND 
CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE. 


£eING THE SECOND PART OF THE PHILOSOPHY 
OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 


THE THIRD EDITION , ' WITH LARGE ADDITIONS. 



AAMIIAAIA EXONTE2 AIAAflSOlSIN AAAHAOI2. 


LONDON: 

JOHN W. PARKER AND SOST, WEST Si (RAND. 



It is to our immortal countryman, Bacon, that we owe tt\i 
brdfid announcement of t%is grand and fertile principle ; and the 
developement of the idea, that the whole of natural philosophy 
consists entirely of a series of inductive generalizations, com* 
mencing with the most circumstantially stated particulars, and 
carried up to univers|l laws, or axioms, which comprehend in 
their staten^ fnts every subordinate degree of generality ; and of 
a corresponding series of inverted reasoning from generals to 
particulars, by which these axioifls are traced back into their 
remotest consequences, and all particular propositions deduced 
frofli them ; as well those by whose immediate considerations 
rose to their discovery, as those of which we had no previpus 
knowledge. 

Hersciiel, Discourse on liatural Philosophy, Art. 96. 


CAMBRIDGE : PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M. A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 



PREFACE. 


Even if /Bacon’s Novum OrganonlnsA possessM the 
character to which it aspired as completely as was 
possible in its own day, it woulc^ at present need r etio- 
lation : and even if no such book had ever been writ- 
ten, it would be a worthy undertaking to determine 
the machinery, intellectual, social and material, by 
which human knowledge, can best be jfUgmented. 
Bacon could only divine Jiow sciences might be con- 
structed ; we can trace, # in their history, how their 
construction has taken place. However sagacious wSre 
His* conjectures, the facts which have really occurred 
must give additional instruction : however large w^re 
his anticipations, the actual progress of science since, 
his time has illustrated them in all their extent. And 
as to £he structure and operation of the Organ by 
which truth is to be collected from nature, — that is, 
the Methods by which science is # to b^ promoted — we 
know that, though Bacon’s general maxims are saga- 
cious and animating, his particular precepts failed* in 
his hands, and are now practically useless. This, 
perhaps, was not wonderful, seeing that they were, as 
I have said, mainly derived from conjectures respect- 
ing knowledge and the progress ot knowledge; but at 

a 2 



IV 


PREFACE. 


the .present day, rw lien, in several provinces of know- 
ledge, we have a large actual progress of solid truth 
to look J;ack upon, we nlay make the like attempt 
with the prospect of, better success, at least on that 
ground. 1t f may be a task, not hopeless, to ‘extract 
from the past progress of science the elements of an* 
.effectual and substantial method of Scientific Disco- 
very/ The advances which have, during tlie last three 
centuries, been made in tlie physical sciences; — hi 
Astronomy, in Physics, in Chemistry, in Natural His- 
tory, in Physiology; — these are allowed by all to bo 
real, to be great, to be striking; may it not be that 
the steps of progress in these different cases have in 
them something alike? Mgy it not be that in each 
advancing movement of such, knowledge there is some 
qommon principle, some common process? May it 
no*t be that discoveries are made by an Organ which 
has something uniform in its working? If we caft 
slv3w that this is so, we sha^ have the New Organ, 
which Bacon aspired to construct, renovated according 
to our advanced intellectual position and office. 

It was with the view of opening the way to such 
an attempt that I undertook that survey of + he past 
progress of physical ^knowledge, of which I have given 
the results in the History of the Sciences , and the 
IF&tory of Scientific Ideas 1 ; the former containing 
the history of the sciences, so far as it depends on 


1 Publish tjl in two fornjpr editions as part of the Philosophy of the 
Inductive Sciences (b. i.— x.). 



PREFACE. 


V 


observed Facts; the latter containing the history of 
those Ideas by which such Facts are bound into 
Theories. 

It can hardly happen that a work fvhich treats of 
Methods of Scientific Discovery, shall not seem to 
fail in the positive results which i$ offers. For an 
Art of Discovery is not possible. • At elch stejj of the 
investigation are needed Invention, »Sagacity, Gsnius, 
-^-elements which no art can give. We may hope in 
vain, as Bacon hoped, for an Organ which shall enatole 
all men to construct Scientific Truths, as a pair of 
compasses enables all men to construct exact circles 2 . 
This cannot be. The practical results of the Philoso- 
phy of Science must be rather classification and 
analysis of what lias been done, than precept and 
method for future doing. Yet I think that the me- 
thods of discovery which I have to recommend, thougi 
gathered from a wider survey of scientific history, 
both as to subjects and as to time, than (so far as I am 
aware) has been elsewhere attempted, are quite as 
definite and practical as any others which have been 
proposed ; with the great additional advantage of being 
the methods by which all gixmt discoveries in science 
have really been made. This may* be said, for instance, 
of the Method of Gradation and tlie Method of Natural 
Classification, spoken of b. iii. c. viii ; and in a nar- 
rower sense, of the Method of Curves , the Method of 



VI 


PREFACE. 


Means , the Method of Least Squares and the Method 
of Residues , spoken of in chap. vii. of the same Book. 
Also the n iRemarks on the* Use of Hypotheses and on 
the Tests of Hypotheses (b. ii. c. v) point out features 
which mark the usual course of discovery. 

But one of the 0 principal lessons resulting from our 
views i^ undoubtedly this: — that different sciences 
may be expected *>to advance by different modes of 
procedure, according to their present condition; au;l 
that in many of these sciences, an Induction performed 
by any of the methods which have just been referred 
to is not the next step which we may expect to see 
made. Several of the sciences may not be in a condi- 
tion which fits them for such a Colligation of Facts; 
(to use tlie phraseology to which the succeeding ana- 
lysis has led me). The Facts may, at the present 
time, require to be more fully observed, or the Idea 
by which they are to be colligated may require to,, bo 
more fully unfolded. 

But in this point also, our speculations are far from 
being barren of practical results. The examination 
to which we have subjected each science, gives us the 
means of discerning whether what is needed jbr the 
further progress, of the science, has its place in the 
Observations, or in the Ideas, or in the union of the 
two. If observations be wanted, the Methods of Ob- 
servation, given in b. iii. c. ii. may be referred to. If 
those who are to make the next discoveries need, for 
that purpose, a developement of their Ideas, the modes 
in which such a developement has usually taken 



PREFACE. 


vii 

place are treated of in Chapters iij. and iv. of that 
Book 

No one who has well studied the history*^ science 
can fail to see how important a part*of that history 
is the explication, or as I might call it, the clarifica- 
tion of men’s Ideas. This, the metaphysical aspect of 
each of the physical sciences, is' very far froip being, 
as some htfve tried to teach, an aspect which it passes 
trough at an early period of progress, and previously 
to the stage of positive knowledge. On the contrary, 
the metaphysical movement is a necessary part of the 
inductive movement. Tltfs, which is evidently so by 
the nature of the case, was proved by a copious collec- 
tion of historical evidences, in the History Scientific 
*Tdeas. The ten Books of that History contain an 
account of the principal philosophical controversies 
which have taken place in all the physical sciences, 
tfrpjn Mathematics to Physiology. These controversies, 
which must be called metaphysical if anything be* so 
called, have been conducted by the greatest discoverers 
in each science, and have been an essential part of the 
^discoveries made. Physical discoverers have differed 
from barren speculators, not by having no metaphysics 
in their heads, but by having 'good* metaphysics in 
their heads while their adversaries had bad; and by 
binding their metaphysics to their physics, instead of 
keeping the two asunder. I trust that the History of 
Scientific Ideas is of some value, even as a record of a 
number of remarkable controversies; but ^1 conceive 
that it also contains an indisputable proof ihat there 



Y11X 


PREFACE. 


is, in progressive science, a metaphysical as well as a 
physical element; — ideas as well as facts; — thoughts 
as well things. Metaphysics is the process of as- 
certaining thafyth ought is consistent with itself : and 
if it- be net so, our supposed knowledge is not know- 
ledge. 

In Chapter vi. of the Second Book, I have spoken of 
the Logic of Induction. Several writers 3 h ive quoted 
very emphatically my assertion that the Logic of Ind\#- 
tion does not exist in previous writers: using it as an 
introduction to Logical Schemes of their own. They 
seem to have overlooked thq fact that at the same time 
that I noted the deficiency, I offered a scheme which I 
think fitted to supply this want. And I am obliged to 
say that I do not regard the schemes proposed by an^ 
of those gentlemen as at all satisfactory for the purpose. 
But I must defer to a future occasion any criticism *of 
authors who have written on the subjects here treated. 

A critical notice of such authors formed the Twelfth 

% 

Book of the former edition of the Philosophy of the 
Sciences . I have there examined the opinions concern- 
ing the Nature of Beal Knowledge and the Inode of 
acquiring it, which haven been promulgated in all ages, 
from Plato and Aristotle, to Boger Bacon, to Francis 
Bacon, to Newton, to Herschel. Such a survey, with 
the additions which I should now have to make to it, 
may hereafter be put forth as a separate book : but I 



8 Apelt Die TheoHe der Induction: Gratry Logique . 



PREFACE. 


IX 


have endeavoured to confine the present volume to such 
positive teaching regarding Knowledge and Science as 
results from the investigations pursued ii^the other 
works of this series. But with regard to this matter, 
of the pLogic of Induction , I may venture to say, that 
we shall not find anything desenpng the name ex- ( 
plained in the common writers on Logfc, or exhibited 
under the/ ordinary Logical Forms. § That in previous 
writers which comes the nearest to the notice of such a 
Logic as the history of science has suggested and veri- 
fied, is the striking declaration of Bacon in two of his 
Aphorisms (b. i. aph. civ. cv.). 

“ There will be good hopes for. the Sciences then, 
and not till then, when by a true scALE#or Ladder, 
and by successive steps, following continuously without 
gaps or breaks, men shall ascend from particulars to 
the narrower Propositions, from those to intermediate 
ones, rising in order one above another 1 , and at last to 
the most general. 

“ But in establishing such propositions, we Jnust de- 
vise some other Form of Induction than has hitherto 
been In use; and this must be one which serves not 
only prove and discover Principles , (as very general 
Propositions are called,) but also the narrower and the 
intermediate, and in short, all tnie Propositions.” 

And he elsewhere speaks of successive Floors of 
Induction. 

All the truths of an extensive science form a Series 
of such Floors, connected by such Scales or Ladders; 
and a part of the Logic of Induction consists, as I 



X 


PREFACE. 


conceive, in the ^construction of a Scheme of such 
Floors. Converging from a wide basis of various 
classes of particulars, at last to one or a few general 
truths, these schemes necessarily take the shape of 
a Pyramid* I have constructed such Pyramids for 
Astronomy and fqr Optics 4 ; and the illustrious Yon 
Humboldt in speaking of the former subject, does me 
the honour to say that my attempt in thut depart- 
ment *s perfectly successful 5 . The Logic of Induction 
contains other portions, which may be seen in the 
following work, b. ii. c. vi. 

I have made large additions to the present edition, 
especially in what regards the Application of Science, 
(b. iii. c. ix.) and the Language of Science. The 
former subject I am aware that I have treated very 
imperfectly. It would indeed, of itself, furnish mate- 
rial ifor a large work; and would require an acquaint* 
ance with practical arts and manufactures of the mast 
exact and extensive kind. But even a general ob- 
server may see how much more close the union of Art 
with Science is now than it ever was before; and what 
large and animating hopes this union inspires/ both 
for the progress of Art end of Science. On another 
subject also I might have dilated to a great extent, 
— what I may call (as I have just now called it) the 
social machinery for the advancement of science. There 
can be no doubt that at certain stages of sciences, 


4 See the Tables at the end of book ii. 

6 CoMos, vol ii. n. 35. 




PREFACE. 


XI 


Societies and Associations maj’ do ^nucli to promote 
their further progress; by combining their observa- 
tions, comparing their vievs, contributing Jg> provide 
material means of observation and calculation, and 
dividing the offices of observer and generaiizer. .We 
have had in Europe in general, and^ especially in this 
country, very encouraging* examples of*what^m^y be 
‘done by sy.ich Associations. For tjie present I have 
(jply ventured to propound one Aphorism on the sub- 
ject, namely this; (Aph. LY.) That it is worth <jpn- 
sidering whether a continued and connected system of 
observation and calculation, like that of Astronomy, 
might not be employed in improving our knowledge 
of other subjects; as Tides, Currents, Winds, Clouds, 
Rain, Terrestrial Magnetism, Aurora Borealis, compo- 
sition of crystals, and the like. In saying this, I have 
mentioned those subjects which are, as appears, fo 
•me, most likely to profit by continued* and connected 
observations. 

I have thrown the substance of my results into 
Aphorisms, as Bacon had done in his Novum Or - 
jjanunt. This I have done, not in the way of deliver- 
ing dogmatic assertions or *oracular sentences; for 
the Aphorisms are all supported by reasoning, and 
were, in fact, written after thd reasoning, and ex- 
tracted from it. I have adopted this mode of gather- 
ing results into compact sentences, because it seems to 
convey lessons with additional clearness and emphasis. 

I have only to repeat what I have -already said; that 
this task of adapting the Nowwi Orgamm to the 



PREFACE. 


XU 

present state of Physical Science, and of constructing a 
Newer Organ which may answer the purposes at which 
Bacon airjvpd, seems to belong to the present genera- 
tion; and being here founded upon a survey of the 
past w lii story and present condition of the Physical 
Sciences, will I hppe, not be deemed presumptuous. 

Tbinity Lodge, 

i November , 1858. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


FACE 

I^IEFACE V 

BOOK If 

APHORISMS CONCERNING IDEAS. 

Aphorisms I. — XVIII. Ideas in general . . 5—7 

XIX. — XLIV. Ideas in the Pure Sciences 8 — 12 

XLV. — LV. Ideas in the Mechanical ^pi- 

# ences .... 13 — 15 
LVI. — LXXI. Ideas in the Secondary Me- 

• chanical Sciences . . 15-^— T8 

LXXII. — LXX. Ideas in the Meehan ico-clie- 

mical Sciences . . 18 

LXXIV. — LX€X. Ideas in Chemistry . . # 18 

LXXX. — LXXXI. Ideas in Morphology . . * 19 

LXXXV. — C. Ideas in Classificatory Science 20— 2$ 

Cl. — CVI. Ideas in Biology . . . 23 — 24 

# CVI 1 . — CXVII. Ideas in Palaeontology . . 24 — 26 

BOOK II. 

OF KNOWLEDGES. 

Chap. I. Of Two Principal Processes by which 

Science is constructed . . . .27 

Ciiap. II. Of the Explication of Conceptions . . 30 

Sect. I. The Historical Progress, 

AH. 1 . The Explication of Conceptions, 

2. Has taken place historically by discussions. 



XIV 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


TAOE 

Art . 3. False doctrines when exposed appear impos- 
sible : 

4^ But were plausible* before 

5. Men’s Minds gradually cleared. 


Sect, II. Use of definitions . 

Art. 6. Controversies about Definitions. 

7. Not arbitrary Definitions. 

8. Attention to Facts requisite. 

9. Definition is not essential. 

10. The omission of Definition not always blame- 
able. 


Sect. III. Use of Axioms. 

Art. 11. Axioms serve to express Ideas. 


Sect. IV. Clear and appropriate Ideas. 


Art. 12. We must see the Axioms clearly. 

13. Inappropriate Ideas cannot lead to Truth. 

14. The fault is in the Conceptions. 

15. Itules cannot teach DLcovery ; 

16. But are not useless. 

17. Discussion as well as Facts needed. 


Sjct. V. • Accidental Discoveries . 

Art. 18. No Scientific Discovery is accidental. 

19. Such accidents do not happen to common Men. 

20. Examples. 

21. So far Explication of Conceptions. 


Chap. III. Op Facts as the Materials of Science . 50 

Art. 1. Facts mu^t be true. 

2. Facts not separable from Ideas. 

3. The Ideas must be distinct. 

4. Conceptions of the Intellect only to be ad- 

mitted. 

5. 1 Facts are to be observed with reference to 
' Space and Time: 

6. And also to other Ideas. 

7. The Decomposition of Facts. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS, 


XV 


Art. 8. 

This step is not sufficient. 

9 - 

It introduces Technical Terms, 

10. 

And Classification. # 

11. 

The materials of Science. 

Chap. IW . 

Of the Colligation op Facts 

Art. 1. 

Facts are colligated by Conceptions. 

2. 

Science begins with common Observation. 

3 * 

Facts must be decomposed. 

4 - 

iWhat Ideas first give Science^ 

5 - 

Facts must be referred to Ideas. 

6. 

Sagacity needed. 

7 - 

Discovery made by Guesses. 

8. 

False Hypotheses preluding to true ones. 

9 - 

New Hypotheses not mere modifications 
old ones. 

10. 

Hypotheses may have superfluous part*._ 

11. 

Hypotheses to be fcompared with Facts. - 

12. 

Secondary Steps.* 


PAGE 


59 


' Chai\ V. Of certain Characteristics of Scientific . 

Induction 70 

tied. I. Invention a part of Induction. 

Art. 1. Induction the source of Knowledge. 

2. Induction involves a New Element. 

3. Meaning of Induction. 

•4. The New Element is soon forgotten. 

5. Induction includes a Definition and a Propo- 
sition. 


Sect. II. Use of Hypotheses. 

Art. 6 . Discoveries made by Guesses, 

7. Which must be compared with Facts. 

8. Hypotheses are sjispected. 

9. Hypotheses may be useful though inaccurate. 


Sect. III. Tests of Hypotheses. 

Art. 10. True Hypotheses foretel Phenomena, 

• 11. Even of different kinds. — Consilience of In- 
ductions, 



XVI 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Art. 12. True Theories Jend to Simplicity. 

13. Connexion of the last Tests. 


PAGE 


Chap. VI. Op the Logic of Induction. . . .97 

Art. 1. 4 Steps of Generalization, 

2. ' May be expressed by Tables , 

3. Which Exhibit Inductive Steps ; 

Ancl the Consilience of Inductions ; 

5. And the tendency to Simplicity ; 

6. And the names of Discoverers ; 

7. And the Verifications of Theory; 

8. By means of % several easy steps. 

9. This resembles Book-keeping. 

10. The Logic of Induction. 

11. Attention at each step required. 

12. General Truths are not mere additions of par- 
t « ticulars : 

13. But a new view is introduced. 

14. Formula of Inductive Logic : 

15. May refer to DeWtiqn. 

16. Formula inadequate. 

1 7. Deductive Connexion of Steps. 

18. Relation of Deductive and Inductive Reasoning. 

T9. The Criterion of Truth. 

20. Theory and Fact. 

21. Higher and Lower Generalizations. 


Chai\ VII. Of Laws of Phenomena and of Causes. 118 

Art. 1. Knowledge, of Laws of Phenomena. 

2. Formal anjJ Physical Sciences. 

3. Causes in Astronomy. 

4. Different Mechanical Causes in other Sciences. 

5. Chemical and Vital Forces as Causes. 

6. Difference of these kinds of Force. 

7. Difficulty of conceiving new Causes. 

8. t Men willingly take old Causes. 

9. 4 Is the Magfletic Fluid real ? 

10. Are Causes to be sought ? (Comte’s Doctrine*.) 

11. Both Laws and Causes to be studied. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS, 


XVII 


Chap. VIII. Op Art and Science 


Art. i. 


3 - 

4 - 

5 - 

6 . 

7 - 

8 . 

Or ip. IX. 


Art precedes Science. 

Contrast of Art ana Science. 

Instinct and Insight. 

Difference of Art and Instinct. 

Does Art involve Science? 

Science unfolds Principles. 

Science may improve Art. 

Arts not classified with Sciences. 

1 

Of the Classification of Sciences . 


AH. i. Use and Limits of such Classification. 

2. Classification depends on the Ideas. 

3. This points Qut Transitions. 

4. The Classification. 

Inductive Table of Astronomy . 

Inductive Table of Optics .... 


PAGE 

129 


. 136 


. I4O 
. I4O 


BOOK III. 

OF METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION 
OF SCIENCE. 

Chap. I. Introduction 14 1 

Art.'. Object of this Book. 

2. An Art of Discoveiw not possible, 

3 Use of Methods. 

4. Series of Six Processes. 

5. Methods of Observation and IfHuction. 

Chap. II. Of Methods of Observation . . .145 

Art. 1. Referring to Number, Space, and Time. 

2. Observations are never perfect. 

3. (I.) Number & naturally exact. 

4. (II.) Measurement of Space. 

5. Instruments Invented in Astronomy, 

6. And improved. 


NOV. ORG. 


b 



XVUI 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Art. 7. 

Goniometer. 

8. 

Standard of Length. 

IOr < 

(III.) Measurement of Time. 

II. 

Uni^of Time. 

12. 

Transit Instrument. 

x 3 * 

Chronometers. 

14. 

(IV.) Conversion of Space and Time. 

J 5 * 

Space may Measure Time. 

16. 

Time may Measure Space. 

l 7 * 

(V.) ihe Method of Repetition. 

18. 

The Method of Coincidences. 

19. 

Applied to Pendulums. 

20. 

(VI.) Measurement of Weight. 

21. 

Standard of Weight. 

22. 

(VII.) Measurement of Secondamj Qualities. 

23- 

“The Howl” in Harmonics. 

24# 

(VIII.) Manipulation. 

WJ. 

Examples in Optics. 

26. 

(IX.) The Education of the Senses , 

27. 

By the Study of Natural History. 

28. 

Preparation for. Ideas. 

Chap. III. 

Op Methods of Acquiring clear Scienti- 
fic Ideas ; and first of Intellectual 
Education 

ArJ. 1. 

(I.) Idea of Space. 

2. 

Education by Geometry. 

3 - 

(II.) Idea of Number. 

4 - 

Effect of the usual Education. 

5. 

(III.) Idea of Force. 

6. 

Stud^of Mechanics needed, 

7 - 

To make Newton intelligible. 

8. 

No Popular Eoad. 

9 - 

(IV.) Chemical Ideas. 

10. 

(V.) Natural History Ideas. 

11. 

Natural Classes to be taught. 

: 2. 

Mathematical Prejudices, 

13. 

To be corrected by Natural History. 

14. 

Method of Natural History, 

15- 

ifesembles common language. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


XIX 


PAGE 

Art. 1 6. Its Lessons. 

17. (VI.) Well-established Idea £ alone to be used. 

18. How are Ideas cleared ? 

Chap. IV. Op Methods of Acquiring C 5 ear Scienti- 
fic Ideas, continued. — Of the Discussion 
op Ideas . . . ^ . .180 

Art. 1. Successive Clearness, 

2. Produced by Discussion. 

3. * Examples. 

4. Disputes not useless, 

5. Although “ metaphysical.” 

6. Connected with Facts. 

Chap. V. Analysis op the Process op Induction . 186 

Sect. I. The Three Steps of Induction. 

Art. 1. Methods may be useful. . 

2 . The three Steps. 

3. Examples. 

4. Mathematical flames of the Steps. 

Sect. II. Of the Selection of the Fundamental Idea. 

Art. 5. Examples. 

6. The Idea to be found by trying, 

7. Till the Discovery is made 5 

8. Preluded by Guesses. 

9. Idea and Facts homogeneous. 

10. Idea tested by the Facts. 

Chap. VI. General Pules for ?he Construction 

op the Conception . • 195 

Art. I. First: for Quantity. 

2. Formula and Coefficients found together. 

3. Example. Law of Cooling. 

4. Determined by Experiment. 

5. Progressive Series of Numbers. 

6 . Recurrent Series. 

7. Use of Hypotheses. 

8. Even with this there are difficulties. 



XX 

TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Chap. VII. 

Special Methods of Induction Applica- 



ble to Quantity 

202 

Sect. I. C fhe Method of Curves . 


Art. i. 

c 

Its Process. 


2 . 

e It$Use. 


3* 

With imperfect Observations. 


4- 

It corrects Observations. 


t 

5- 

Obstacles. (I.) Ignorance of the argument. 


6 . 

(II.) Combination of Laws. 


II. 

The Method of Means. 


Art. 7 . 

Its Relation !o the Method of Curves. 


8. 

Its process. 


9 * 

Argument required to be known. 


10. 

Use of the Method. 


11. 

( Large masses of Observations used. 


1?,. 

Proof of the Use of the Method. 


III. 

The Method of Least Squares. 


Art. 13. 

Is a Method of Mean&. 


14 . 

example. 


Sert. IY. 

• 

The Method of Residues. 


Art. *15. 

Occasion /or its Use. 


16. 

Its Process. 


i7- 

Examples. 


18. 

Its Relation to the Method of Means. 


19. 

Example. 


20. 

“ Residual r Phenoni 3 iia.” 


r 

Chap. VIII. Methods of Induction Depending on 



Resemblance 

220 

Sect. I. 

The Law of Continuity. 


Art. 1. 

Its Nature and Application, 


2 % 

To Falling Bodies, 


3 * 

To Hard Bodies, 


4. 

To Gravitation. 


5 * 

The Evidence. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


XXI 


Sect. II. 

The Method of Gradation. 

Art. 6 . 

Occasions of its Use- 

7- 

Examples. 

8 . 

Not enjoined by Bacon. 

.9- 

Other Examples. 

10 . 

Its Value in Geology. 

IT. 

Limited Results. 

Sect. III. 

The Method of Natural damnation. 

Art. 12 . 

* Examples of its Use. 

13* 

Its Process. 

14 . 

Negative Results. 

15- 

Is opposed to Arbitrary Definitions. 

16 . 

Propositions and Definitions correlative. 

17- 

Definitions only provisional. 

Chap. IX. 

Of the Application of Inductive TrIwhs. 

Art. 1 . 

This forms the Sfequel of Discovery. 

2 . 

Systematic Verification of Discoveries. 

3* 

Correction of Coefficients. 

4- 

Astronomy a Model. 

5* 

Verification by new cases. 

6 . 

Often requires fresh calculation. 

7- 

Cause of Dew. 

8 . 

Useful Applications. 

Chap. X. 

Of the Induction of jCauses 

Art.\. 

Is to be pursued. 

2 . 

Induction of Substance. 

3- 

Induction of Force. 

4- 

Induction of Polarity. 

5- 

Is Gravity Polar ? 

6 . 

Induction of Ulterior Causes. 

7* 

Of the Supreme Cause. 


PAGE 


^33 


247 



xxn 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


BOOK IV. 

OF THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 

PAG R 

INTRODUCTION ‘ . . -257 

Aphorisms concerning the Language of Science. 
Aphorism I. Relative to the Ancient Period . . . o «;B 

^ Art. i. Common Words. 

2. Descriptive Terms. 

3. Theoretical Terms. 

Aphorism II. Relative to the Modem Period . . . 269 

Art-. 1. 1 Systematic Nomenclature. 
pi Systematic Terminology. 

3. Systematic Modification. 

Aphorisms (III. IV. V. VI. VII) relative to the Applica- 
tion of Common Words . . . . *78 


Aphorisms (VIII. IX. X. XI. XII. XIII.) relative to the 


Construction of New Terms 

. . 285 

Aphorism XIV. 

Binary Nomenclature . 

• 3<>7 

XV. 

Linnean Maxims 

308 

XVI. 

Numerical Names 

• • • 309 

XVII. 

Names of more than two Steps . 

3*o 

XVIII. 

No arbitrary Terms 

•< • 3ii 

XIX. 

Forms fixed by Convention 

3*4 

XX. 

Forfti of Terms 

¦ 3!8 


Art 1. Terms derived from Latin and Greek. 


2. German Terms. 

3. Descriptive Terms. 

4. Nomenclature. Zoology. 
MinersRogy. 

(>. Botany. 

7. Chemistry. 

8. Crystallography. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


xxiii 

( PAGB 

Aphorism XXI. Philological Rules .... 328 

Art. 1. Hybrids. 

2. Terminations of Substantives. 

3. Formations of Substantives (names of tfings). 

4. Abstract Substantives. 

5. Rules of derivation from Greek and Latin. • 

0. Modification of Terminations.. 

• 

Aphorism XXII. Introduction of Changes w . . - * 341 


jftTRTHER ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE APHO- 
RISMS ON SCIENTIFIC LANGUAGE, FROM 
THE RECENT COURSE OF SCIENCES. 


1. Botany. 

Aphorism XXIII. Multiplication of Genera . . . 346 


2. Comparative Anatomy. 


Aphonsm XXIV. Single Names to be used . . 352 

XXV. The History of Science is the History 

of its Language . . . . 355 

XXVI. Algebraical Symbols . . . 357 

XXVII. Algebraical Analogies . . . 364 

XXVIII. Capricious Derivations . . . , 365 

XXIX. Inductions are our Definitions . . 368 




NOVUM ORGAN O.N 
RENOVATUM. 


NOV. ORG. 


1 



Be Scientiis turn demum bene sperandum est, quando per 
Scalam veram et per gradus continuos, et non intermiBSoa aut 
hiulcos, a particularibus ascendetur ad Axiomata minora, et 
deinde ad media, alia aliis superiora, et poBtremo demum ad 
generalissima. 

In constituendo autem Axiomate, Forma Inducttonis alia 
quam adhuc in usu fuit, excogitanda est ; et qme non ad Principia 
'tantum (quae vocant) probanda et iiivenienda, sed etiam ad Axio- 
mata minora, et media, denique omnia. 

Bacon, Nov. Org., Apb. civ. cv. 



NOVUM ORGANON RENOVATU 


The name Organon \?as applied to* the works of 
Aristotle which treated of Logic, that is, of the method 
of establishing and proving knowledge, and of refuting 
errour, by means of Syllogisms. Francis Bacon, hold- 
ing that tills method was insufficient and ftftile for 
the augmentation of real and useful knowledge, pub- 
lished his Novum Organwi , in which he proposed for* 
that purpose methods from which he promised a better 
success. Since his time real and useful knowledge has 
made great progress, and many Sciences have; beem 
greatly extended or newly constructed; so that even 
if Bacon’s method had been the right one, and had 
been coftiplete as far as the progress of Science up to 
his time could direct it, there would be room for the 
revision and improvement of the methods of arriving 
at scientific knowledge. 

Inasmuch as we have gone through the Histories 
of the principal Sciences, from the earliest up to the 
present, time, in a previous work, and have also traced 
the History of Scientific Ideas in another work, it 
may perhaps be regarded as not too presumptuous if 
we attempt this revision and improvement of the 
methods by which Sciences must rise and grow. This 

1— -2 



4 NOVUM ORGANON RENOVATUM. 

is our task in tli3 present volume; and to mark tlie 
reference of this undertaking to the work of Bacon, we 
name our jbook Novum Organon Renovatum. 

Bacon has delivered his precepts in Aphorisms, 
some of them stated nakedly, others expanded into 
dissertation^. The general results at which we have 
anr.yed by tracing the history of Scientific Ideas are 
the groundwork of such Precepts as we have to give : 
and I shall the/efore begin by summing up these 
results in Aphorisms, referring to the former w^rk 
fof the historical proqf that these Aphorisms are true. 



NOVUM ORGANON REMOVATUM. 


BOOK I. 

APHORISMS CONCERNING IDEAS DERIVED FR&M 
THE HISTORY OF IDEAS. 


I. 

MAN is the Interpreter of Nature , Science the right 
interpretation . {History of Scientific Ideas: Book 1 . Chap- 
te£ X.) 

II. 

The Senses place before us the Characters of the Bqpk 
of Nature; but these convey no knowledge to us, till we m 
have discovered the Alphabet by which they are to be read. 
(Ibid, i 2.) 

III. 

The Alphabet, by means of which we interpret Pheno- 
mena, consists of the Ideas existing irt our own minds ; for 
these give to the phenomena that coherence and significance 
which is not an object of sense, (i. 2.) 

IY. 

The antithesis of Sefise and Ideas is i he foundation of 
the Philosophy of Science. No knowledge can exist without 
the union, no philosophy without the separation, of these two 
elements . (i. 2.) 



6 


APHORISMS 


Y. 

Fact and Theory correspond to Sense on the one hand, 
and to Ideas on the other , so far as we are conscious of our 
Ideas: hut all facts involve ideas unconsciously; and thus 
the distinction of Facts and Theories is not tenable, as that 
of Sense andjdeas is. (i. 2.) 

VI* 

Senscttions and Ideas in our knowledge are like Matter 
and Form in bodies. Matter cannot exist without Form , 
nor Form without Matter: yet the two are altogether cVs- 
tinpt and opposite. There is no possibility either of separat- 
ing, or of confounding them. The same is the case with 
Sensations and Ideas, (i. 2.) 

YII. 

Ideas ane not tran s formed, but informed Sensations; for 
ivithout ideas, sensations have no form. (i. 2.) 

YlII. 

The Sensations are the Objective, the Ideas the Subjec- 
tive part of every act of perception or knowledge, (i. 2.) 

IX. 

General Terms denote Ideal Conceptions, as a circle, an 
orbit, a rose. These are not Images of real things, as was 
held by the Realists , but Conceptions : yet they are concep- 
tions, not bound together by mere Name, as the Nominalists 
held, but by an Idea. (i. 2.) 

X. 

It has been said by some, that all Conceptions are merely 
states or feelings of the mind, but this assertion only tends 
to confound what it is our business to distinguish . (i. 2.) 

XI. 

Observed Facts are connected so as to produce new truths, 
by superinducing upon them . an Idea : and such truths are 
obtained by Induction, (i. 2.) 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


7 


XII. 

Truths once obtained by legitimate Induction are Facts : 
these Facts may be again connected , so as to produce higher 
truths : and thus we advance to Successive Generalizations, 
(l. 2.) 

XIII. 

Truths obtained by Induction are tnade compact jtnd 
permanent by being expressed in Technical Tern*, {i. 3.) 

XIV. 

Experience cannot conduct us to universal and necessary 
truths: — Not to universal , because she has not tried? all 
cases : — Not to necessary , because necessity is not a matter 
to which experience can testify . (i. 5.) 

XV. 

Necessary truths derive their necessity from* the Ideas 
which they involve ; and the existence of necessary truths 
proves the existence of Ideas not generated by experience. 
(I. 5.) 

XVI. 

In Deductive Reasoning , we cannot have any truth in 
the conclusion which is not virtually contained in the pre- 
mises . (i. 6.) 

XVII. 

In order to acquire any exact and solid knowledge, the 
student must possess with perfect precision the ideas appro- 
priate to that part of knowledge: and this precision is 
tested by the student's perceiving thB axiomatic evidence of 
the axioms belonging to each Fundamental Idea. (i. 6.) 

XVIII. 

The Fundamental Ideas which it is most important to 
consider , as being the Bases of the Material Sciences , are the 
Ideas of Space, Time ( including Number), Cause ( includ- 
ing Force and Matter ), Outness of Objects , and Media of 
Perception of Secondary Qualities, Polarity (Contrariety), 



8 


APHORISMS 


Chemical Composition and Affinity, Substance, Likeness 
and Natural Affinity, Means and Ends (whence the Notion 
of Organization ), Symmetry, and the Ideas of Vital Powers. 

(i. 8.) 

XIX. 

The Sciences which depend upon the Ideas of Space and 
Number are Pure 1 Sciences, not Inductive Sciences: they do 
not info? special Theories from Facts, but deduce the con- 
ditions of all theo'Qj from Ideas. The Elementary Pure 
Sciences, or Elementary Mathematics, are Georhetry, Theo- 
retical Arithmetic and Algebra, (n. 1.) 

XX. 

The Ideas on which the Pure Sciences depend, are those 
of Space and Number ; but Number is a modification of 
the conception of Repetition , which belongs to the Idea of 
Time. (ft. 1.) 

XXI. 

The Idea of Space is not derived from experience, for 
experience of external objects pr esupposes bodies to exist in 
Space. Space is a condition under which the mind receives 
the impressions of sense, and therefore the relations of space 
t are necessarily and universally true of all perceived objects . 
Space is a form of our perceptions, and regulates them, 
whatever the matter of them may be. (ii. 2.) 

•XXII. 

Space is not a General Notion collected by abstraction 
from particular casek ; for we do not speak of Spaces in 
general, but of universal or absolute Space. Absolute Space 
is infinite . All special spaces are in absolute space, and are 
parts of it. (ii. 3.) 

XXIII. , 

Space is not a rea,l object or thing, distinct from the 
objects which exist in it; but it is a real condition of the 
existence of external objects . (n. 3.) 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


9 


XXIV. 

We have an Intuition of objects in space ; that is, we 
contemplate objects as made up of spatial parts , and appre- 
hend their spatial relations by the same act by \uhich we 
apprehend the objects themselves . (n. 3.) 

XXV. 

Form or Figure is space limited by bourfidaries. # &pace 
has necessarily three dimensions, length, breadth , depth ; and 
no others which cannot be resolved into these . (n. 3.) 

XXVI. 

The Idea of Space is exhibited for scientific purposes , by 
the Definitions and Axioms of Geometry; such, for instance , 
as these: — JAo Definition of a Right Angle, and of a Circle; 
— the Definition of Parallel Lines, and the Axiom con- 
cerning them ; — the Axiom that two straight line* cannot 
inclose a space. These Definitions are necessary, not arbi- 
trary ; and the Axioms are speeded as well as the Definitions , 
in *>rder to express the necessary conditions which the Idea of 
Spaqe imposes . (ii. 4.) 

XXVII. 

The Definitions and Axioms of Elementary Geometry do ' 
not completely exhibit the Idea of Space . In proceeding 
to the Higher Geometry, we may introduce other additional 
and independent Axioms ; such o% that of Archimedes, that 
a curve •line which joins two points is, less than any 
broken line joining the same point* and including the 
curve line. (ii. 4.) 


XXVIII. 

The perception of a solid object by sight requires that act 
of mind by which, from* figure and shade,' we infer distance 
and position in space . The perception of figure by sight 
requires that act of mind by which we give an outline 
to each object . (n. 6.) 



10 


APHORISMS 


XXIX. 

The perception of Form by touch is not an impression on 
the passive sense , but requires an act of our muscular frame 
by which* we become aware of the position of our own limbs. 
The perceptive faculty involved in this act has been called 
the muscular sense, (n. 6.) 


XXX. 

The* Idea of Time is not derived from experience , for 
experience of changes presupposes occurrences to fake place in 
Time . Time is a condition under which the mind recSives 
thf impressions of sense , and therefore the relations of time 
are necessarily and universally true of all perceived occur- 
rences. Time is a form of our perceptions , and regulates 
them, whatever the matter of them may be. (n. 7.) 

XXXI. 

Time r is not ,a General Notion collected by abstraction 
from particular cases . For we do not speak of particular 
Times as examples of time in*, general , but as parts of a 
single and infinite Time. (n. 8.) 

XXXII. 

Time, like Space, is a form, not only of perception, but 
of Intuition. We consider the whole of any time as equal 
to the sum of the parts ; and an occurrence as coinciding 
with the portion of time which it occupies, (il. 8.) 

XXXIII. 

Time is analogous to Space of one dimension: portions 
of both have a beginning and an end , are long or short. 
There is nothing in Time which is analogous to Space of 
two, or of three, dimensions, and thus nothing which corre- 
sponds to Figure, (n. 8.) 

XXX I Y. 

The Repetition of a set of occurrences , as, for example, 
strong and vjeak, or long and short sounds 9 according to a 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


II 


steadfast order, produces Rhythnt, whi$h is a conception 
peculiar to Time , as Figure is to Space . (n. 8.) 

XXXV, 

The simplest form of Repetition is that f n which there is 
no variety , and thus gives rise to the conception of Number. 
(II. 8.) 

XXXVI. 

The simplest numerical truths are seen by Intuition; when 
we endeavour to deduce the more comptex from these sim- 
plSt , we employ such maxims as these : — If equals be added 
to equals the wholes are equal: — Jf equals be subtracted 
from equals the remainders are equal: — The whole is 
equal to the sum of all its parts, (n. 9.) 

XXXVII. 

The Perception of Time involves a constant and latent 
hind of memory , which may be termed a Sense of Succes- 
sion. The Perception of Number also involves this Sense of 
Succession , although in smdll numbers we appear to appre- 
hend the units simultaneously and not successively . (n. 10.) 

XXXVIII. 

The Perception of Rhythm is not an impression on the t 
passive sense, but requires an act of thought by which we 
connect jmd group the strokes which form the Rhythm . 
(u. 10.) 

xxxut. 

Intuitive is opposed to Discursive reason. In intuition , 
we obtain our conclusions by dwelling upon one aspect of 
the fundamental Idea; in discursive reasoning, we combine 
several aspects of the Idea, (that is, several axioms ,) and 
reason from the combination, (n. 11.) 

XL. 

Geometrical deduction ( and deduction in general) is call- 
ed Synthesis, because we introduce, at successive steps, the 



12 


APHORISMS 


remits of new principles'. But in reasoning on the relations 
of space , we sometimes go on separating truths into their 
component truths , and these into other component truths; and 
so on: and this is geometrical Analysis, (n. 11.) 

XLI. 

Among the foundations of the Higher Mathematics , is the 
Id^ of Symbols considered as general Signs of Quantity. 
This idea of a Sign is distinct from , and independent of 
other ideas. The Axiom to which we refer in reasoning by 
means of Symbols of quantity is this: — The interpretation 
of 4 Such symbols must bo perfectly general. This Idea of 
Axiom are the bases of Algebra in its most general form . 
(II. 12.) 

XLII. 

Among the foundations of the Higher Mathematics is 

also the idea of a Limit. The Idea of a Limit cannot be 

superseded by any other definitions or Hypotheses. The 

Axiom which we employ in introducing this Idea into our 

reasoning is this: — What is trfib up to the Limit is true 

at the Limit. This Idea and Axiom are the bases of all 

Methods of Limits , Fluxions , Differentials , Variations and 

the like. (n. 12.) 

« * 

XLIII. 

There is a pure Science of Motion, which does not depend 
upon observed facts, but upon the Idea of motion . It may 
also be termed Pure Mechanism, in opposition to Mechanics 
Proper , or Machinery, which involves the mechanical con- 
ceptions of force and matter. It has been proposed to name 
this Pure Science of Motion, Kinematics, (ii. 13.) 

XLIY. 

The pure Mathematical Sciences must be successfully cul- 
tivated, in order that the progress of the principal Inductive 
Sciences may take place. This appears in the case of Astro- 
nomy, in which Science, both in ancient and in modern 
times, each advance of the theory has depended upon the pre- 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


13 


vious solution of problems in pure kiathefaatics, • It appears 
also inversely in the Science of the Tides , in which , at pre- 
sent, we cannot advance in the theory , because we cannot 
solve the requisite problems in the Integral Calculus ( 11 . 14.) 

XLV. 

The Idea of Cause, modified into the conceptions of me- 
chanical cause , or Force , and resistance to force , or Matter, 
is the foundation of the Mechanical Sciences; that%, Me- 
chanics, ( including Statics and Dynamics,) Hydrostatics , 
and Physical Astronomy . (in. 1.) 

XLVI. 

The Idea of Cause is not derived from experience; for in 
judging of occurrences which we contemplate , we consider 
them as being, universally and necessarily. Causes and Ef- 
fects, which a finite experience could not authorize us to do. 
The Axiom, that every event must have a cause, iS true in- 
dependently of experience, and beyond the limits of experi- 
ence. (ill. 2.) 

XLVII. 

The Idea of Cause is expressed for purposes of science by 
these three Axioms : — Every Event must have a Cause :s — 
Causes are measured by their Effects: — Reaction is equal* 
and opposite to Action, (in. 4.) 

XLYIII. 

The Conception of Force invokes the Idea of Cause, as 
applied to the motion and rest of bodies. The conception of 
force is suggested by muscular action Ixerted: the conception 
of matter arises from muscular action resisted. We neces- 
sarily ascribe to all bodies solidity and inertia, since we 
conceive Matter as that which cannot be compressed or moved 
without resistance, (in. 5.) 

XLIX. 

Mechanical Science depends on the Conception of Force; 
and is divided into Statics, the doctrine of Force preventing 



14 


APHORISMS 


motion, and Dynamics, the doctrine of Force 'producing 
motion . (hi. 6.) 


L, 

The Science? of Statics depends upon the Axiom , that Ac- 
tion and Reaction are equal , which in Statics assumes this 
form : — When two equal weights are supported on tho 
rnidtHe point between them, the pressure on the fulcrum 
is equaY to the sum of the weights, (in. 6.) 


LI. 

The Science of Hydrostatics depends upon the Fundamen- 
tal Principle that fluids press equally in all directions. 
This principle necessarily results from the conception of a 
Fluid , as a body of which the parts are perfectly moveable 
in all directions. For since the Fluid is a body , it can 
transmit pressure; and the transmitted pressure is equal to 
the original pressure , in virtue of the Axiom that Reaction 
is equal to Action. That the Fundamental Principle is not 
derived from experience , is plain both from its evidence dud 
from its history, (hi. 6.) 


LIT. 

The Science of Dynamics depends upon the three Axioms 
above stated respecting Cause. The First Axiom , — that every 
change must have a Cause , — gives rise to the First Law of 
Motion , — that a body not*actcd upon by a force will move 
with a uniform velocity in a straight lino. The Second 
Axiom , — that Causes v are measured by their Effects , — gives 
rise to the Second Law of Motion , — that when a force acts 
upon a body in motion, the effect of the force is com- 
pounded with the previously existing motion. The Third 
Axiom , — that Reaction is equal and opposite to Action, — 
gives rise to the Third Law of Motion , which is expressed 
in the same terms as the Axiom; Action and Reaction 
being understood to signify momentum gained and lost . 
(in. r.) 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 




LIII. 

The above Laws of Motion , historically speaking, were 
established by means of experiment: but since they* have been 
discovered and reduced to their simplest forrn^ they Have been 
considered by many philosophers as self-evident . This result 
is principally due to the introduction and establishment of 
terms and definitions? which enable us to express the Laws in 
a very simple manner, (hi. 7.) 

LIY. 

Jfi the establishment of the Laws of Motion , it happened , 
in several instances , that Principles % were assumed as self- 
evident which do not now appear evident , but which have 
since been demonstrated from the simplest and most evident 
principles. Thus it was assumed that a perpetual motion 
is impossible ; — that the velocities of bodies acquired by 
falling down planes or curves of the same vertical height 
are equal ; — that the actual descent of the center of gra- 
vity is equal to its potential ascent. But we are not hence 
to suppose that these assumptions were made without ground: 
for 'since they really follow from the laws of motion , they 
vfere probably , in the minds of the discoverers , the results of 
undeveloped demonstrations which their sagacity led them 40 
divine . (in. 7.) 

LY. 

It is ct Paradox that Experience should lead us to truths 
confessedly universal , and apparency necessary , such as the 
La ws of 'Motion are. The Solution of this paradox is, 
that these laws are interpretations of the Axioms of Causa- 
tion. The axioms are universally and necessarily true, but 
the right interpretation of the terms which they involve, is 
learnt by experience. Our Idea of Cause supplies the Form, 
Experience, the Matter, of these La,ws. (in. 8.) 


LYI. 

Primary Qualities of Bodies are those which we can con- 
ceive as directly perceived ; Secondary Qualities are those 



i6 


APHORISMS 


which we tonceiv% as perceived by means of a Medium . 
(iv. 1.) 

Lyn. 

We necessarily perceive bodies as without us; the Idea of 
Externality is one of the conditions of perception . % (iv. 1.) 

LYIII. 

We ^necessarily assume a Medium for the perceptions of 
Light , Colour , So&nd, Heat , Odours , Tastes ; awe? </ns ilfe- 
dtwm must convey impressions by means of its mechamcal 
attributes . (iv. 1.) 

LIX. 

Secondary Qualities are not extended but intensive: 
their effects are not augmented by addition of parts , but by 
increased 'operation of the medium . Hence they are not 
measured, directly , but by scales; not by units, but by de- 
grees. (iv. 4.) 

LX. 

In the Scales of Secondary Qualities , it is a condition 
(in order that the scale may be complete ,) that every example 
of the m quality must either agree with one of the degrees of 
the Scale 9 or lie between two contiguous degrees . (iv. 4.) 

LXI. 

We perceive by meaift of a medium and by means of 
impressions on the nerves : but we do not (by our senses) per- 
ceive either the mediUm or the impressions on the nerves . 
(IV. 1.) 

LXII. 

The Prerogatives of the Sight are, that by this sense we 
necessarily and immediately apprelend the position of its 
objects: and that fropx visible circumstances , we infer the 
distance of objects from us, so readily that we seem, to per- 
ceive and not to infer . (iv. 2.) 



CONCERNING IDEAS* 


17 


LXIII. 

The Prerogatives of the Hearing are, that by this sense 
we perceive relations perfectly precise and definite between 
two notes , namely , Musical Intervals (a^ an <5ctave, a 
Fifth); and that when two notes are perceived together , they 
are apprehended as distinct , (a Chord,) and jig having a 
certain relation , (Cdncord or Discord.) •(iv. 2.) 

LXIV. 

The Sight cannot decompose a corrtpound colour into 
simple colours, or distinguish a compound from a simple 
colour . The Hearing cannot directly perceive the place, tfill 
less the distance , of its objects : we infer these obscurely and 
vaguely from audible circumstances, (iv. 2.) 

LXV. 

The First Paradox of Vision is, that we see objects up- 
right, though the images on the retina are inverted. The 
solution is, that we do not see the image on the retina at all , 
we only see by means of it. m (iv. 2.) 

LXYI. 

The Second Paradox of Vision is, that we see objects 
single, though there are two images on the retinas, j>ne *in 
each eye . The explanation is, that it is a Law of Vision • 
that we see (small or distant ) objects single , when their images 
fall on Corresponding points of the two retinas, (iv. 2.) 

LXVII.« 

The law of single vision for near objects is this: — When 
the two images in the two eyes are situated, part for part, 
marly but not exactly, upon corresponding points, the object 
is apprehended as single and solid if the two objects are such 
as would be produced by a single solid object seen by the eyes 
separately, (iv. 2.) 

LXVIII. 

The ultimate object of each of the Secondary Mechanical 
Sciences is, to determine the nature and laws of the^processes 
NOV. QRG. 2 



i8 


APHORISMS 


by which the imprkssion of the Secondary Quality treated of 
is conveyed: but before we discover the cause, it may be 
necessary to determine the laws of the phenomena; and for 
this purpbse a Measure or Scale of each quality is necessary. 
(iv. 4.) 

LXIX. 

'Secondary qualities are measured by means of such effects 
as can ue estimated in number or space, (iv. 4.) 

LXX. 

flie Measure of Sounds , as high or low , is the Musical 
Scale, or Harmonic Canon, (iv. 4.) 

LXXI. 

The Measures of Pure Colours are the Prismatic Scale; 
the same, including Fraunhofer's Lines; and Newton's 
Scale of Colours. The principal Scales of Impure Colours 
are Werner's Nomenclature of Colours , and Merimeo's 
Nomenclature of Colours, (iv 4.) 

LXXII. 

The Idea of Polarity involves the conception of contrary 
properties in contrary directions: — the properties being, for 
example, attraction and repulsion, darkness and light, syn- 
thesis and analysis ; and the contrary directions being those 
which arc directly opposite, or, in some cases, those which are 
at right angles, (v. 1.) , 


LXXIII. (Doubtful.) 
Coexistent polarities are fundamentally identical. 


(v* 2.) 


1XX1V. 

The Idea of Chemical Affinity, as implied in Elementary 
Composition, involves peculiar conceptions. It is not properly 
expressed by assuming the qualities of bodies to resemblo 
those of the elements, or to depend on the figure of the ele- 
ments, of on their attractions, (vi. 1.) 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


*9 


LXXY! 

Attractions take place between bodies , Affinities between 
the particles of a body . The fprmer may be compared to the 
alliances of states , the latter to the ties of foynily. (vi. 2.) 

LXXVI. 

The governing principles of Chemical* Affinity are , that it 
is elective; that it is definite; that it determines pro- 
perties of the compound; and that analysis is possible. 
(v t 2.) « 

LXXYII. 

• 

We have an idea of Substance : and an axiom involved 
in this Ideaj is, that the weight of a body is the sum of the 
weights of all its elements, (vi. 3.) 

LXXYJII. 

Hence Imponderable Fluids are not to be admitted as 
chemical elements, (vi. 4.j 

LXXIX. 

The Doctrine of Atoms is admissible as a mode of express- 
ing and calculating laws of nature; but is not proved by hny 
fact , chemical or physical, as a philosophical truth . (vi. 5.) 

LXXX. 

We have an Idea of Symmetry ; and an axiom involved 
in this Mea is, that in a symmetrical 'natural body, if there 
be a tendency to modify any member iv any manner, there is 
a tendency to modify all the corresponding members in the 
same manner . (vn. 1.) 


LXXXI. 

All hypotheses respecting the manner in which the elements 
of inorganic bodies are arranged jro space, must be con- 
structed with regard to the general facts of crystallization. 
(vii. 3.) 

9 o 



20 


APHORISMS 


LXXXII. 

When we consider any object as One, we give unity to it 
by an act of thought • The condition which determines what 
this unity shall include, and what it shall exclude , is this ; 
— that assertions concerning the one thing shall be possible . 
(viu. 1.) 

LXXXIII. 

We collect individuals into Kinds by applying to them 
the Idea of Likeness, Kinds of things are not determined 
by definitions , but by this condition: — that general assertions 
concerning such kinds of things shall be possible . (viu. 1.) 

LXXXIY. 

The Names of kinds of things are governed by their use ; 
~and that may be a right name in one use which is not. so in 
another . A whale is not a fish in natural history , but it is 
a fish in commerce and law . (vm. 1.) 

LXXXY. 

We take for granted that each kind of things has a special 
character which may be expressed by a Definition . The 
ground of our assumption is this; — that reasoning must be 
possible . (vm. 1.) 

LXXXY I. 

The “Five Words,” Genus, Species, Difference, Pro- 
perty, Accident, were used by the Aristotelians , in order to 
express the subordination of Kinds , and to describe the nature 
of Definitions and Propositions. In modern times , these 
technical expressions have been more referred to by Natural 
Historians than by Metaphysicians, (vm. 1.) 

LXXXYII. 

The construction of a Classificatory Science includes 
Terminology, the formation of a descriptive language; — 
Diataxis, the Plan of the System of Classification, called 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


21 


also the Systematick ; — Diagnosis, the Scheme of the Cha- 
racters by which the different Classes are known, called also 
the Characteristic^ Physiography is the tynowlffige which 
the System is employed to convey. Diataxisiincludes Nomen- 
clature. (viii. 2.) 

LXXXVIII. 

Terminology must be conventional , precise , cq&ffant; 
copious in words , and minute in distinctions , according to 
the needs of the science . The student must understand the 
tertns, directly according to the convention , not through the 
medium of explanation or comparison, (viii. 2.) 

LXXXIX. 

The Diataxis, or Plan of the System, may aim at a 0 
Natural or at an Artificial System. But no classes can be 
absolutely artificial , for if they were, no assertion £ could be 
made concerning them. (viii. 2.) 

XC. 

An Artificial System is one in which the smaller groups 
(the Genera) are natural ; and in which the wider divisions 
( Classes , Orders) are constructed by the peremptory* appli- 
cation of selected Characters; (selected, however, so as not to 
break up the smaller groups.) (viii. 2.) 


XCI. 

A Natural System is one which attempts to make all the 
divisions natural, the widest as well hs the narrowest; and 
therefore applies no characters peremptorily, (viii. 2.) 

XCII. 

Natural Groups are best described, not by any Definition 
which marks their boundaries, but by a Type which marks 
their center. The Type of any natural group is an example 
which possesses in a marked degree all the leading characters 
of the class, (viii. 2.) 



22 


APHOBISMS 


XCIII. 

A Natural Qroup is steadily fixed, though not precisely 
limited; k is ge'jcn in position, though not circumscribed ; it 
is determined , not by a boundary without , but by a central 
point within; — not by what it strictly excludes, bi# by what 
it eminently includes; — by a Type, not by a Definition . 
(VKI^ 2.) 

XCIY. 

The prevalence 6f Mathematics as an element of educa- 
tion has made us think Definition the philosophical ntbde 
of fixing the meaning of a word: if (Scientific) Natural 
History were introduced into education , men might become 
familiar with the fixation of the signification of words by 
Types ; and this process agrees more nearly with the com- 
mon processes by which words acquire their significations . 
(Till. 2.) 

XCY. 

The attempts at Natural Classification are of three sorts; 
according as they are made by the process of blind trial, of 
general comparison, or of subordination of characters. 
The process of Blind Trial professes to make its classes by 
attention to all the characters , but without proceeding metho- 
dically. The process of General Comparison professes to 
enumerate all the characters, and forms its classes by the 
majority. Neither of these methods can really be carried 
into effect. The method of Subordination of Characters 
considers some characters as more important tfoth others; 
and this method gives more consistent results than the others . 
This method , however, does not depend upon the Idea of 
Likeness only , but introduces the Idea of Organization or 
Function, (vm. 2.) 

XCVI. 

A Species is a collection of individuals which are de- 
scended from a common stock, or which resemble such a 
collection as much as these resemble each other: the resem- 
blance being opposed to a definite difference . (vm. 2.) 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


23 


XCVII. 

A Genus is a collection of species whichjresemble each 
other more than they resemble other species: /he ^resemblance 
being opposed to a definite difference, (virf. 2.) 

XCVIII. 

The Nomenclature of a Classificatory Science is col- 
lection of the names of the Species , Genera , and other divi- 
sions. The Jnnary nomenclature , which denotes a species by 
the generic and specific name, is now commonly adopted in 
Natural History, (viii. 2.) 

XCIX. 

The Diagnosis, or Scheme of the Characters, comes , in 
the order of philosophy , after the Classification. The cha- 
racters do not make the classes, they only enable us to recog- 
nize them. The Diagnosis is an Artificial Key to a Natural 
System, (viii. 2.) 

C. 

The basis of all Natural Systems of Classification is the 
Idea of Natural Affinity . The Principle which thm Idea 
involves is this : — Natural arrangements , obtained from • 
different sets of characters, must coincide with each other . 
(viii. 4.J 

CI. 

In order to obtain a Science of Biolggy, we must analyse 
the Idea of Life . It has been proved by the biological specu- 
lations of past time , that Organic Life cannot rightly be 
solved into Mechanical or Chemical Forces , or the operation 
of a Vital Fluid , or of a Soul. (ix. 2.) 

OIL 

Life “is a System of Vital Forces ; and the conception of 
such Forces involves a peculiar Fundamental Idea. (ix. 3.) 



24 


APHORISMS 


CIII. 

MechanicOL chemical, and vital Forces form an ascending 
progressist each including the preceding . Chemical Affinity 
includes in its Mature Mechanical Force , and may often be 
practically resolved into Mechanical Force. (Thu* the ingre- 
dients of gdhpowder, liberated from their chemical union 9 
cor^t great mechanical Force : a galvanic battery acting by 
chemical process does the like.) Vital Forces include in 
their nature both chemical Affinities and mechanical Forces : 
for Vital Powers produce both chemical changes, (as diges- 
tion ,) and motions which imply considerable mechanical 
force, (as the motion of the sap and of the blood.) (ix. 4 ) 

CIV. 

In voluntary motions, Sensations produce Actions , and 
the connexion is made by means of Ideas: in reflected 
motions, the connexion neither seems to be nor is made by 
means of Ideas: in instinctive motions , the connexion is 
such as requires Ideas , but we cannot believe the Ideas to 
exist, (ix. 5.) 

cv. 

c The Assumption of a Final Cause in the structure of each 
- part of animals and plants is as inevitable as the assumption 
of an Efficient Cause for every event . The maxim that in 
organized bodies nothing is in vain, is as necessarily true as 
the maxim that nothing happens by chance, (ix. 0.) 

CVI. 

The Idea of living beings as subject to disease includes a 
recognition of a Final Cause in organization ; for disease is 
a state in which the vital forces do not attain their proper 
ends. (ix. 7.) 

CVII. 

The Palcetiologica 1 Sciences depend upon the Idea of 
Cause ; but the leading conception which they involve is that 
of historical cause, not mechanical cause, (x. 1.) 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 


25 


CVIIL 

Each Palcetiological Science, when completeJmust possess 
three members: the Phenomenology, the ^Etyiogy^ and the 
Theory, (x. 2.) 

CIX. 

There are, in the Palcetiological Sciences, two antagonist 
doctrines: Catastrophes and Uniformity. The dof&me 
of a uniform course of nature is tenable only when we 
extend the ration of Uniformity so faf that it shall in- 
clufb Catastrophes . (x. 3.) 


CX. 

The Catastrophist constructs Theories , the Uniformitarian 
demolishes them . The former adduces evidence of an Origin, 
the latter explains the evidence away. The Catastrophist' s 
dogmatism is undermined by the Uniformitarian' s skeptical 
hypotheses . But when these hypotheses are asserted dogma- 
tically, they cease to be consistent with the doctrine of Uni- 
formity. (x. 3.) 

CXI. 

In each of the Palcetiological Sciences, we can ascend jto 
remote periods by a chain of causes , but in none can we 
ascend to a beginning of the chain, (x. 3.) 

CXII. 

Since Sfte Palcetiological sciences deal with the conceptions 
of historical cause , History, including 0 Tradlt\on, is an im- 
portant source of materials for such sciences, (x. 4.) 

CXIII. 

The history and tradition which present -to us the provi- 
dential course of the wdrld form a Sacred Narrative ; and 
in reconciling the Sacred Narrative with the results of sci- 
ence, afise inevitable difficulties which disturb the minds of 
those who reverence the Sacred Narrative, (x. 4.) 



26 


APHORISMS CONCERNING IDEAS. 


CXIY. 

The distit *bance of reverent minds , arising from scientific 
views , ceasis ^uhcn such views become familiar , Sacred 

Narrative beinr then interpreted anew in accordance with 
such views . (x. 4.) 


CXY. 

A olew interpretation of the Sacred Narrative , made for 
the purpose of reconciling it with doctrines of science, should 
not be insisted on till such doctrines are clearly proved & and 
when they are so proved , should be frankly accepted , in the 
confidence that a reverence for the Sacred Narrative is con- 
sistent with a reverence for the Truth, (x. 4.) 

CXYI. 

In contemplating the series of causes and effects which 
constitutes the world, we necessarily assume a First Cause 
of the whole series, (x. 5.) 


CXYII. 

The Palcetiological Sciences point backwards with lines 
which are broken, but which all converge to the same invisible 
point ': and this point is the Origin of the Moral and 
Spiritual, as well as of the Natural World, (x. 5.) 



NOVUM OKGANON KENOVATUM. 


BOOK II. 

OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


CHAPTER I. 

Of two principal Processes by which Science 

IS CONSTRUCTED. 


Aphorism I. 

THE two processes by which Science is constricted are 
the Explication of Conceptions, and the Colligation of 
Facts. 

T O tlie^subject of tlie present and next Book all that 
has preceded is subordinate and preparatory. In 
former works we have treated of tlie History of Scientific 
Discoveries and of the History of Scientific Ideas. We 
have now to attempt to describe the# manner in which 
discoveries are made, and in which Ideas give rise to 
knowledge. It has already been stated that Knowledge 
requires us to possess both Facts and Ideas; — that 
every step in our knowledge consists in applying the 
Ideas and Conceptions furnished by our minds to the 
Facts which observation and experiment offer to us. 
When our Conceptions are clear and* distinct, when our 
Facts are certain and sufficiently numerous, and when 
the Conceptions, being suited to the nature of the 



28 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


Facts, aie applied to them so as to produce an exact 
and uni^Vrsal accordance, we attain knowledge of a 
precise aiM comprehensive kind, which we may term 
Science .* ^d we appl/ this term to our knowledge 
still more decidedly when, Facts being thus included 
in exact and general Propositions, such propositions 
are, in tlfSe same manner, included with equal rigour 
iji Propositions of a higher degree of Generality ; and 
tli&se again in others of a still wider nature, so as to 
form a large and systematic whole. 

But after thus stating, in a general waip, the nature 
of science, and the elements of which it consists, we 
kave been examining with a more close and extensive 
scrutiny, some of those elements; and we must now 
return to our main subject, and apply to it the results 
of our long investigation. We have been exploring 
the realm of Ideas ; we have been passing in review 
the difficulties in which the workings of our own minds 
involve us when we would make our conceptions con- 
sistent with themselves : and we have endeavoured to 
get a sight of the true solutions of these difficulties. 
We have now to inquire how the results of these long 
and laborious efforts of thought find their due pjacet in 
the formation of our Knowledge. What do we gain 
by £liese attempts to make our notions distinct and 
consistent ; and in what manner is the gain of which « 
we thus become possessed, carried to the general trea- 
sure-house of our permanent and indestructible know- 
ledge? After all this battling in the world of ideas, 
all this struggling with the shadowy and changing 
forms of intellectual perplexity, how do we secure to 
ourselves the fruits of our warfare, and assure ourselves 
that we have really pushed forwards the frontier of 
the empire of Science? It is by such an appropria- 
tion, that the task which we have had in our hands 
during the two previous works, (the History of the 
Inductive Sciences and the History of Scientific Ideas,) 
must a&piire its real value and true place in our design. 

In order to do this, we must reconsider, in a more 
definite and precise shape, the doctrine which has 
already been laid down ; — that our Knowledge consists 



TWO PROCESSES, ETC. 2Q 

in applying Ideas to Facts; and tfiat tie conditions of 
real knowledge are that the ideas be distinc/ and ap- 
propriate, and exactly applied to clear a/d certain 
facts. The steps by which ouf knowledges aclf anced 
are those by which one or the other of these two pro- 
cesses is rendered more complete; — by which Concep- 
tions are made more clear in themselves, or \>y which 
the Conceptions more strictly bind together the Factor 
These two processes may be considered as together con- 
stituting the whole formation of our knowledge; and 
the principles* which have been established in the His- 
tory ol* Scientific Ideas bear principally upon the former 
of these two operations ; — upon the business of elevating 
our conceptions to the highest possible point of pre- 
cision and generality. But these two portions of the 
progress of knowledge are so clearly connected with 
each other, that we shall deal with them in immediate 
succession. And having now to consider these opera- 
tions in a more exact and formal manner than ft was 
before possible to do, we shall designate them by cer- 
tain constant and technical* phrases. We shall speak 
of the two processes by which we arrive at science, as 
the .Explication of Conceptions and the Colligation of 
Facts: we shall show how the discussions in which we 
have been engaged have been necessary . in order, to 1 
promote the former of these offices; and we shall 
endeavour to point out modes, maxims, and principles 
by which |he second of the two tasks may also be fur- 
thered. 



CHAPTER II. 

Op the Explication of Conceptions. 


Aphorism: II. 

The Explication of Conceptions, as requisite for the pro- 
gress of science , has been effected by means of discussiom and 
controversies among scientists; often by debates ^concerning 
definitions; these controversies have frequently led to the 
establishment of a Definition ; but along with the Definition , 
a corresponding Proposition has always been expressed or 
implied. The essential requisite for the advance of science 
is the clearness of the Conception , not the establishment of a 
Definition . The construction of an exact Definition is often 
very difficult . The requisite conditions of clear Conceptions 
may often be expressed by Ax\oms as well as by Definitions . 

Aphorism III. 

Conceptions , for purposes of science, must be appropriate 
as well as clear : that is, they must be modifications of that 
Fundamental Idea , by which the phenomena can really be in- 
terpreted. This maxim may warn us from err our, though 
it may not lead to discovery . Discovery depends upon the 
previous cultivation or natural clearness of the appropriate 
Idea , and therefore no discovery is the work of accident. 

Sect. I. — Historical Progress of the Explication of 
Conceptions . 

i. TTTE have given the appellation of Ideas to ccr- 
V V tain comprehensive «forms of thought, — as 
space, number, cause, composition, resemblance, — which 
we apply to the phenomena which we contemplate. 
But the special modifications of these ideas which are 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


31 


exemplified in particular facts, we have tewned Con- 
ceptions; as a circle , a square number , an opcelerating 
force , a neutral combination of element/ a genus . 
Such Conceptions involve in themselves certain* neces- 
sary and universal relations derived from the Ideas 
just enumerated; and these relations are an indispen- 
sable portion of the texture of our knowledge. But to 
determine the contents and limits of this portion >£ 
our knowledge, requires an examination of the Ideas 
and Conceptions from which it proceeds. The Con- 
ceptions musj be, as it were, carefully unfolded , so as 
to bring into clear view the elements of truth with 
which they are marked from their. ideal origin. Thft 
is one of file processes by which our knowledge is ex- 
tended and made more exact ; and this I shall describe 
as the Explication of Conceptions. 

In the several Books of the History of Ideas we 
have discussed a great many of the Fundamental Ideas 
of the most important existing sciences. We have, in 
those Books, abundant exemplifications of the process 
now under our consideration. We shall here add a 
few general remarks, suggested by the survey which 
wt; have thus made. 

2. Such discussions as those in which we have been 
engaged concerning our fundamental Ideas, have beer? 
, the course by which, historically speaking, those Con- 
ceptions which the existing sciences involve have been 
rendered so clear as to be fit elements of exact know- 
ledge. Thus, the disputes concerning the various kinds 
and measures of Force were an important part of the 
progress of the science of Mechanics. The struggles by 
which philosophers attained a right general conception 
of plane , of circular , of elliptical Folarization , >vere 
some of the most difficult steps in the modern discove- 
ries of Optics. A Conception of the Atomic Constitu- 
tion of bodies, such as shall include what we know, 
and assume nothing more, is even now a matter of 
conflict among Chemists. The debates by wlfich, in 
recent times, the Conceptions of fyjecies and Genera 
have befoi rendered more exact, have improved the 
science of Botany : the imperfection of th * science of 



32 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


Mineralogy arises in a great measure from the circum- 
stance, that, in that subject, the Conception of a Species 
is not yet \ixed. In Physiology, what a vast advance 
would that philosopher inake, who should establish a 
precise, tenable, and consistent Conception of Life ! 

Thus discussions and speculations concerning the 
import of eery abstract and general terms and notions, 
may be, and in reality have been, far from useless and 
ban on. Such discussions arose from the desire of men 
to impress their opinions on others, but they had the 
effect of making the opinions much more clear and dis- 
tinct. In trying to make others understand them; they 
learnt to understand themselves. Their speculations 
were begun in twilight, and ended in the fulllbrilliance 
of day. It was not easily and at once, without expen- 
diture of labour or time, that men arrived at those 
notions which now form the elements of our know- 
ledge; on the contrary, we have, in the history of 
science, seen how hard, discoverers, and the forerunners 
of discoverers, have had to struggle with the indistinct- 
ness and obscurity of the intellect, before they could 
advance to the critical point at which truth became 
clearly visible. And so long as, in this advance, some 
speculators were more forward than others, there was 
r, natural and inevitable ground of difference of opi- 
nion, of argumentation, of wrangling. But the ten- 
dency of all such controversy is to diffuse truth and to 
dispel errour. Truth is consistent, and can bear the 
tug of war; Errour is incoherent, and falls to pieces 
in the struggle. Tnie Conceptions can endure the 
sun, and become clearer as a fuller light is"' obtained ; 
confused and inconsistent notions vanish like visionary 
spectres at the break of a brighter day. And thus 
all the controversies concerning such Conceptions as 
science involves, have ever ended in the establishment 
of the side on which the truth was found. 

3. Indeed, so complete has been the victory of 
truth in most of these instances, that at present we 
can hardly imagine the struggle to have been neces- 
sary. The very essence of these triumphs is that they 
lead us to tegard the views we reject as not only false, 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


33 


but inconceivable. And hence we are led^rather to 
look back upon the vanquished with contempt than 
upon the victors with gratitude. We now c/esyise those 
who, in the Copernican controversy, could* not conceive 
the apparent motion of the sun on the heliocentric 
hypothesis f — or those who, in opposition to. Galileo, 
thought that a uniform force might *be tfiat which 
generated a velocity proportional to the space; — ar 
those who held there was something absurd in New- 
ton’s doctrine of the different refrangiJjility of differ- 
ently coloured rays; — or those who imagined that 
when elements combine, their sensible qualities must 
be manifest in the compound; — «or those who were 
reluctant to give up the distinction of vegetables into 
herbs, shrubs, and trees. We cannot help thinking that 
men must have been singularly dull of comprehension, 
to find a difficulty in admitting what is to us so plain 
and simple. We have a latent persuasion that we in 
their place should have been wiser and more clear- 
sighted; — that we should have taken the right side, 
and given our assent at on«c to the truth. 

4. Yet in reality, such a persuasion is a mere delu- 
sion. JClie persons who, in such instances as the above, 
were on the losing side, were very far, in most cases, 
from being persons more prejudiced, or stupid, or nar- 
row-minded, than the greater part of mankind now 
are; and the cause for which they fought was far 
from being a manifestly bad one, till it had been so 
decided by the result of the war. It is the peculiar 
character of scientific contests, Hiat what is only an 
epigram with regard to other warfare is a truth in 
this; — They who are defeated are reiflly in the wrong. 
But they may, nevertheless, be men of great subtilty, 
sagacity, and genius; and we nourish a very foolish 
self-complacency when we suppose that we are their 
superiors. That this is so, is proved by recollecting 
that many of those wl^o have made very great disco- 
veries have laboured under the imperfection of tliought 
which was the obstacle to the next step in knowledge. 
Though * Kepler detected with great acuteness the 
Numerical Laws of the solar system, he laboured in 
NOV. org. 3 



34 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


vain to Conceive the very simplest of the Laws of 
Motion b^ which the paths of the planets are governed. 
Though Prrestley made spme important steps in chemis- 
try, he coul& not bring his mind to admit the doctrine 
of a general Principle of Oxidation. How many in- 
genious men in the last century rejected the New- 
tonian Attraction as an impossible chimera! How 
filany more, equally intelligent, have, in the same man- 
ner, in our own time, rejected, I do not now mean as 
false, but as inconceivable, the doctrine of Luminife- 
rous Undulations! To err in this way isrtlie lot, not 
only of men in general, but of men of great endow- 
ments, and very sincere love of truth. 

5. And those who liberate themselves from such 
perplexities, and who thus go on in advance of their 
age in such matters, owe their superiority in no small 
degree to such discussions and controversies as those 
to which we now refer. In such controversies, the 
Conceptions in question are turned in all directions, 
examined on all sides; the strength and the weakness 
of the maxims which men apply to them are fully test- 
ed ; the light of the brightest minds is diffused to other 
minds. Inconsistency is unfolded into self-contradic- 
tion ; axioms are built up into a system of necessary 
truths ; and ready exemplifications are accumulated of 
that which is to be proved or disproved, concerning 
the ideas which are the basis of the controversy. 

The History of Mechanics from the time of Kepler 
to that of Lagrange, is perhaps the best exemplifica- 
tion of the mode in which the progress of a science 
depends upon such disputes and speculations as give 
clearness and geiPerality to its elementary conceptions. 
This, it is to be recollected, is the kind of progress of 
which we are now speaking ; and this is the principal 
feature in the portion of scientific history which we 
have mentioned. Kor almost all that was to be done 
by reference to observation, was executed by Galileo 
and his disciples. What remained was the task of 
generalization and simplification. And this was pro- 
moted in no small degree by the various controversies 
which took place within that period concerning me- 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


35 


clianical conceptions : — as, for example, the*' question 
concerning the measure of the Force of Percussion ; — 
the war of the Vis Viva ; — the* controversy of the Cen- 
ter of Oscillation; — of the independence of Statics and 
Dynamics; — of the principle of Least Action; — of the 
evidence of # the Laws of Motion ; — and of the humber 
of Laws really distinct. None of these discussions was 
without its influence in giving generality and clearness 
to the mechanical ideas of mathematicians: and there- 
fore, though remote from general apjfrehension, and 
dealing with Very abstract notions, they were of emi- 
nent use in the perfecting the science of Mechanics# 
Similar controversies concerning fundamental notions, 
those, for example, which Galileo himself had to main- 
tain, were no less useful in the formation of the science 
ofJHydrostatics. And the like struggles and conflicts, 
whether they take the form of controversies between 
several persons, or only operate in the efforts and fluc- 
tuations of the discoverer’s mind, are always requisite, 
before the conceptions acquire that clearness which 
makes them fit to appear id the enunciation of scien- 
tific truth. This, then, was one object of the History 
of Idea* ; — to bring under the reader’s notice the main 
elements of the controversies which have thus had so, 
important a share in the formation of the existing 
*body of science, and the decisions on the controverted 
points to which the mature examination of the subject 
has led; rfinl thus to give an abundant exhibition of 
that step which we term the Explication of Conceptions. 

Sect. II. — Use of Definitions. 

C). The result of such controversies as we have 
been speaking of, often appears to be summed up in a 
Definition ; and the controversy itself has often as- 
sumed the form of a battle of definitions. For ex- 
ample, the inquiry concerning the Laws of Falling 
Bodies led to the question whether «tlie proper Defi- 
nition of a uni for in force is, that it generates a velocity 
proportional to the space from rest, or to the time. 
The controversy of the Vis Viva was, what was the 
# 3-2 



36 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

proper Definition of the measure of force. A principal 
question 11 the classification of minerals is, what is 
the Definition of a mineral species. Physiologists have 
endeavoured to throw light on their subject, by De- 
fining organization , or some similar term. 

7. It«-is very important for us to observe, that 
these controversies have never been questions of insu- 
lated and arbitrary Definitions, as men seem often 
tempted to suppose them to have been. In all cases 
there is a taciff assumption of some Proposition which 
is to be expressed by means of the Diifinitio* , and 
¦which gives it its importance. The dispute concerning 
the Definition thus" acquires a real value, and becomes 
a question concerning true and false. Thus in the dis- 
cussion of the question, What is a Uniform Force ? it 
was taken for granted that ‘ gravity is a uniform 
force — in the debate of the Vis Vim, it was assumed 
that f in the mutual action of bodies the whole effect 
of the force is unchanged :* — in the zoological definition 
of Species, (that it consists of individuals which have, 
or may have, sprung from *clie same parents,) it is pre- 
sumed that ‘ individuals so related resemble each other 
more than those which are excluded by such* a defi- 
nition;’ or perhaps, that e species so defined have per- 
manent and definite differences/ A definition of Or- 
ganization, or of any other term, which was not em- 
ployed to express some principle, would be of no value. 

The establishment, therefore, of a right 'Definition 
of a Term may be p, useful step in the Explication of 
our Conceptions ; but this will be the care then only 
when we have under our consideration some Propo- 
sition in which the Term is employed. For then the 
question really is, how the Conception shall be under- 
stood and defined in order that the Proposition may be 
true. 

8. The establishment of a Proposition requires an 
attention to observed Facts, and can never be rightly 
derived from our Conceptions alone. We must here- 
after consider the necessity which exists that the Facts 
should be rightly bound together, as well as that our 
Conceptions should be clearly employed, in order to 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


37 


lead us to real knowledge. But Ve m8y observe here 
that, in such cases at least as we are now considering, 
the two processes are co-ordinate. To unfold our Con- 
ceptions by the means of Definitions, has nearer been 
serviceable to science, except when it has been asso- 
ciated with^an immediate use of the Definitions. The 
endeavour to define a Uniform Force was •combined 
with the assertion that ‘ gravity is a uniform force 
the attempt to define Accelerating Force was imme- 
diately followed by the doctrine that c accelerating 
forces may be compounded:’ the process of defining 
Morrfcntum was connected with the principle that 
‘ momenta gained and lost are equal naturalists would 
have given in vain the Definition of Species which we 
have quoted, if they had not also given the ‘ characters’ 
of species so separated. Definition and Proposition 
are the two handles of the instrument by which we 
apprehend truth ; the former is of no use without the 
latter. Definition may be the best mode of explaining 
our Conception, but that which alone makes it worth 
while to explain it in any mode, is the opportunity of 
using it in the expression* of Truth. When a Defi- 
nition is propounded to us as a useful step in know- 
ledge, *we are always entitled to ask what Principle it 
serves to enunciate. If there be no answer to this in^ 

, quiry, we define and give clearness to our conceptions 
in vain. While we labour at such a task, we do but 
light up a vacant room; — we sharpen a knife with 
which we have nothing to cut; — we take exact aim, 
while we load our artillery with blank cartridge; — 
we apply Strict rules of grammar to sentences which 
have no meaning. 

If, on the other hand, we have under our considera- 
tion a proposition probably established, every step 
which we can make in giving distinctness and exact- 
ness to the Terms which this proposition involves, is 
an important step towards scientific truth. In such 
cases, any improvement in our Definition is. a real 
advance in the explication of our • Conception. The 
clearness of our Expressions casts a light upon the 
Ideas which we contemplate and convey to others. 



33 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


9. But the* ugh Definition may be subservient to a 
right explication of our conceptions, it is not essential 
to that process. It is absolutely necessary to every 
advance* in our knowledge, that those by whom such 
advances are made should possess clearly the concep- 
tions which they employ : but it is by no means neces- 
sary tliatithey should unfold these conceptions in the 
words of a formal Definition. It is easily seen, by 
examining the course of Galileo’s discoveries, that he 
had a distinct conception of the Moving Force which 
urges bodies downwards upon an inclined plane, while 
he still hesitated whether to call it Momentum , Energy, 
Impetus, or Force , and did not venture to offer a Defi- 
nition of the thing which was the subject of his 
thoughts. The Conception of Polarization was clear 
in the minds of many optical speculators, from the 
time of Iiuyghens and Newton to that of Young and 
Fresnel. This Conception we have defined to be * Op- 
posite * properties depending upon opposite positions;’ 
but this notion was, by the discoverers, though con- 
stantly assumed and expressed by means of superfluous 
hypotheses, never clothed m definite language. And 
in the mean time, it was the custom, among subordi- 
nate writers on the same subjects, to say, that the 
term Polarization had no definite meaning, and was 
merely an expression of our ignorance. The Definition 
which was offered by Haliy and others of a Mineral lo- 
gical Species; — ‘The same elements combined in the 
same proportions, with the same fundamentaf form ;’ — 
was false, inasmuch ps it was incapable of being rigor- 
ously applied to any one case; but this defect did not 
prevent the philosophers who propounded such a Defi- 
nition from making many valuable additions to mine- 
ralogical knowledge, in the way of identifying some 
species and distinguishing others. The right Concep- 
tion which they possessed in their minds j)revented 
their being misled by their own very erroneous Defi- 
nition. - The want of any precisd Definitions of Strata , 
and Formations , rnd Epochs, among geologists, has 
not prevented the discussions which they have carried 
on upon such subjects from being highly serviceable 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


39 


in the promotion of geological knowledge. For how- 
ever much the apparent vagueness of these terms 
might leave their arguments open to cavil, there was a 
general understanding prevalent among the *most in- 
telligent cultivators of the science, as to what was 
meant in ^lcli expressions; and this common under- 
standing sufficed to determine what evidence should 
he considered conclusive and what inconclusive, in 
these inquiries. And thus the distinctness of Con- 
ception, which is a real requisite of scientific progress, 
existed in the minds of the inquirers,* although Defi- 
nitions, which are a partial and accidental evidence 
of this distinctness, had not yet been hit upon. The 
Idea had been developed in men's minds, although a 
clothing of words had not been contrived for it, nor, 
perhaps, the necessity of such a vehicle felt : and thus 
that essential condition of the progress of knowledge, 
of which we are here speaking, existed; while it was 
left to the succeeding speculators to put this unwritten 
Rule in the form of a verbal Statute. 

to. Men are often prone to consider it as a thought- 
less omission of an essential circumstance, and as a 
neglect which involves some blame, when knowledge 
thus assumes a form in which Definitions, or rather 
Conceptions, are implied but are not expressed. But 41 
such a judgment, they assume that to be a matter of 
choice requiring attention only, which is in fact as 
difficult and precarious as any other portion of the task 
of discovery. To define , so that our Definition shall 
have any scientific value, requires no small portion of 
that sagadlty by which truth is detected. As we have 
already said, Definitions and Propositions are co-ordi- 
nate in their use and in their origin. In many cases, 
perhaps in most, the Proposition which contains a 
scientific truth, is apprehended with confidence, but 
with some vagueness and vacillation, before it is put in 
a positive, distinct, and definite form. It is thus known 
to be true, before it edn be enunciated in term# each of 
which is rigorously defined. The •business of Defini- 
tion is part of the business of discovery. When it has 
been clearly seen what ought to be our Definition, it 



40 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


must be pretty well* known what truth we have to 
state. The Definition, as well as the discovery, sup- 
poses a decided step in our knowledge to have been 
made. The writers on L'ogic in the middle ages, made 
Definition the last stage in the progress of knowledge ; 
and in this arrangement at least, the history of science, 
and the* philosophy derived from the history, confirm 
their speculative views. If the Explication of our 
Conceptions ever assume the form of a Definition, this 
will come to pass, not as an arbitrary process, or as a 
matter of course^ but as the mark of one of those happy 
efforts of sagacity to which all the successive advances 
of our knowledge are owing. 


Sect. III. — Use of Axioms. 

1 1. Our Conceptions, then, even when they become 
so cleai 7 as the progress of knowledge requires, are not 
adequately expressed, or necessarily expressed at all, by 
means of Definitions. We may ask, then, whether there 
is any other vnode of expression in which we may look 
for the evidence and exposition of that peculiar exact- 
ness of thought which the formation of Science demands. 
And in answer to this inquiry, we may refer to the 
discussions respecting many of the Fundamental Ideas 
of the sciences contained in our History of such Ideas. 
It has there been seen that these Ideas involve many 
elementary truths w hich enter into the texture of our 
knowledge, introducing into it connexions and relations 
of the most important kind, although these elementary 
truths cannot be deduced from any verbal definition of 
the idea. It has been seen that these elementary truths 
may often be enunciated by means of Axioms , stated in 
addition to, or in preference to, Definitions. For exam- 
ple, the Idea of Cause, which forms the basis of the 
science of Mechanics, makes its appearance in our elemen- 
tary mechanical reasonings, not as a Definition, but by 
means of the Axioms that 1 Causes are measured by 
their effects/ and that ( Reaction is equal and opposite 
to action.’ Such axioms, tacitly assumed or occa- 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


41 

sionally stated, as maxims of acknowfedged, validity, 
belong to all the Ideas which form the foundations of 
the sciences, and are constantly employed in the reason- 
ing and speculations of thosb who think clearly on 
such subjects. It may often be a task of some diffi- 
culty to defect and enunciate in words the Principles 
which are thus, perhaps silently and^ unconsciously, 
taken for granted by those who have a share in the 
establishment of scientific truth : but inasmuch as 
these Principles are an essential element in our know- 
ledge^ it is t very important to our present purpose 
to separate them from the associated materials, and 
to trace them to their origin. This accordingly «[ 
attempted to do, with regard to a considerable num- 
ber of the most prominent of such Ideas, in the His- 
tory. The reader will there find many of these Ideas 
resolved into Axioms and Principles by means of 
which their effect upon the elementary reasonings of 
the various sciences may be expressed. That* Work 
is intended to form, in some measure, a representation 
of the Ideal Side of our physical knowledge ; — a Table 
of those contents of our Conceptions which are not 
received directly from facts ; — an exhibition of Rules 
to which we know that truth must conform. 


Sect. IV . — Clear and appropriate Ideas . 

12. Ri order, however, that we may see the neces- 
sary cogency of these rules, we mi^st possess, clearly and 
steadily, the Ideas from which the rules flow. In order 
to perceive the necessary relations of the Circles of the 
Sphere, we must possess clearly the Idea of Solid 
Space : — in order that w^ may see the demonstration of 
the composition of forces, we must have the Idea of 
Cause moulded into a distinct Conception of Statical 
Force. This is that Clearness of Ideas which we stipu- 
late for in any one’s mind, as the first essential con- 
dition of his making any new step *in the discovery of 
truth. »And we now see wdiat answer we are able to 
give, if we are asked for a Criterion of this Clearness of 



42 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


Idea. Tlie Criterion' is, that the person shall see the 
necessity of the Axioms belonging to each Idea ; — shall 
accept them in such a manner as to perceive the cogency 
of the reasonings founded upon them. Thus, a person 
has a clear Idea of Space who follows the reasonings of 
geometry and fully apprehends their con elusiveness. 
The Explication of Conceptions, which we are speaking 
of as an essential part of real knowledge, is the process 
by which we bring the Clearness of our Ideas to bear 
upon the Formation of our knowledge. And this is 
done, as we have now seen, not always, nor generally, 
nor principally, by laying down a Definition ot the 
Conception ; but by acquiring such a possession of it 
in our minds as enables, indeed compels us, to admit, 
along with the Conception, all the Axioms and Prin- 
ciples which it necessarily implies, and by which it 
produces its effect upon our reasonings. 

1 3. But in order that we may make any real advance 
in the vliscovery of truth, our Ideas must not only be 
clear, they must also be appropriate. Each science has 
for its basis a different class of Ideas; and the steps 
which constitute the progress of one science can never 
be made by employing the Ideas of another kind of 
science. No genuine advance could ever be obtained 
ip Mechanics by applying to the subject the Ideas of 
Spa& and Time merely : — no advance in Chemistry, by 
the use of mere Mechanical Conceptions no discovery 
in Physiology, by referring facts to mere Chemical and 
Mechanical Principles. Mechanics must involve the 
Conception of Force;, — Chemistry, the Conception of 
Elementary Composition ; — Physiology, the Conception 
of Vital Powers. Each science must advance by means 
of its appropriate Conceptions. Each has its own field, 
which extends as far as its principles can be applied. I 
have already noted the separation of several of these 
fields by the divisions* of the Books of the History of Ideas. 
The Mechanical, the Secondary Mechanical, the Che- 
mical, the Classificatory, the Biological Sciences form so 
many great Provinces in the Kingdom of knowledge, 
each in a great measure possessing its own peculiar 
fundamental principles. Every attempt to build up a 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 43 

new science by the application of principles which be- 
long to an old one, will lead to frivolous and barren 
speculations. 

This truth has been exemplified in all the 'instances 
in which subtle speculative men have failed in their 
attempts tg frame new sciences, and especially in the 
essays of the ancient schools of philosophy Greece, 
as has already been stated in the History of Science. 
Aristotle and his followers endeavoured in vain to 
account for the mechanical relation of forces in the 
lever by applying the inappropriate geometrical con- 
ceptions of the properties of the circle: — they specu- 
lated to no purpose about the elementary composition 
of bodies, because they assumed the inappropriate 
conception of likeness between the elements and the 
compound, instead of the genuine notion of elements 
merely determining the qualities of the compound. And 
in like manner, in modern times, we have seen, in the 
history of the fundamental ideas of the physiological 
sciences, how all the inappropriate mechanical and 
chemical and other ideas which were applied in succes- 
sion to the subject faileef in bringing into view any 
genuine physiological truth. 

14* That the real cause of the failure in the in- 
stances above mentioned lay in the Conceptions , js 
plain. It was not ignorance of the facts which in 
these cases prevented the discovery of the truth. Aristotle 
was as well acquainted with the fact of the proportion 
of the weights which balance on a Lever as Archimedes 
was, although Archimedes aloi^e gave the true me- 
chanical reason for the proportion. 

With regard to the doctrine of tjie Four Elements 
indeed, the inapplicability of the conception of compo- 
sition of qualities, required, perhaps, to be proved by 
some reference to facts. But this conception was 
devised at first, and accepted by succeeding times, in a 
blind and gratuitous manner, which could hardly have 
happened if men had been awake to the necessary 
condition of our knowledge; — that the conceptions 
which we introduce into our doctrines are not arbitrary 
or accidental notions, but certain peculiar modes of 



44 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


apprehension strictly 'determined by the subject of our 
speculations. 

15. It may, however, be said that this injunction 
that we are to employ appropriate Conceptions only in 
the formation of our knowledge, cannot be of practical 
use, because we can only determine what* Ideas are 
appropriate, by finding that they truly combine the 
facts. And this is to a certain extent true. Scientific 
discovery must ever depend upon some happy thought, 
of which we cannot trace the origin ; — some fortunate 
cast of intellect, rising above all rules. No maxims 
can be given which inevitably lead to discovery. No 
precepts will elevate a man of ordinary endowments 
to the level of a man of genius : nor will an inquirer 
of truly inventive mind need to come to the teacher 
of inductive philosophy to learn how to exercise the 
faculties which nature has given him. Such persons 
as Kepler or Fresnel, or Brewster, will have their 
powers* of discovering truth little augmented by any 
injunctions respecting Distinct and Appropriate Ideas ; 
and such men may very naturally question the utility 
of rules altogether. 

16. But yet the opinions which such persons m^y 
entertain, will not lead us to doubt concerning the 
value of the attempts to analyse and methodize the 
process of discovery. Who would attend to Kepler if 
lie had maintained that the speculations of Francis 
Bacon were worthless? Notwithstanding what has 
been said, we may venture to assert that the Maxim 
which points out tha necessity of Ideas appropriate 
as well as clear, for the purpose of discovering truth, is 
not without its us§. It may, at least, have a value as 
a caution or prohibition, and may thus turn us a why 
from labours certain to be fruitless. We have already 
seen, in the History of Ideas, that this maxim, if duly 
attended to, would have at once condemned, as wrongly 
directed, the speculations of physiologists of the mathe- 
matical, h mechanical, chemical, and vital-fluid schools; 
since the Ideas which the teachers of these schools in- 
troduce, cannot suffice for the purposes of physiology, 
which seeks truths respecting the vital powers. Again, 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


45 


it is clear from similar considerations that no definition 
of a mineralogical species by chemical characters alone 
can answer the end of scienge, since we seejj: to make 
mineralogy, not an analytical butaclassificatory science 1 . 
Even before the appropriate conception is matured in 
men’s minds so that they see clearly what it, is, they 
may still have light enough to see what it is not. 

17. Another result of this view of tfie necessity 
of appropriate Ideas, combined with a survey of the 
history of science is, that though for t^e most part, as 
we thall sec, the progress of science consists in accu- 
mulating and combining Facts rather than in debating 
concerning Definitions; there are* still certain peridfls 
when the discussion of Definitions may be the most 
useful mode of cultivating some special branch of 
science. This discussion is of course always to be con- 
ducted by the light of facts; and, as has already been 
said, along with the settlement of every good Defi- 
nition will occur the corresponding establishment of 
some Proposition. But still at particular periods, the 
want of a Definition, or of the clear conceptions which 
Definition supposes, may be peculiarly felt. A good 
ahd tenable Definition of Species in Mineralogy would 
at present be perhaps the most important step which 
the science could make. A just conception o£ the 
nature of Life, (and if expressed by means of a Defini- 
tion, so much the better,) can hardly fail to give its 
possessor an immense advantage in the speculations 
which now come under the considerations of physio- 
logists. .And controversies respecting Definitions, in 
these cases, and such as these, may be very far from 
idle and unprofitable. 

Thus the* knowledge that Clear and Appropriate 
Ideas are requisite for discovery, although it does not 
lead to any very precise precepts, or supersede the 
value of natural sagacity and inventiveness, may still 

1 This agrees with what M. Neckcr science, Jiave substituted the analysis 
has well observed in his llcgne of substances for the classification of 
Mineral , that those who have treat- individuals. See History of Ideas, 
ed mineralogy as a merely chemical b. viii. chap. iii. 



CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


46 

be of use to us in our pursuit after truth. It may 
show us what course of research is, in each stage of 
science, recommended bv the general analogy of the 
history of knowledge; and it may both save us from 
hopeless and barren paths of speculation, and make us 
advance with more courage and confidence, to know 
that we are looking for discoveries in the manner in 
which they*have always hitherto been made. 

Sect. Y . — Accidental Discoveries. 

• \ 

18. Another consequence follows from the views 
presented in this Chapter, and it is the last I shall at 
present mention. No scientific discovery can, with any 
justice, be considered due to accident. In whatever 
manner facts may be presented to the notice of a disco- 
verer, they can never become the materials of exact 
knowledge, except they find his mind already provided 
with precise and suitable conceptions by which they may 
be analysed and connected. Indeed, as we have already 
seen, facts cannot be observed as Facts, except in virtue* 
of the Conceptions which the observer 2 himself uncon- 
sciously supplies ; and they are not Facts of Observa- 
tion for any purpose of Discovery, except these familiar 
and unconscious acts of thought be themselves of a 
just and precise kind. But supposing the Facts to be 
adequately observed, they can never be combined into 
any new Truth, except by means of some new .Concep- 
tions, clear and appropriate, such as I have endeavoured 
to characterize. When the observer’s mind is pre- 
pared with such instruments, a very few facts, or it 
may be a single one, may bring the process of disco- 
very into action. But in such cases, this previous 
condition of the intellect, and not the single fact, is 
really the main and peculiar cause of the success. The 
fact is merely the occasion by which the engine of 
discovery is brought into play sooner or later. It is, 
as I have elsewhere said, only the spark which dis- 
charges a gun already loaded and pointed; and thero 


2 B. i. of this voL Aphorism III. 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 


47 

is little propriety in speaking of* such an accident as 
the cause why the bullet hits the mark. If it were 
true that the fall of an apple was the occasion of New- 
ton’^ pursuing the train of tKought which led to the 
doctrine of universal gravitation, the habits and con- 
stitution of ewton’s intellect, and not the apgle, were 
the real source of this great event in ,the jflrogress of 
knowledge. The common love of the marvellous, and 
the vulgar desire to bring down the greatest achieve- 
ments of genius to our own level, in fry lead men to 
ascribe such Results to any casual circumstances which 
accompany them ; but no one who fairly considers the 
real nature of great discoveries, ^nd the intellectuifl 
processes which they involve, can seriously hold the 
opinion of their being the effect of accident. 

1 9. Such accidents never happen to common men. 
Thousands of men, even of the most inquiring and 
speculative men, had seen bodies fall ; but who, except 
Newton, ever followed the accident to such •conse- 
quences'? And in fact, how little of his train of 
thought was contained in* or even directly suggested 
by, the fall of the apple ! If the apple fall, said the 
discoverer, ‘why should not the moon, the planets, the 
satellites, fall?’ But how much previous thought, — 
what a steady conception of the universality of^thc 
laws of motion gathered from other sources, — were 
requisite, that the inquirer should see any connexion 
in these gases ! Was it by accident that he saw in .the 
apple an image of the moon, and of every body in the 
solar system 1 ? 

20. Tl*e same observations may be made with re- 
gard to the other cases which are sometimes adduced 
as examples of accidental discovery. It has been said, 

‘ By the accidental placing of a rhomb of calcareous 
spar upon a book or line Bartholinus discovered the 
property of the Double Refraction of light.’ But Bar- 
tholinus could have seen no such consequence in the 
accident if he had not previously had* a clear Concep- 
tion of single refraction. A lady? in describing an 
optical 'experiment which had been shown her, said of 
her teacher, ‘He told me to increase and diminish 



48 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

the angle of refraction , and at last I found that he only 
meant me to move my head up and down.’ At any 
rate, till the lady had acquired the notions which the 
technical terms convey, she could not have made 
Bartholinus’s discovery by means of his accident. ‘By 
accidentally combining two rhombs in different posi- 
tions/ it # is acfcled, ‘ Huyghens discovered the Polari- 
zation of Light.* Supposing that this experiment h&-d 
been made without design, what Huyghens really 
observed was, # that the images appeared and disap- 
peared alternately as he turned one of the rhombs 
round. But was it an easy or an obvious business to 
analyze this curious alternation into the circumstances 
of the rays of light having sides, as Newton expressed 
it, and into the additional hypotheses which are im- 
plied in the term ‘polarization’? Those will be able 
to answer this question, who have found how far from 
easy it is to understand clearly what is meant by 
‘polarization’ in this case, now that the property is 
fully established. Huygliens’s success depended on his 
clearness of thought, for this enabled him to perform 
the intellectual analysis, which never would have occur- 
red to most men, however often they had ‘ accidentally 
combined two rhombs in different positions.* ‘ By acci- 
dentally looking through a prism of the same sub- 
stance, and turning it round, Malus discovered the 
polarization of light by reflection.’ Malus saw that, 
in some positions of the prism, the light* reflected 
from the windows of the Louvre thus seen through 
the prism, became dijn. A common man would have 
supposed this dimness the result of accident; but 
Malus’s mind Wds differently constituted and disci- 
plined. He considered the position of the window, 
and of the prism ; repeated the experiment over and 
over ; and in virtue of the eminently distinct concep- 
tions of space which he possessed, resolved the pheno- 
mena into its geometrical conditions. A believer in 
accideiffc would not have sougfit them; a person of 
less clear ideas would not have found them. A person 
must have a strange confidence in the virtue of chance, 
and the worthlessness of intellect, who can say that 



EXPLICATION OP CONCEPTIONS. 49 

< in all these fundamental discoveries appropriate ideas 
had no share,’ and that the discoveries ‘ might have 
been made by the most ordinary observers.’ m 

21. I have now, I trust, shown in various ways, 
how the Explication of Conceptions , including in this 
term their ’clear development from Fundamental Ideas 
in the discoverer’s mind, as well as ttyeir precise ex- 
pression in the form of Definitions or Axioms, when 
that, can be done, is an essential part in the establish- 
ment of all exact and general physical truths. In doing 
this, J have endeavoured to explain in what sense the 
possession of clear and appropriate' ideas is a main 
7 *equisite for every step in scieutific # discovery. That i# 
is far from being the only step, I shall soon have to 
show; and if any obscurity remain on the subject 
treated of in the present chapter, it will, I hope, be 
removed when we have examined the other elements 
which <#iter into the constitution of our knowledge. 


N^V. ORf*. 


4 



CHATTER III. 


Of Facts as the Materials of Science. 


Aphorism IY. 

Facts arc the materials of science , but att Facts 'nvolve 
Tdeas. Since, in observing Facts, we cannot exclude Ideas, 
we must, for the purposes of science, take care that the Ideas 
are clear and rigorously applied . 

Aphorism Y. 

The last Aphorism leads to such Rules as the following : — 
That Facts, for the purposes of material science, muft involve 
Conceptions of the Intellect only , and not Emotions: — That 
Facts must be observed with reference to our most exact con- 
ceptions, Number, Place, Figure , Motion: — That they must 
also be observed with reference to any other exact conceptions 
which the phenomena suggest, as Force, in mechanical pheno- 
mena, Concord, in musical . 

Aphorism YL 

The resolution of complex Facts into precise and measured 
partial Facts, we call the Decomposition of Facts. This . 
process is requisite for the progress of science, lut does not 
necessarily lead to progress . 

i. XTTE have now to examine liow Science is built 

V V up by the combination of Facts. In doing this, 
we suppose that we have already attained a supply of 
definite and certain Facts, free from obscurity and doubt. 
We must, therefore, first consider under what condi- 
tions Facts can as&ume this character. 

When we inquire what Facts are to be made the 
materials of Science, perhaps the answer which we 



OF FACTS- AS TIIE MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 5T 


should most commonly receive would be, that they 
must be True Facts , as distinguished from any mere 
inferences or opinions of our *own. We should pro- 
bably be told that we must be careful in such a case to 
consider as Facts, only what we really observe ; — that 
we must assert only what we see ; and believe nothing 
except upon the testimony of out senses! 

But such maxims are far from being easy to apply, 
as a little examination will convince us. 

2. It lias been explained, in preceding works, 
that fill perception of external objects and occur- 
rences involves an active as well as a passive process* 
of the mind ; — includes not only Sensations, but also 
Ideas by which Sensations are bound together, and 
have a unity given to them. From this it follows, that 
there is a difficulty in separating in our perceptions 
what we receive from .without, and what we ourselves 
contribute from within ; — what we perceive, and. what 
we infer. In many cases, this difficulty is obvious to 
all : as, for example, when we witness the performances 
of a juggler or a ventriloquist. In these instances, we 
imagine ourselves to see and to hear what certainly we 
do hot see and hear. The performer takes advantage 
of the habits by which our minds supply interruptions 
and infer connexions ; and by giving us fallacious indi- 
cations, lie leads us to perceive as an actual fact, what 
does not happen at all. In these cases, it is evident 
that we cmrselves assist in making the fact; for we 
make one which does not really exist. In other cases, 
though the* fact which we perceive be true, we can 
easily see that a large portion of the perception is our 
own act ; as when, from the sight of a bird of prey we 
infer a carcase, or when we read a half-obliterated in- 
scription. In the latter case, the mind supplies the 
meaning, and perhaps half the letters ; yet we do not 
hesitate to say that we actually read the inscription. 
Thus, in many cases, our own inferences and interpre- 
tations enter into our facts. But # this happens in 
many instances in which it is at first sight less obvious. 
When any one has seen an oak-tree blown down by a 
strong gust of wind, he does not think of the occurrence 



52 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


any otherwise than as a Fact of .which he is assured by 
his senses. Yet by what sense does lie perceive the 
Force which he thus supposes the wind to exert? By 
what sense does he distinguish an Oak-tree from all 
other trees? It is clear upon reflexion, that in such 
a case, his own mind supplies the conception of extra- 
neous impulse and pressure, by which he thus inter- 
prets the motions observed, and the distinction of 
different kinds of trees, according to which he thus 
names the one under his notice. The Idea of Force, 
and the idea of delinite Resemblances and Did educes, 
,are thus combined with the impressions on our senses, 
and form an undistinguished portion of that which we 
consider as the Fact. And it is evident that we can in 
no other way perceive Force, than by seeing motion ; 
and cannot give a Name to any object, without not 
only seeing a difference of single. objects, but supposing 
a difference of classes of objects. When we speak as 
if we saw impulse and attraction, things and classes, 
we really see only objects of various forms and colours, 
more or less numerous, variously combined. But do 
we really perceive so much as this? When we see the 
form, the size, the number, the motion of objects, "are 
these .really mere impressions on our senses, unmo- 
dified by any contribution or operation of the mind 
itself ? A very little attention will sufliee to convince 
ns that this is not the case. When we see a windmill 
turning, it may happen, as we have elsewhere noticed 1 , 
that we mistake the direction in which the sails turn: 
when we look at certain ' diagrams, they may appear 
either convex or concave: when we sec the moon first 
in the horizon and afterwards high up in the sky, we 
judge her to be much larger in the former than in the 
latter position, although to the eye she subtends the 
same angle. And in these cases and the like, it lias 
been seen that the errour and confusion which wc thus 
incur jirise from the mixture of acts of the mind itself 
with impressions pn the senses. But such acts are, as 
we have also seen, inseparable portions of tli^ process 


1 History of Ideas , B. ii. c. vL s. G. 



OF FACTS AS THE MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 53 

of perception: A certain activity of t£e mind is in- 
volved, not only in seeing objects erroneously, but in 
seeing tliem at all. With regard to solid objects, this, 
is generally acknowledged. When we seem to see an 
edifice occupying space in all dimensions, we really see 
only a representation of it as it appears referred by 
perspective to a surface. The inference of \he solid 
form is an operation of our own, alike when we look at 
a reality and when we look at a picture. But we may 
go further. Is plane Figure really a mere Sensation ? 
If we look at a decagon, do we see at once that it has 
ten snles, or Vs it not necessary for us to count them: 
and is not counting an act of the jnind? All objects 
are seen in space ; all objects are seen as one or many : 
but are not the Idea of Space and the Idea of Number 
requisite in order that we may thus apprehend what 
we sec 'l That these Ideas of Space and Number in- 
volve a connexion derived from the mind, and not from 
the senses, appears, as we have already seeiif frorft this, 
that those Ideas afford us the materials of universal 
and necessary truths : — such truths as the senses can- 
not possibly supply. And thus, even the perception of 
sucji facts as the size, shape, and number of objects, 
cannot be said to be impressions of sense, distinct from 
all acts of mind, and cannot be expected to b'e free, 
from errour on the ground of their being mere observed 
Facts. 

Thus the difficulty which we have been illustrating, 
of distinguishing Facts from inferences and from inter- 
pretations of facts, is not only great, but amounts to an 
impossibility. The separation at which we aimed in 
the outset of this discussion, and which was supposed 
to be necessary in order to obtain a firm groundwork 
for science, is found to be unattainable. We cannot 
obtain a sure basis of Facts, by # rejecting all inferences 
and judgments of our own, for such inferences and 
judgments form an unavoidable clement in all Facts. 
We cannot exclude our Ideas from our Perceptions, 
for our Perceptions involve our Ideas. 

3. Bat still, it cannot be doubted that in selecting 
the Facts which are to form the foundation of Science, 



54 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

\ 

we must reduce them to their most simple and certain 
form; and must reject everything from which doubt or 
,errour may arise. Now since this, it appears, cannot 
be done, by rejecting the Ideas which all Facts in- 
volve, in what manner are we to conform to the ob- 
vious maxim, that the Facts which form * the basis of 
Science ifrust be perfectly definite and certain'? 

The analysis of facts into Ideas and Sensations, 
which we have so often referred to, suggests the an- 
swer to this inquiry. We are not able, nor need we 
endeavour, to exclude Ideas from our Facts; but we 
may be able to discern, with perfect distinctness, the 
?deas which we include. We cannot observe any phe- 
nomena without applying to them such Ideas as Space 
and Number, Cause and Resemblance, and usually, 
several others; but we may avoid applying these Ideas 
in a wavering or obscure manner, and confounding 
Ideas with one another. We cannot read any of the 
inscriptions which nature presents to. us, without in- 
terpreting them by means of some language which we 
ourselves are accustomed to speak; but we may make 
it our business to acquaint ourselves perfectly with the 
language which we thus employ, and to interpret it ac- 
cording to the rigorous rules of grammar and analogy. 

This maxim, that when Facts are employed as the 
basis of Science, we must distinguish clearly the Ideas 
which they involve, and must apply these in a distinct 
and rigorous manner, will be found to be a more pre- 
cise guide than we might perhaps at first expect. We 
may notice one or two Rules which flow from it. 

4. In the first place, Facts, when used as the mate- 
rials of physical Science, itmst be referred to Concep- 
tions of the Intellect only , all emotions of fear, admira- 
tion, and the like, being rejected or subdued. Thus, 
the observations of phenomena which are related as 
portents and prodigies, striking terrour and boding 
evil, are of no value for purposes of science. The tales 
of armies seen warring in the sky, the sound of arms 
heard from the clouds, fiery dragons, chariots, swords 
seen in the air, may refer to meteorological pheno- 
mena ; but the records of phenomena observed in the 



OF FACTS AS THE MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 55 


state of mind which these descriptions imply can be 
of no scientific value. We cannot make the poets our 
observers. 

Armorum sonitum toto Germania ccelo 
Audiif ; insolitis tremuerunt motibus Alpes. 

Vox quoque per lucos vulgo exaudita silcn^esf 
Ingens, et simulacra modis pallentia miris 
Visa sub obscurum noctis : pecudesque locutse. 

Tlie mixture of fancy and emotion with tjie observation 
of facts has often disfigured them to an extent which 
is too familiar to all to need illustration. We have an 
example of this result, in the manner in which Comets 
are described in the treatises of the middle ages. *In 
such works, these bodies are regularly distributed into 
several classes, accordingly as they assume the form of 
a sword, of a spear, of a cross, and so on. When such 
resemblances had become matters of interest, the im- 
pressions of the senses were governed, not by the rigor- 
ous conceptions of form and colour, but by tliqpe as- 
sumed images ; and under these circumstances, we can 
attach little value to the statement of what? was seen. 

In alj such phenomena, the reference of the objects 
to the exact Ideas of Space, Number, Position, Motion, 
and the like, is the first step of Science : and accord- 
ingly, this reference was established at an early period 
in those sciences which made an early progress, as, for 
instance, Astronomy. Yet even in astronomy there 
appears to have been a period when the predominant 
conceptions of men in regarding the heavens and the 
stars pointed to mythical story and supernatural in- 
fluence, rather than to mere relations* of space, time, 
and motion : and of this primeval condition of those 
who gazed at the stars, we seem to have remnants in 
the Constellations, in the mythological Names of the 
Planets, and in the early prevalence of Astrology. It 
was only at a later period, when men had begun to 
measure the places, or at least to count the revolutions 
of the stars, that Astronomy had its tiirth. 

r,. And thus we are led to another Rule : — that in 
collecting Facts which are to be made the basis of 



56 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

* 

Science, the Facts are to be observed, as far as possible, 
with reference to place , figure , number , motion , and the 
like Conceptions; which, depending upon the Ideas of 
Space and Time, are the most universal, exact, and 
simple of our conceptions. It was by early attention to 
these relations in the case of the heavenly* 1 bodies, that 
the ancients formed the science of Astronomy : it was 
by not making precise observations of this kind in the 
case of terrestrial bodies, that they failed in framing a 
science of the, Mechanics of Motion. They succeeded 
in Optics as far as they made observations of tips na- 
ture; but when they ceased to trace the geometrical 
‘{)aths of rays in the actual experiment, they ceased to 
go forwards in the knowledge of this subject. 

6. But we may state a further Kule : — that though 
these relations of Time and Space are highly important 
in almost all Facts, we are not to confine ourselves to 
these : but arc to consider the phenomena loith reference 
to otJicr Conceptions also: it being always understood 
that these conceptions are to be made as exact and 
rigorous as those of geometry and number. Thus the 
science of Harmonics, arose from considering sounds 
with reference to Concords and Dis fords; the science 
of Mechanics arose from not only observing motions as 
tl\ey take place in Time and Space, but further, refer- 
ring them to Force as their Cause. And in like man- 
ner, other sciences depend upon other Ideas, which, as 
I have endeavoured to show, are not less fundamental 
than those of Time and Space ; and like them, capable 
of leading to rigor oiVs consequences. 

7. Thus the Facts which we assume as the basis of 
Science are to be freed frftm all the mists which ima- 
gination and passion throw round them ; and to be 
separated into those .elementary Facts which exhibit 
simple and evident relations of Time, or Space, or 
Cause, or some other Ideas equally clear. We resolve 
the complex appearances which nature offers to us, 
and tile mixed and manifold modes of looking at these 
appearances whidh rise in our thoughts, into limited, 
definite, and clearly-understood portions. This process 
we may term the Decomposition of Facts. It is the 



OF FACTS AS THE MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 5 7 

beginning of exact knowledge, —the first step in the 
formation of all Science. This Decomposition of Facts 
into Elementary Facts, clearly understood and surely 
ascertained, must precede all* discovery of tlTe laws of 
nature. 

8. But though this step is necessary, it is nof infal- 
libly sufficient. It by no means follows that Vhen we 
have thus decomposed Facts into Elementary Truths 
of observation, we shall soon be able to combine these, 
so as to obtain Truths of a higher and more specula- 
tive kind. We have examples which show us how 
far this is 'from being a necessary consequence of the 
former step. Observations of the weather, made a»d 
recorded for many years, have not led. to any gmicral 
truths, forming a science of Meteorology: and altnougli 
great numerical precision has been given to such ob- 
servations by means of barometers, thermometers, and 
other instruments, still, no general laws regulating the 
cycles of change of such phenomena have yet been 
discovered. In like manner the faces of crystals, and 
the sides of the polygons which these crystals form, 
were counted, and thus numerical facts were obtained, 
perfectly true ’and definite, but still of 110 value for 
purposes of s*ence. And when it was discovered 
what Element of the form of crystals it was important 
to observe and measure, namely, the Angle madfc by 
two faces with each other, this discovery was a step of 
a higher order, and did not belong to that depart- 
ment, of mere exact observation of manifest Facts, 
with which we are here concerned. 

9. When the Complex Facts which nature offers to 
us are t^us decomposed into Simple Facts, the decom- 
position, in general, leads to the introduction of Terms 
and Phrases, more or less technical, by which these 
Simple Facts are described. When Astronomy was 
thus made a science of measurement, the things mea- 
sured were soon described as Hours, and J)ays , and 
Cycles, Altitude and" Declination, Phases an Aspects. 
In the same maimer, hi Music, the* concords had names 
assigned them, as Diapente, Diatessaron, Diapason; in 
studying Optics, the Hays of light were spoken of as 



58 


CONSTRUCTION OU SCIENCE. 


having their course altered by Reflexion and Refrac- 
tion; and when useful observations began to be made 
in Mechanics, the observers spoke of Force , Pressure, 
Momentum, Inertia, and the like. 

10. When we take phenomena in which the lead- 
ing Idea is Resemblance, and resolve them lhto precise 
component Facts, we obtain some kind of Classifica- 
tion; as, for instance, when we lay down certain Rules 
by which particular trees, or particular animals are to 
be known. This is the earliest form of Natural His- 
tory; and the Classification which it invokes is .that 
which corresponds, nearly or exactly, with the usual 
Names of the objects, thus classified. 

ii^ Thus the first attempts to render observation 
certain and exact, lead to a decomposition of the ob- 
vious facts into Elementary Facts, connected by the 
Ideas of Space, Time, Number, Cause, Likeness, and 
others: and into a Classification of the Simple Facts; 
a classification more or less just, and marked by Names 
either common or technical. Elementary Facts, and 
Individual Objects, thus observed and classified, form 
the materials of Science; and any improvement in. 
Classification or Nomenclature, or an^ discovery of h 
Connexion among the materials thus accumulated, 
le?,ds us fairly within the precincts of Science. We 
must* now, therefore, consider the manner in which 
Science is built up of such materials; — the process by 
which they are brought into their places, and + he tex- 
ture of the bond which unites and cements them. 



CHAPTER IV. 


Of the Colligation of Facts. 


Aphorism VII. 

Science begins with common observation of facts; but 
even at this stage , requires that the observations be precise. 
Hence the sciences which depend upon space and number 
were the earliest formed . After common observation , come 
Scientific Observation and Experiment. 

Aphorism VIII. 

The Conceptions by which* Facts are bound together , are 
suggested by the sagacity of discoverers. This sagacity can- 
not bejtaught. It % commonly succeeds by guessing ; and this 
success seems to consist in framing several tentative hypo- 
theses a nd selecting the right one . But a supply of appro- 
priate hypotheses cannot be constructed by rule , nor without 
inventive talent. 


Aphorism IX. 

The truth of tentative hypotheses* must be tested by their 
application to facts. The discoverer mpst be ready , care- 
fully to try his hypotheses in this manner , and to reject 
them if they will not bear the test , in spite of indolence and 
vanity . 

i. TRACTS such as the last Chapter speaks of are, by 
Jl means of such* Conceptions as are described in 
the preceding Chapter, bound together so as to give 
rise to* those general Propositions of which Science 
consists. Thus the Facts that the planets revolve 



6o 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


about 'the sun m certain periodic times and at certain 
distances, are included and connected in Kepler’s Law, 
by means of such Conceptions as the squares of num- 
bers, tli q* cubes of distances, and the 'proportionality of 
these quantities. Again the existence of this propor- 
tion in the motions of any two planets, forms a set of 
Facts wh : ch may all be combined by means of the 
Conception of a certain central accelerating force, as 
was proved by Kcwton. The whole of our physical 
knowledge consists in* the establishment of such pro- 
positions; and '-in all such cases, Facts are bound to- 
gether by the aid of suitable Conceptions. Tliis'part 
qf the formation of our knowledge I have called the 
Colligation of FacU: and we may apply this term to 
every case in which, by an act of the intellect, we 
establish a precise connexion among the phenomena 
which arc presented to our senses. The knowledge of 
such connexions, accumulated and systematized, is 
Science. On the steps by which science is thus col- 
lected from phenomena we shall proceed now to make 
a few remarks. 

2. Science begins with' Common Observation of 
facts, in which we are not conscious of any peculiar 
discipline or habit of thought exercised in observing. 
Thus the common perce] >tions of tlie appearances and 
recurrences of the celestial luminaries, were the first 
steps of A stronoiuy : the obvious cases in which bodies 
fall or are supported, were the beginning of Mechanics ; 
the familiar aspects of visible filings, were the origin 
of Optics; the usual distinctions of well-known plants, 
first gave rise to Botany. Facts belonging to such 
parts of our knowledge are noticed by us, and accumu- 
lated in our memories, in the common course of our 
habits, almost without our being aware that we are 
observing and collecting facts. Yet such facts may 
lead to many scientific truths ; for instance, in the first 
stages of Astronomy (as we have shown in the History) 
such faets led to Methods of Intercalation and Buies 
of the Ptecurrence of Eclipses. In succeeding stages 
of science, more especial attention and preparation on 
the part of the observer, and a selection of certain 



OF THE COLLIGATION OF FACTS. 6 1 

kinds of facts, becomes necessary; but there is an early 
period in the progress of knowledge at which man is 
a physical philosopher, withc^it seeking to be so, or 
being aware that he is so. 

3. But in all stages of the progress, even in that 
early one ot which we have just spoken, it # is neces- 
sary, in order that the facts may be fit materials of 
any knowledge, that they should be decomposed into 
Elementary Facts, and that these should be observed 
with precision. Thus, in the first infancy of astro- 
nomy the recurrence of phases of the moon, of places 
of the sun’s rising and setting, of planets, of eclipse^ 
was observed to take place at intervals of certain defi- 
nite numbers o*f days, and in a certain exact order; 
and thus it was, that the observations became portions 
of astronomical science. In other cases, although the 
facts were equally numerous, and their general aspect 
equally familiar, they led to no science, becausy their 
exact circumstances were not apprehended. A vague 
and loose mode of looking at facts very easily observ- 
able, left men for a long time under the belief that a 
body, ten times as heavy as another, falls ten times as 
fast ;-#-that objects immersed in water are always mag- 
nified, without regard to the form of the surface ; — 
that the magnet exerts an irresistible force; — that 

* crystal is always found associated with ice ; — and the 
like. These and many others are examples how blind 
and careless men can be, even in observation of the 
plainest and commonest appearances; and they show 
ns that thy mere faculties of perception, although con- 
stantly exercised upon innumerable objects, may long 
fail in leading to any exact knowledge. 

4. If we further inquire what was the favourable 
condition through which some special classes of facts 
wore, from thy first, fitted to become portions of sci- 
ence, we shall find it to have been principally this ; — 
that these facts were considered with reference to the 
Ideas of Time, Number, and Space, which are Ideas 
possessing peculiar definiteness and precision ; so that 
with regard to them, confusion and indistinctness are 
hardly possible. The interval from new moon to new 



62 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


moon was always a particular number of days: the 
sun in his yearly course rose and set near to a known 
succession of distant ol^ects: the moon’s path passed 
among the stars in a certain order : — these are obser- 
vations in which mistake and obscurity are not likely 
to occui^ ^f the sfnallest degree of attention is bestowed 
upon the task. To count a number is, from the first 
opening of man’s mental faculties, an operation which 
no science can render more precise. The relations of 
space are nearest to those of number in obvious and 
universal evidence. Sciences depending, upon «tliese 
Ideas arise with the first dawn of intellectual civiliza- 
tion. But few of the other Ideas which man employs 
in the acquisition of knowledge possess this clearness 
in their common use. The Idea of Resemblance may 
be noticed* ^s coming next to those of Space and Num- 
ber in original precision ; and the Idea of Cause , in a 
certain vague and general mode of application, suffi- 
cient for the purposes of common life, but not for the 
ends of science, exercises a very extensive influence 
over men’s thoughts. But .the other Ideas on which 
science depends, with the Conceptions which arise out 
of them, are not unfolded till a much later period *of 
intellectual progress; and therefore, except in such 
limited cases as I have noticed, the observations of 
common spectators and uncultivated nations, however 
numerous or varied, are of little or no effect in giving 
rise to Science. 

5. Let us now suppose that, besides common every- 
day perception of fadls, we turn our attention to some 
other occurrences and appearances, with a design of 
obtaining from fhem speculative knowledge. This 
process is more peculiarly called Observation , or, when 
we ourselves occasion- the facts, Experiment. But the 
same remark which we have already m^de, still holds 
good here. These facts can be of no value, except 
they are resolved into those exa^t Conceptions which 
contain* the essential circumstances of the case. They 
must be determined, not indeed necessarily, , as has 
sometimes befen said, ‘ according to Number, Weight, 
and Measure;’ for, as we have endeavoured to show 



OF THE COLLIGATION OF FACTS. 63 

in the preceding Books 1 , there are many other Con- 
ceptions to which phenomena may be subordinated, 
quite different from these, and yet not at all # less defi- 
nite and precise. But in order that the facts obtained 
by observation and experiment may be capable of 
being used in furtherance of our exact and solid know- 
ledge, they must be apprehended and analysed accord- 
ing to some Conceptions which, applied for this pur- 
pose, give distinct and definite results, such as can be 
steadily taken hold of and reasoned froja ; that is, the 
facts must be referred to Clear and Appropriate Ideas, 
according to*the manner in which we have already ex- 
plained this condition of the derivation of our kno\** 
ledge. The phenomena of light, when they' are such 
as to indicate sides in the ray, must be referred to the 
Conception of polarization; the phenomena of mix- 
ture, when there is an alteration of qualities as well 
as quantities, must be combined by a Conception of 
elementary composition . And thus, when merS posi- 
tion, and number, and resemblance, will no longer an- 
swer the purpose of enabling us to connect the facts, 
we call in other Ideas, in such cases more efficacious, 
thqugh less obvidus. 

6. iBut how are we, in these cases, to discover such 
Ideas, and to judge which will be efficacious, in leadyig* 
to a scientific combination of our experimental data] 
To this question, we must in the first place answer, 
that the first and great instrument by which facts, so 
observed with a view to the formation of exact know- 
ledge, are combined into important and permanent 
truths, is t&at peculiar Sagacity ’which belongs to the 
genius of a Discoverer; and which, while it supplies 
those distinct and appropriate Conceptions which lead 
to its success, cannot be limited by rules, or expressed 
in definitions. It would be difficult or impossible to 
describe in words the habits of thought which led Ar- 
chimedes to refer the conditions of equilibrium on the 
Lever to the Conception of pressure, while Aristotle 
could not see in them anything moi^ than the results 


1 Hist of Sci. Id. Ls. v. vl vii. viii. ix. x. 




64 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

« 

of tlie strangeness v of the properties of the circle; — 
or which impelled Pascal to explain by means of the 
Conception of the weight of air , the facts which his 
predecessors .had connected by the notion of nature’s 
horrour of a vacuum; — or which caused Vitello and 
Roger Bacon to refer the magnifying poWer of a con- 
vex lens to the bending of the rays of light towards 
the perpendicular by refraction , while others conceived 
the effect to result ‘from the matter of medium, with 
no consideratiqp of its form. These are what are com- 
monly spoken of as felicitous and inexplipable smokes 
of inventive talent; and such, no doubt, they are. No 
fules can ensure to,us similar success in new cases; or 
can enable men who do not possess similar endow- 
ments, to make like advances in knowledge. 

7. Yet still, we may do something in tracing the 
process by which such discoveries are made ; and this 
it is here our business to do. We may observe that 
these/and the like discoveries, are not improperly de- 
scribed as happy Guesses ; and that Guesses, in these 
as in other instances, imply various suppositions made, 
of which some one turns out to be the right one. We 
may, in such cases, edheeive the discoverer as invent- 
ing and trying many conjectures, till he finds one 
•which answers the purpose of combining the scattered 
facts into a single rule. The discovery of general 
truths from special facts is performed, commonly at 
least, and more commonly than at first appears, by 
the use of a series of Suppositions, or Hypotheses , 
which are looked atdn quick succession, and of which 
the one which really leads to truth is rapidly detected, 
and when caught sight of, firmly held, verified, and 
followed to its consequences. In the minds of most 
discoverers, this process invention, trial, and accept- 
ance or rejection of the hypothesis, goes on so rapidly 
that we cannot trace it in its successive steps. But in 
some instances, we can do so; and we can also see that 
the other examples of discovery do not differ essen- 
tially from these; The same intellectual operations 
take place in other cases, although this often happens 
so instantaneously that we lose the trace of the pro- 



OF THE COLLIGATION OF FACTS. 65 

gression. In the discoveries made by Kepler, we have 
a curious and memorable exhibition of this process in 
its details. Thanks to his communicative disposition, 
we know that he made nineteen hypotheses with re- 
gard to the motion of Mars, and calculated the results 
of each, before he established the true doctrine, that 
the planet’s path is an ellipse. We know, in like man- 
ner, that Galileo made wrong suppositions respecting 
the laws of falling bodies, and Mariotte, concerning 
the motion of water in a siphon, before^ they hit upon 
the correct view of these cases. 

8. But it*has very often happened in the history of 
science, that the erroneous hypotheses which preceded 
the discovery of the truth have been made, not by the 
discoverer himself, but by his precursors ; to whom he 
thus owed the service, often an important one in such 
cases, of exhausting the most tempting forms of errour. 
Thus the various fruitless suppositions by which Kep- 
ler endeavoured to discover the law of refraction, led 
the way to its real detection by Snell ; Kepler’s nume- 
rous imaginations concerning the forces by which the 
celestial motions are produced, — his ‘ physical reason- 
ings* as he termed them, — were a natural prelude to 
the truer physical reasonings of Newton. The various 
hypotheses by which the suspension of vapour in air. 
had been explained, and their failure, left the field 
open for Dalton with his doctrine of the mechanical 
mixture of gases. In most cases, if we could truly 
analyze the operation of the thoughts of those who 
make, or who endeavour to inakfj discoveries in sci- 
ence, we should find that many more suppositions pass 
through their minds than those which are expressed 
in words ; many a possible combination of conceptions 
is formed and soon rejected. There is a constant in- 
vention and activity, a perpetual creating and selecting 
power at work, of which the last results only are ex- 
hibited to 11s. Trains of hypotheses are called up and 
pass rapidly in re vie#; and the judgment makes its 
choice from the varied group. 

9. It would, however, be a great mistake to sup- 
pose that the hypotheses, among which our choice thus 

NOV. ORfl. £ 



66 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


lies, are constructed by an enumeration of obvious 
cases, or by a wanton alteration of relations which 
occur in some first hypothesis. It may, indeed, some- # 
times happen that the proposition which is finally 
established is such as may be formed, by some slight 
alteration, from those which are justly rejected. Thus 
Kepler’s ‘elliptical theory of Mars’s motions, involved 
relations of lines and angles much of the same nature 
as his previous false suppositions : and the true law of 
refraction so much resembles those erroneous ones 
which Kepler tried, that we cannot help wondering 
how he chanced to miss it. But it more frequently 
happens that new truths are brought into view by the 
application of new Ideas, not by new modifications of 
old ones. The cause of the properties of the Lever 
was learnt, not by introducing any new geometrical 
combination of lines and circles, but by referring the 
properties to genuine mechanical Conceptions. When 
the Motions of the Planets were to be explained, this 
was done, not by merely improving the previous no- 
tions, of cycles of time, but by introducing the new 
conception of epicycles in space. The doctrine of the 
Four Simple Elements was expelled, not by forming 
any new scheme of elements which should impart, 
according to new rules, their sensible qualities to their 
compounds, but by considering the elements of bodies 
as neutralizing each other. The Fringes of Shadows 
could not be explained by ascribing new properties to 
the single rays of light, but were reduced to law by 
referring them to th$ interference of several rays. 

Since the true supposition is thus very frequently 
something altogether diverse from all the obvious con- 
jectures and combinations, we see here how far we are 
from being able to reduce discovery to rule, or to give 
any precepts by which the want of real invention and 
sagacity shall be supplied. We may warn and en- 
courage these faculties when they exist, but we cannot 
create them, or make great discoveries when they are 
absent. 

io. The Conceptions which a true theory 'requires 
are very often clothed in a Hypothesis which connects 



OF THE COLLIGATION OF F^CTS. 6 J 

with them several superfluous and irrelevant circum- 
stances. Thus the Conception of the Polarization of 
Light was originally represented under the Image of 
'particles of light having their poles all turned in the 
same direction. The Laws of Heat may be made out 
perhaps most conveniently by conceiving H«at to be 
a Fluid. The Attraction of Gravitation might have 
been successfully applied to the explanation of facts, if 
Newton had throughout treated Attraction as the re- 
sult of an Ether diffused through space? a supposition 
which he ha» noticed as a possibility. The doctrine of 
Definite and Multiple Proportions may be conveniently 
expressed by the hypothesis of Atofus. In such cases, 
the Hypothesis may serve at first to facilitate the in- 
troduction of a new Conception. Thus a pervading 
Ether might for a time remove a difficulty, which some 
persons find considerable, of imagining a body to exert 
force at a distance. A Particle with Poles is* more 
easily conceived than Polarization in the abstract. 
And if hypotheses thus employed will really explain 
the facts by means of a fe*v simple assumptions, the 
laws so obtained may afterwards be reduced to a sim- 
ple! form than that in which they were first suggested. 
The general laws of Heat, of Attraction, of Polariza- 
tion, of Multiple Proportions, are now certain, whitt- 
•ever image we may form to ourselves of their ultimate 
causes. 

ii. In order, then, to discover scientific truths, sup- 
positions consisting either of new Conceptions, or of 
new Combinations of old ones, are to be made, till we 
find one supposition which succeeds in Jbinding together 
the Facts. But how are we to find this ? How is the 
trial to be made? What is meant by ‘success’ in these 
cases? To this we reply, that our inquiry must be, 
whether the Facts have the same relation in the Hypo- 
thesis which they have in reality ; — whether the results 
of our suppositions ag*ee with the phenomena .which 
nature presents to us. For this purpose, we must 
both carefully observe the phenomena, and steadily 
trace the consequences of our assumptions, till we can 

5 — 2 



68 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

bring the two into comparison. The Conceptions which 
our hypotheses involve, being derived from certain 
Fundamental Ideas, afford a basis of rigorous reasoning, 
as we have shown in the Books of the History of those 
Ideas. And the results to which this reasoning leads, 
will be Susceptible of being verified or contradicted by 
observation of the facts. Thus the Epicyclical Theory 
of the Moon, once assumed, determined what the 
moon’s place among the stars ought to be at any given 
time, and could therefore be tested by actually observ- 
ing the moon’s places. The doctrine uhat musical 
strings of the same length, stretched with weights of 
i, 4, 9, 16, would give the musical intervals of an oc- 
tave, a fifth, a fourth, in succession, could be put to the 
trial by any one whose ear was capable of appreciating 
those intervals : and the inference which follows from 
this doctrine by numerical reasoning, — that there must 
be certain imperfections in the concords of every mu- 
sical scale, — could in like manner be confirmed by try- 
ing various modes of Temperament. In like manner 
all received theories in science, up to the present time, 
have been established by taking up some supposition, 
and comparing it, directly or by means of its remoter 
^consequences, with the facts it was intended to embrace. 
Its agreement, under certain cautions and conditions, 
of which we may hereafter speak, is held to be the evi- 
dence of its truth. It answers its genuine purpose, 
the Colligation of Facts. 

12. When we have, in any subject, succeeded in one 
attempt of this kind, and obtained some time Bond of 
Unity by which, the phenomena are held together, the 
subject is open to further prosecution; which ulterior 
process may, for the most part, be conducted in a more 
formal and technical manner. The first great outline 
of the subject is drawn; and the finishing of the re- 
semblance of nature demands a more minute pencilling, 
but perhaps requires less of genius in the master. In 
the pursuance of this task, rules and precepts may be 
given, and features and leading circumstances pointed 
out, of which it may often be useful to the inquirer to 
be aware. 



OF THE COLLIGATION OF FACTS. 69 

Before proceeding further, I shall speak of some 
characteristic marks which belong to such scientific 
processes as are now the subject of our consideration, 
and which may sometimes aid'us in determining when 
the task has been rightly executed. 



CHAPTER V. 


Of Certain Characteristics of Scientific 
Induction. 


Aphorism X. 

The process of sciefitific discovery is cautious and rigorous, 
not by abstaining from hypotheses , but by rigorously com- 
paring hypotheses with facts, and by resolutely rejecting all 
which the comparison does not confirm . 

Aphorism XI. 

Hypotheses may be useful, though involving much that is 
superfluous, and even erroneous: for they may supply the 
true bond of connexion of the facts; and the superfluity and 
errour may afterwards be pared away. 1 

Aphorism XII. 

It is a test of true theories not only to account for, but to 
predict phenomena . 


« 

Aphorism XIII. 

Induction is a ' term applied to describe the process of a 
true Colligation of Facts by means of an exact and appro- 
priate Conception. An Induction is also employed to denote 
the proposition which results from this process . 

Aphorism X,IV. 

The Consilience- of Inductions takes place when an 
Induction, obtained from one class of facts, coincides with 
an Induction , obtained from another different class. This 



CHARACTERISTICS OP SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 7 1 


Consilience vs a test of the truth of the Theory in which it 
occurs . 

Aphorism* XV. 

An Induction is not the mere sum of the Facts which are 
colligated. The Facts are not only brought together^ but seem 
in a new point of view. A new mental Element is super- 
induced ; and a peculiar constitution and discipline of mind 
are requisite in order to make this Induction. 

Aphorism XYI. 

Although in Every Induction a new conception is super- 
induced upon the Facts; yet this on8e effectually done , the 
novelty of the conception is overlooked , and the conception is 
considered as a part of the fact. 

Sect. I. — Invention a part of Induction 

t. rriHE two operations spoken of in the preceding 

X chapters, — the Explication of the Conceptions 
of our own minds, and the Colligation of observed Facts 
by. the aid of such Conceptions, — are, as we have just 
said, inseparably connected with each other. When 
united, and employed in collecting knowledge from tha 
phenomena which the \jorld presents to us, they con- 
stitute the mental process of Induction ; which is usu- 
ally and justly spoken of as the genuine source of all 
our real general knowledge respecting the external 
world. And we see, from the preceding analysis of 
this process into its two constituents, from what origin 
it derives each of its characters. It is real , because it 
arises from the combination of Real Facts, but it is 
general , because it implies the possession of General 
Ideas. Without- the former, it would not be know- 
ledge of the External World; without the latter, it 
would not be Knowledge at all. When Ideas and 
Facts are separated from each other, the neglect of 
Facts gives rise to empty speculates, idle subtleties, 
visionary inventions, false opinions concerning the laws 
of phenomena, disregard of the true aspect of nature : 



72 CONSTRUpTION OF SCIENCE. 

while the want of Ideas leaves the mind overwhelmed, 
bewildered, and stupified by particular sensations, with 
no means of connecting the past with the future, the 
absent with the present, the example with the rule; 
open to the impression of all appearances, but capable 
of appropriating none. Ideas are the Fo, m, facts the 
Material, of our structure. Knowledge does not con- 
sist in the empty mould, or in the brute mass of mat- 
ter, but in the rightly-moulded substance. Induction 
gathers general truths from particular facts ; — and in 
her harvest, the corn and the reaper, the solid ears and 
the binding band, are alike requisite. All our know- 
ledge of nature is obtained by Induction; the term 
being understood according to the explanation we have 
now given. And our knowledge is then most com- 
plete, then most truly deserves the name of Science, 
when both its elements are most perfect ; — when the 
Ideas which have been concerned in its formation have, 
at every step, been clear and consistent; and when 
they have, at every step also, been employed in bind- 
ing together real and certain Facts. Of such Induc- 
tion, I have already given so many examples and illus- 
trations in the two preceding chapters, that 1 need not 
now dwell further upon the subject. 

? 2 . Induction is familiarly spoken of as the process 

by which we collect a General proposition from a num- 
ber of Particular Cases : and it appears to be fre- 
quently imagined that the general proposition results 
from a mere juxta-position of the cases, or at most, from 
merely conjoining end extending them. But if we 
consider the process more closely, as exhibited in the 
cases lately spoken of, we shall perceive that this is an 
inadequate account of the matter. The particular 
facts are not merely brought together, but there is a 
New Element added to the combination by the very 
act of thought by which they are combined. There is 
a Conception of the mind introduced in the general 
proposition, which did not exist in any of the observed 
facts. When tlm Greeks, after long observing the 
motions of the planets, saw that these motions might 
be rightly considered as produced by the motion of one 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 73 

» . 

wheel revolving in the inside of ‘another wheel, these 
Wheels were Creations of their minds, added to the 
Facts which they perceived by sense. And even if the 
wheels were no longer suppoSed to be material, but 
were reduced to mere geometrical spheres or circles, 
they were m>t the less products of the mind alone, — 
something additional to the facts observed. The same 
is the case in all other discoveries. The facts are 
known, but they are insulated and unconnected, till 
the discoverer supplies from bis own stores a Principle 
of Connexion. The pearls are there, bift they will not 
hang V)getluh* till some one provides the String. The 
distances and periods of the planets were all so many 
separate facts; by Kepler’s Third *Law they are con- 
nected into a single truth : but the Conceptions which 
this law involves were supplied by Kepler’s mind, and 
without these, the facts were of no avail. The planets 
described ellipses round the sun, in the contemplation 
of others as well as of Newton ; but Newton conceived 
the deflection from the tangent in these elliptical mo- 
tions in a new light, — as the effect of a Central Force 
following a certain law ; aftd then it was, that such a 
foijce was discovered truly to exist. 

Thus 1 in each inference made by Induction, there is 
introduced some General Conception, which is given v 
not by the phenomena, but by the mind. The con- 
clusion is not contained in the premises, but includes 
them by the introduction of a New Generality. In 
order to obtain our inference, we travel beyond the 
cases which we have before us; ^ve consider them as 
mere exemplifications of some Ideal Case in which the 
relations are complete and intelligible. We take a 
Standard, and measure the facts by it ; and this 
Standard is constructed by us, not offered by Nature. 
W e assert, for example, that a body left to itself will 
move on with unaltered velocity ; not because our 
senses ever disclosed to us a body doing this, but be- 
cause (taking this as t>ur Ideal Case) we find idiat all 


1 I repeat here remarks made at the end of the Mechanical Euclid, p. 17S. 



74 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

, »; 

actual cases are intelligible and explicable by means of 
the Conception of Forces , causing change and motion, 
and exerted by surrounding bodies. In like manner, 
we see bodies striking each other, and thus moving and 
stopping, accelerating and retarding each ‘other : but 
in all this, we do not perceive by our- senses that 
abstract 'quantity, Momentum , which is always lost by 
one body as it is gained by another. This Momentum 
is a creation of the mind, brought in among the facts, 
in order to convert their apparent confusion into order, 
their seeming' chance into certainty, their perplexing 
variety into simplicity. This the Conception of Mo- 
mentum gained and lost does : and in like manner, in 
any other case in which a truth is established by In- 
duction, some Conception is introduced, some Idea is 
applied, as the means of binding together the facts, 
and thus producing the truth. 

3. Hence in every inference by Induction, there is 
some Conception superinduced upon the Facts: and 
we may henceforth conceive this to be the peculiar 
import of the term Induction . I am not to be under- 
stood as asserting that the term was originally or 
anciently employed with this notion of its meaning; 
for the peculiar feature just pointed out in Induction 
has generally been overlooked. This appears by the 
accounts generally given of Induction. ‘ Induction/ 
says Aristotle 2 , ‘is when by means of one extreme 
term 3 we infer the other extreme term to be true of 
the middle term.’ Thus, (to take such exemplifications 
as belong to our subject,) from knowing that Mercury, 
Venus, Mars, describe ellipses about the Sutt, we infer 
that all Planets * describe ellipses about the Sun. In 
making this inference syllogistically, we assume that 
the evident proposition, ‘Mercury, Venus, Mars, do 
what all Planets do/ may be taken conversely , ‘All 


9 Analyt. Prior, lib. ii. c. xxiii. Depi iirayuiyrjs. 

3 Hie syllogism here alluded to would be this > 

Mercury, Venurf, Mars, describe ellipses about the Sun ; 
All Planets do what Mercury, Venus, Mars, do ; 
Therefore all Planets describe ellipses about the Sun. 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 75 

Planets do what Mercury, Venus, *Mars/ do/ But we 
may remark that, in this passage, Aristotle (as was 
natural in his line of discussion) turns his attention 
entirely to the evidence of the inference ; and overlooks 
a step which is of far more importance to our know- 
ledge, namely, the invention of *the second extreme 
term. In the above instance, the particular luminaries, 
Mercury, Venus, Mars, are one logical Extreme; the 
general designation Planets is the Middle Term ; but 
having these before us, how do we come to think of 
description of ellipses , which is the o Slier Extreme 
of the 1 * syllogism? When we have once invented this 
‘ second Extreme Term,’ we may, or may not, be satis- 
fied with the evidence of the sylld^ism ; we may, or 
may not, be convinced that, so far as* this property 
goes, the extremes are co-extensive with the middle 
term 4 ; but the statement of the syllogism is the im- 
portant step in science. We know how long Kepler 
laboured, how hard he fought, how many deviqes he 
tried, before he hit upon this Term , the Elliptical 
Motion. He rejected, as we know, many other ‘ second 
extreme Terms/ for examjfle, various combinations of 
epipyclical constructions, because they did not represent 
with sufficient accuracy the special facts of observa- 
tion. When he had established his premiss, that ‘Mars 
does describe an Ellipse about the Bun/ he does not* 
hesitate to guess at least that, in this respect, he might 
convert the other premiss, and assert that ‘ All the 
Planets do what Mars does/ But the main business 
was, the inventing and verifying the proposition re- 
specting tl*e Ellipse. The Invention of the Conception 
was the great step in the discovery ; t^e Verification of 
the Proposition was the great step in the proof of the 
discovery. If Logic consists in pointing out the con- 
ditions of proof, the Logic of Induction must consist in 
showing what are the conditions of proof, in such infer- 
ences as this : but this subject must be pursued in the 
next chapter ; I now* speak principally of the.act of 


4 Ei otfv dvTurrptfei to T rw B jcal /uu/ vTrepreim rb fittrov. — Alistot. Ibid. 



76 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

Invention , winch is requisite in every inductive in- 
ference. 

4. Although in every inductive inference, an act of 
invention is requisite, the act soon slips out of notice. 
Although we bind together facts by superinducing 
upon them a new Conception, this Conception, once 
introduced and applied, is looked upon as inseparably 
connected with the facts, and necessarily implied in 
them. Having once had the phenomena bound to- 
gether in their minds in virtue of the Conception, men 
can no longei -easily restore them back to the detached 
and incoherent condition in which they were ' before 
they were thus combined. The pearls once strung, 
they seem to form a chain by their nature. Induction 
has given them a unity which it is so far from costing 
us an effort to preserve, that it requires an effort to 
imagine it dissolved. For instance, we usually repre- 
sent to ourselves the Earth as round, the Earth and 
the PJanets as revolving about the Sun, and as drawn 
to the Sun by a Central Force; we can hardly under- 
stand how it could cost the Greeks, and Copernicus, 
and Newton, so much pains and trouble to arrive at a 
view which to us is so familiar. These are no longer 
to us Conceptions caught hold of and kept hold of by 
a severe struggle; they are the simplest modes of con- 
ceiving the facts: they are really Facts. We are will- 
ing to own our obligation to those discoverers, but we 
hardly feel it : for in what other manner (we ask in 
our thoughts) could we represent the facts to our- 
selves 1 

Thus we see why it is that this step of which we 
now speak, the _ Invention of a new Conception iii 
every inductive inference, is so generally overlooked 
that it has hardly been noticed by preceding philoso- 
phers. When once performed by the discoverer, it 
takes a fixed and permanent place in the understanding 
of every one. It is a thought which, once breathed 
forth, permeates all men’s minds. All fancy they 
nearly or quite knjw it before. It oft was thought, or 
almost thought, though never till now expressed. Men 
accept it and retain it, and know it cannot be taken 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 77 


from them, and look upon it as their own. They will not 
and cannot part with it, even though they may deem 
it trivial and obvious. It is»a secret, whith once 
uttered, cannot be recalled, even though it be despised 
by those to v§hom it is imparted. -As soon as the lead- 
ing term of a new theory has been pronouqped and 
understood, all the phenomena change their aspect. 
There is a standard to which we cannot help referring 
them. We cannot fall back into the helpless and 
bewildered state in which we gazed at them when we 
possessed no principle which gave them unity. Eclipses 
arrive in mysterious confusion : the notion of a Cycle 
dispels the mystery. The Planets perform a tangled 
and mazy dance; but Epicycles reduce the maze to 
order. The Epicycles themselves run into confusion ; 
the conception of an Ellipse makes all clear and simple. 
And thus from stage to stage, new elements of intel- 
ligible order are introduced. But this intelligible # order 
is so completely adopted by the human understanding, 
as to seem part of its texture. Men ask Whether 
Eclipses follow a Cycle ; Whether the Planets describe 
Ellipses; and they imagine that so long as they do not 
answei • such questions rashly, they take nothing for 
granted. They do not recollect how much they assume 
in asking the question : — how far the conceptions *>f* 
Cycles and of Ellipses are beyond the visible surface of 
the celestial phenomena : — how many ages elapsed, 
how much thought, how much observation, were 
needed, before men’s thoughts were fashioned into the 
words whi$h they now so familiarly use. And thus 
they treat the subject, as we have seen Aristotle treat- 
ing it; as if it were a question, not of invention, but 
of proof; not of substance, but of form : as if the main 
thing were not what we assert, but how we assert it. 
But for our purpose, it is requisite to bear in mind the 
feature which we have thus attempted to mark ; and 
to recollect that, in e^ery inference by induction, there 
is a Conception supplied by the mind and superinduced 
upon the Facts. 

5. In collecting scientific truths by Induction, we 
often find (as has already been observed) a Definition 



78 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

and a Proposition established at the same time, — in- 
troduced together, and mutually dependent on each 
other. <rThe combination of the two constitutes the 
Inductive act ; and we may consider the Definition as 
representing the superinduced Conception, and the 
Proposition as exhibiting the Colligation of Facts. 

Sect. II. — Use of Hypotheses. 

6. To discover a Conception of the mind which will 
justly represent a train of observed facts is, in. some 
measure, a process of conjecture, as I have stated al- 
ready; and as I tfyen observed, the business of conjec- 
ture is commonly conducted by calling up before our 
minds several suppositions, and selecting that one which 
most agrees with what we know of the observed facts. 
Hence he who has to discover the laws of nature may 
have to invent many suppositions before he hits upon 
the right one ; and among the endowments which lead 
to his success, we must reckon that fertility of inven- 
tion which ministers to hiin such imaginary schemes, 
till at last he finds the one which conforms to the true 
order of nature. A facility in devising hypotheses, 
therefore, is so far from being a fault in the intellec- 
tual character of a discoverer, that it is, in truth, a 
faculty indispensable to his task. It is, for his pur- 
poses, much better that he should be too ready in con- 
triving, too eager in pursuing systems which promise 
to introduce law and order among a mass of unarranged 
facts, than that he should be barren of such inventions 
and hopeless of such success. Accordingly, as we have 
already noticed, great discoverers have often invented 
hypotheses which would not answer to all the facts, as 
well as those which would; and have fancied them- 
selves to have discovered laws, which a more careful 
examination of the facts overturned. 

The tendencies of our speculative nature 5 , carrying 


5 I here take the liberty of charac- the History of Science, I have em- 
terizing inventive minds in general ployed in reference to particular ex- 
in the same phraseology which, in amples. These expressions are what 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 79 

us onwards in pursuit of symmetry and rule, and thus 
producing all true theories, perpetually show their 
vigour by overshooting the mark. They obtain some- 
thing, by aiming at much more. * They detect tlie order 
and connexion which exist, by conceiving imaginary 
relations of ofder and connexion which have no exist- 
ence. Real discoveries are thus mixed with baseless 
assumptions; profound sagacity is combined with fan- 
ciful conjecture; not rarely, or in peculiar instances, 
but commonly, and in most cases ; probably in all, if we 
could read the thoughts of discoverers as we read the 
books of Kepler. To try wrong guesses is, with most 
persons, the only way to hit upon right ones. The 
character of the true philosopher is,* not that he never 
conjectures hazardously, but that liis conjectures are 
clearly conceived, and brought into rigid contact with 
facts. He sees and compares distinctly the Ideas and 
the Things; — the relations of liis notions to each other 
and to phenomena. Under these conditions, it is not 
only excusable, but necessary for him, to snatch at 
every semblance of general rule, — to try all promising 
forms of simplicity and symfnetry. 

Hence advances in knowledge 6 are not commonly 
made without the previous exercise of some boldness 
and license in guessing. The discovery of new truths 
requires, undoubtedly, minds careful and scrupulous in 
examining what is suggested ; but it requires, no less, 
such as are quick and fertile in suggesting. What is 
Invention, except the talent of rapidly calling before us 
the many possibilities, and selecting the appropriate 
one? It is* true, that when we have rejected all the 
inadmissible suppositions, they are often quickly for- 
gotten; and few think it necessary to dwell on these 
discarded hypotheses, and on the process by which they 
were condemned. But all who discover truths, must 
have reasoned upon many errours to obtain each truth; 


I have used in speaking of the disco- occasion of Kepler’s speculations, and 
veries of Copernicus.—#^. Jnd. Sc. are illustrated by reference to his 
b. v. c. ii. * discoveries. — Hist. IncL Sc. b. v. c. iv. 

6 These observations are made on sect. 1. 



80 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

every accepted doctrine must have been one chosen 
out of many candidates. If many of the guesses of 
philosophers of bygone^ times now appear fanciful and 
absurd, because time and observation have refuted them, 
others, which were at the time equally gratuitous, have 
been confirmed in a manner which make£ them appear 
marvellously sagacious. To form hypotheses, and then 
to employ much labour and skill in refuting them, if 
they do not succeed in establishing them, is a part of 
the usual process of inventive minds. Such a proceed- 
ing belongs to the rule of the genius of discovery, 
rather than (as has often been taught in modern times) 
to the exception, 

7. But if it be an advantage for the discoverer of 
truth that he be ingenious and fertile in inventing 
hypotheses which may connect the phenomena of na- 
ture, it is indispensably requisite that he be diligent 
and careful in comparing his hypotheses with the facts, 
and )ready to abandon his invention as soon as it ap- 
pears that it does not agree with the course of actual 
occurrences. This constant comparison of his own 
conceptions and supposition with observed facts under 
all aspects, forms the leading employment of $ho -dis- 
coverer: this candid and simple love of truth, which 
1 makes him willing to suppress the most favourite pro- 
duction of his own ingenuity as soon as it appears to 
be at variance with realities, constitutes the first cha- 
racteristic of his temper. He must have neither the 
blindness which cannot, nor the obstinacy which will 
not, perceive the discrepancy of his fancies and his 
facts. He must allow no indolence, or partial views, 
or self-complacency, or delight in seeming demonstra- 
tion, to make him tenacious of the schemes which he 
devises, any further than they are confirmed by their 
accordance with nature. The framing of hypotheses 
is, for the inquirer after truth, not the end, but the 
beginning of his work. Each of his systems is in- 
vented, not ’that he may admire it and follow it into 
all its consistent consequences, but that he may make 
it the occasion of a course of active experiment and 
observation. And if the results of this process contra- 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 8 1 


diet his fundamental assumptions, however ingenious, 
however symmetrical, however elegant his system may 
be, he rejects it without hesitation. He allows no 
natural yearning for the offspring of his own mind to 
draw him asijie from the higher duty of loyalty to his 
sovereign, Truth: to her he not only gives Ipg affec- 
tions and his wishes, but strenuous labour and scrupu- 
lous minuteness of attention. 

We may refer to what we have said of Kepler, New- 
ton, and other eminent philosophers, fo* illustrations 
of thi§ character. In Kepler we have remarked 7 the 
courage and perseverance with which he undertook and 
executed the task of computing hi$ own hypotheses: 
and, as a still more admirable characteristic, that he 
never allowed the labour he had spent upon any con- 
jecture to produce any reluctance in abandoning the 
hypothesis, as soon as he had evidence of its inac- 
curacy. And in the history of Newton’s discovery 
that the moon is retained in her orbit by the force of 
gravity, we have noticed the same moderation in main- 
taining the hypothesis, aft^r it had once occurred to 
the author’s mind. The hypothesis required that the 
moon should fall from the tangent of her orbit every 
second through a space of sixteen feet ; but according 
to his first calculations it appeared that in fact she on)^ 
/oil through a space of thirteen feet in that time. The 
difference seems small, the approximation encouraging, 
the theory plausible ; a man in love with his own fan- 
cies would readily have discovered or invented some 
probable cause of the difference. ^But Newton acqui- 
esced in it*as a disproof of his conjecture, and ‘laid 
aside at that time any further thbughts of this matter 8 .’ 

8. It has often happened that those who have under- 
taken to instruct mankind have not possessed this pure 
love of truth and comparative indifference to the main- 
tenance of their own inventions. Men have frequently 
adhered with great tenacity and vehemence to the hy- 
potheses which they have once framed ; and in* their 


7 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. v. c. iv. sect. i. 

8 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. Yii. c. ii. sect. 3. 


NOV. ORCfc. 


6 



82 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


affection for these, have been prone to overlook, to dis- 
tort, and to misinterpret facts. In this manner, Hypo- 
theses have so often been prejudicial to the genuine 
pursuit of truth, that they have fallen into a kind of 
obloquy ; and have been considered as dangerous temp- 
tation^ ^and fallacious guides. Many warnings have 
been uttered against the fabrication of hypotheses, by 
those who profess to teach philosophy; many disclaimers 
of such a course by those who cultivate science. 

Thus we shall find Bacon frequently discommending 
this habit, under the name of ‘ anticipation of the, mind/ 
and Newton thinks it necessary to say emphatically 
‘ hypotheses non fingo.’ It lias been constantly urged 
that the inductions by which sciences are formed must 
be cautious and rigorous; and the various imaginations 
which passed through Kepler’s brain, and to which he 
has given utterance, have been blamed or pitied, us 
lamentable instances of an unphilosophical frame of 
mind. Yet it has appeared in the preceding remarks 
that hypotheses rightly used are among the helps, far 
more than the dangers, of science ; — that scientific in- 
duction is not a ‘cautious’ or a ‘rigorous’ process in 
the sense of abstaining from such suppositions,, but in 
not adhering to them till they are confirmed by fact, and 
i/i carefully seeking from facts confirmation or refuta- 
tion. Kepler’s distinctive character was, not that he was 
peculiarly given to the construction of hypotheses, but 
that he narrated with extraordinary copiousness and 
candour the course of his thoughts, his labours, and 
his feelings. In th« minds of most persons, as we have 
said, the inadmissible suppositions, when rejected, are 
soon forgotten : n and thus the trace of them vanishes 
from the thoughts, and the successful hypothesis alone 
holds its place in our memory. But in reality, many 
other transient suppositions must have been made by 
all discoverers; — hypotheses which are not afterwards 
asserted as true systems, but entertained for an in- 
stant ) — ‘tentative hypotheses,’ as they have been 
called. Each of “these hypotheses is followed by its 
corresponding train of observations, from which it de- 
rives its power of leading to truth. The hypothesis is 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 83 

like the captain, and the observations like the soldiers 
of an army : while he appear, s^to command them, and 
in this way to work his own will, he does in fact derive 
all his power of conquest from their obedience, and be- 
comes helpless and useless if they mutiny. 

Since the discoverer .has thus constantly to work his 
way onwards by means of hypotheses, false and true, 
it is highly important for him to possess talents and 
means for rapidly testing each supposition as it offers 
itself. In this as in other parts of the work of disco- 
very, success *has in general been mainly owing to the 
native ingenuity and sagacity of the discoverer’s mind. 
Yet some Hules tending to further this object have 
been delivered by eminent philosophers, and some 
others may perhaps be suggested. Of these we shall 
here notice only some of the most general, leaving for 
a future chapter the consideration of some more 
limited and detailed processes by which, in certain 
cases, the discovery of the laws of nature may be 
materially assisted. 


Sect. III. — Tests of Hypotheses. 

9. A maxim which it may be useful to recollect is 
this; — that hypotheses may often he of service to science , 
when they involve a certain portion of incompleteness , 
and even of errour . The object of such inventions is to 
bind together facts which without them arc loose and 
detached ; rtnd if they do this, they may lead the way 
to a perception of the true rule by which the pheno- 
mena are associated together, even if they themselves 
somewhat misstate the matter. The imagined arrange- 
ment enables us to contemplate, as a whole, a collection 
of special cases which perplex and overload our minds 
when they are considered in succession ^ and if our 
scheme has so much of truth in it as to conjoin what is 
really connected, we may afterwards* duly correct or 
limit the •mechanism of this connexion. If our hypo- 
thesis renders a reason for the agreement of cases 
really similar, we may afterwards find this reason to be 

6—2 



84 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

false, but we sliall be able to translate it into the lan- 
guage of truth. 

A conspicuous example of such an hypothesis, — one 
which was of the highest value to science, though very 
incomplete, and as a representation of ' nature alto- 
gether false, — is seen in the Doctrine of epicycles by 
which the ancient astronomers explained the motions 
of the sun, moon, and planets. This doctrine con- 
nected the places and velocities of these bodies at par- 
ticular times in a manner which was, in its general 
features, agreeable to nature. Yet this' doctrine was 
erroneous in its assertion of the circular nature of all 
the celestial motions, and in making the heavenly 
bodies revolve round the earth . It was, however, of 
immense value to the progress of astronomical science ; 
for it enabled men to express and reason upon many 
important truths which they discovered respecting the 
motion of the stars, up to the time of Kepler. Indeed 
we can hardly imagine that astronomy could, in its 
outset, have made so great a progress under any other 
form, as it did in consequence of being cultivated in 
this shape of the incomplete and false epicyclical hypo- 
thesis. 

, We may notice another instance of an exploded 
hypothesis, which is generally mentioned only to be 
ridiculed, and which undoubtedly is both false in the 
extent of its assertion, and unpliiloso2)hical in its 
expression ; but w T hich still, in its day, was not with- 
out merit. I mean the doctrine of Natures horrour 
of a vacuum (fuga vacui ), by which the action of 
siphons and pumps and many other phenomena were 
explained, till Mersenne and Pascal taught a truer 
doctrine. This hypothesis was of real service ; for it 
brought together many facts which really belong to 
the same class, although they are very different in their 
first aspect. A scientific writer of modern times 0 ap- 
pears to wonder that men did not at once divine the 
weigh fc of the a it, from which the phenomena formerly 
ascribed to the fuga vacui really result. i Loaded, com- 


9 Deluc, Modifications de VAtmosphtre, Partie i. 




CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 85 

pressed by tlie atmosphere,’ he says, ‘they did not 
recognize its action. In vain all nature testified that 
air was elastic and heavy ; they shut their eyes to her 
testimony. The water rose in pumps and flawed in 
siphons at that time, as it does at this day. They 
could not separate the boards of a pair of bellows of 
which the holes were stopped; and they c^uld not 
bring together the same boards without difficulty, if 
they were at first separated. Infants sucked the milk 
of their mothers; air entered rapidly into the lungs 
of animals at every inspiration ; cupping-glasses pro- 
ducedHumouj’s on the skin ; and in spite of all these 
striking proofs of the weight and elasticity of the air, 
the ancient philosophers maintained* resolutely that air 
was light, and explained all these phenomena by the 
horrour which they said nature had for a vacuum.’ 
It is curious that it should not have occurred to the 
author while writing this, that if these facts, so nu- 
merous and various, can all be accounted for one 
principle, there is a strong presumption that the prin- 
ciple is not altogether baseless. And in reality is it 
not true that nature does abhor a vacuum, and does all 
she can to avoid it ? No doubt this power is not un- 
limited; and moreover we can trace it to a mechanical 
cause, the pressure of the circumambient air. But the 
tendency, arising from this pressure, which the bodies 
surrouuding a space void of air have to rush into it, 
may be expressed, in no extravagant or unintelligible 
manner, by saying that nature has a repugnance to a 
vacuum. 

That imperfect and false hypotheses, though they 
may thus explain some phenomena, aiql may be useful 
in the progress of science, cannot explain all pheno- 
mena; — and that we are never to rest in our labours 
or acquiesce in our results, till we have found some 
view of the subject which is consistent with all the ob- 
served facts ; — will of course be understood. We shall 
afterwards have to speak of the other steps of such a 
progress. 

10. yhus the hypotheses which we accept ought to 
explain phenomena which we have observed. But they 



86 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

ought to do more than this : our hypotheses ought to 
foretel phenomena which have not yet been observed ; 
at least all phenomena of the same kind as those which 
the hypothesis was invented to explain. For our assent 
to the hypothesis implies that it is held to be true of all 
particular instances. That these cases belong to past or 
to future times, that they have or have not already 
occurred, makes no difference in the applicability of the 
rule to them. Because the rule prevails, it includes all 
cases ; and will determine them all, if we can only cal- 
culate its real Consequences. Hence it will predict the 
results of new combinations, as well as explain tHe ap- 
pearances which have occurred in old ones. And that 
it does this with certainty and correctness, is one mode 
in which the hypothesis is to be verified as light and 
useful. 

The scientific doctrines which have at various periods 
been established have been verified in this manner. 
For example, the Encyclical Theory of the heavens 
was confirmed by its 'predicting truly eclipses of the 
sup and moon, configurations of the planets, and other 
celestial phenomena; and fey its leading to the con- 
struction of Tables by which the places of the heavenly 
bodies were given at every moment of time. Thd truth 
and accuracy of these predictions were a proof that the 
hypothesis was valuable, and, at least to a great extent, 
true ; although, as w^as afterwards found, it involved a 
false representation of the structure of the heavens. 
In like manner, the discovery of the Laws of Refrac- 
tion enabled mathematicians to predict , by calculation, 
what would be the efrect of any new form c r combina- 
tion of transparent lenses. Newton’s hypothesis of 
Fits of Easy Transmission and Easy Reflection in the 
particles of light, although not confirmed by other 
kinds of facts, involved a true statement of the law of 
the phenomena which it was framed to include, and 
served to predict the forms and colours of thin plates 
for a wide range of given cases. • The hypothesis that 
Light operates by^ Undulations and Interferences , af- 
forded the means of predicting results under a still 
larger extent of conditions. In like maimer in the 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 87 

progress of chemical knowledge, the doctrine of Phlo- 
giston supplied the means of foreseeing the consequence 
of many combinations of elements, even before they 
were tried; but the Oxygen Theory, besides affording 
predictions, at least equally exact, with regard to the 
general results of chemical operations, included all the 
facts concerning the relations of weight of the elements 
and their compounds, and enabled chemists to foresee 
such facts in untried cases. And the Theory of Electro- 
magnetic Forces , as soon as it was rightly understood, 
enablejl those who had mastered it to predict ^notions 
such as had ifot been before observed, which were ac- 
cordingly foiled to take place. 

Men cannot help believing that £he laws laid down 
by discoverers must be in a great measure identical 
with the real laws of nature, when the discoverers thus 
determine effects beforehand in the same manner in 
which nature herself determines them when the occa- 
sion occurs. Those who can do this, must, to a* con- 
siderable extent, have detected nature’s secret ; — must 
have fixed upon the conditions to which she attend^, 
and must have seized the rules by which she applies 
them. jSuch a coincidence of untried facts with specu- 
lative assertions cannot be the work of chance, but im- 
plies some large portion of truth in the principles on 
which the reasoning is founded. To trace order anJ 
law in that which has been observed, may be considered 
as interpreting what nature has written down for us, 
and will commonly prove that we understand her 
alphabet. But to predict what ha^not been observed, 
is to attemjft ourselves to use the legislative phrases of 
nature ; aud when she responds plainly and precisely 
to that which we thus utter, we cannot but suppose 
that we have in a great measure made ourselves masters 
of the meaning and structure of her language. The 
prediction of results, even of the same kind as those 
which have been observed, in new cases, is a proof of 
real success in oiir indifetive processes. 

11. We have here spoken of the prediction of 
facts of the same kind as those from which our rule 
was collected. But the evidence in favour of our 



88 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


induction is of a much higher and more forcible cha- 
racter when it enables us to explain and determine 
cases of a kind different from those which were con- 
templated in the formation of our hypothesis. The 
instances in which this- has occurred, indeed, impress 
us with a conviction that the truth of our hypothesis 
is certain. No accident could give rise to such an 
extraordinary coincidence. No false supposition could, 
after being adjusted to one class of phenomena, exactly 
represent a /different class, where the agreement was 
unforeseen and uncontemplated. That rules springing 
from remote and unconnected quarter^ should thus 
leap to the same point, can only arise fi^m that being 
the point where truth resides. 

Accordingly the cases in which inductions from 
classes of facts altogether different have thus jumped 
together , belong only to the best established theories 
which the history of science contains. And as I shall 
have occasion to refer to this peculiar feature in their 
evidence, I will take the liberty of describing it by a 
particular phrase; and will term it the Consilience of 
Inductions. 

It is exemplified principally in some of the greatest 
discoveries. Thus it was found by Newton that the 
doctrine of the Attraction of the Sun varying accord- 
ing to the Inverse Square of this distance, which ex- 
plained Kepler’s Third Law , of the proportionality of 
the cubes of the distances to the squares of the periodic 
times of the planets, explained also his First and 
Second Laws , of the elliptical motion of each planet; 
although no connexion of these laws had been visible 
before. Again, it appeared that the force of Universal 
Gravitation, which had been inferred from the Pertur- 
bations of the moon and planets by the sun and by 
each other, also accounted for the fact, apparently 
altogether dissimilar and remote, of the Precession of 
the equinoxes. Here was a most striking and sur- 
prising coincidence, which gave to the theory a stamp 
of truth beyond the power of ingenuity to counterfeit. 
In like manner in Optics ; the hypothesis of alternate 
Fits of easy Transmission and [Reflection would explain 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 89 

the colours of thin plates, and indeed was devised and 
adjusted for that very purpose; hut it could give no 
account of the phenomena of the fringes of shadows. 
But the doctrine of Interferences, constructed at first 
with reference to phenomena of the nature of the 
Fringes, explained also the Colours of thin plates better 
than the supposition of the Fits invented for fchat very 
purpose. And we have in Physical Optics another 
example of the same kind, which is quite as striking 
as the explanation of Precession by inferences from the 
facts # of Perturbation. The doctrine of Undulations 
propagated ih a Spheroidal Form was contrived at first 
by Huyghens, with a view to explain the laws of 
Double Refraction in calc-spar ; and was pursued with 
the same view by Fresnel. But in thh course of the 
investigation it appeared, in a most unexpected and 
wonderful manner, that this same doctrine of sphe- 
roidal undulations, when it was so modified as to 
account for the directions of the two refracted rays, 
accounted also for the positions of their Planes of 
Polarization 10 ; a phenomenon which, taken by itself, 
it had perplexed previoife mathematicians, even to 
represent. 

The Theory of Universal Gravitation, and of the 
Undulatory Theory of Light, are, indeed, full of exam- 
ples of this Consilience of Inductions. With regard* to 
the latter, it has been justly asserted by Herscliel, that 
the history of the undulatory theory was a succession 
of felicities H . And it is precisely the unexpected coin- 
cidences of results drawn from .distant parts of the 
subject which are properly thus described. Thus the 
Laws of the Modification of polarization to which 
Fresnel was led by his general views, accounted for 
the Buie respecting the Angle at which light is polar- 
ized, discovered by Sir D. Brewster 13 . The concep- 
tions of the theory pointed out peculiar Modifications 
of the phenomena when Newton's rings were produced 
by polarised light, Vliich modifications weru ascer- 

10 Hist. Jnd. Sc. b. ix. c. xi. sect. 4. 

11 See Hist Jnd. Sc. b. ix. c. xii. 12 lb. c. xi. sect. 4. 



90 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

tained to take place in fact, by Arago and Airy 13 . 
When the beautiful phenomena of Dipolarized light 
were discovered by Arago and Biot, Young was able 
to declare that they were reducible to the general laws 
of Interference which he had already established 14 . 
And what was no less striking a confirmation of the 
truth of the theory, Measures of the same element 
deduced from various classes of facts were found to 
coincide. Thus the Length of a luminiferous undu- 
lation, calculated by Young from the measurement of 
Fringes of shadows, was found to agree very yearly 
with the previous calculation from the colours of Thin 
plates'*. 

No example can be pointed out, in the whole his- 
tory of science, so far as I am aware, in which this 
Consilience of Inductions has given testimony in 
favour of an hypothesis afterwards discovered to be 
false. If we take one class of facts only, knowing the 
law which they follow, we may construct an hypothe- 
sis, or perhaps several, which may represent them : 
and as new circumstances are discovered,' we may often 
adjust the hypothesis so as to correspond to these also. 
But when the hypothesis, of itself and without adjust- 
ment for the purpose, gives us the rule and reason of a 
class of facts not contemplated in its construction, we 
have a criterion of its reality, which has never yet 
been produced in favour of falsehood. 

12. In the preceding Article I have spoken of the 
hypothesis with which we compare our facts as being 
framed all at once , e*\ph of its parts being included in 
the original scheme. In reality, however, it bften hap- 
pens that the various suppositions which our system 
contains are added upon occasion of different re- 
searches. Thus in the Ptolemaic doctrine of the hea- 
vens, new epicycles and eccentrics were added as new 
inequalities of the motions of the heavenly bodies were 
discovered; and in the Newtonian doctrine of mate- 
rial rays of light, the supposition that these rays had 


13 See Hist. Ind . Sc. b. ix. c. xiii. sect. 6. 

14 lb. c. xt sect. 5. 15 lb. c. xi. sect. 2. 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. QI 

4 fits,’ was added to explain the colours of thin plates; 
and the supposition that they had 4 sides’ was intro- 
duced on occasion of the phenomena of polarization. 
In like manner other theories have been built up of 
parts devised at different times. 

This being* the mode in which theories are often 
framed, we have to notice a distinction which fa found 
to prevail in the progress of true and false theories. 
In the former class all the additional suppositions tend 
to simplicity and harmony ; the new suppositions re- 
solve themselves into the old ones, or at "least require 
only stane ea*?y modification of the hypothesis first 
assumed: the system becomes more coherent as it is 
further extended. The elements which we require for 
explaining a new class of facts are already contained 
in our system. Different members of the theory run 
together, and we have thus a constant convergence to 
unity. In false theories, the contrary is the case. The 
new suppositions are something altogether additional ; 
— not suggested by the original scheme ; perhaps diffi- 
cult to reconcile with it. Every such addition adds to 
the complexity of the hypothetical system, which at 
last becomes unmanageable, and is compelled to sur- 
render fts place to some simpler explanation. 

Such a false theory, for example, was the ancient 
doctrine of eccentrics and epicycles. It explained the 
general succession of the Places of the Sun, Moon, 
and Planets; it would not have explained the pro- 
portion of their Magnitudes at different times, if these 
could have been accurately observed; but this the an- 
cient astronomers were unable to d<f. When, however, 
Tycho and other astronomers came to t be able to ob- 
serve the planets accurately in all positions, it was 
found that no combination of equable circular motions 
would exactly represent all the observations. We may 
see, in Kepler’s works, the many new modifications of 
the epicyclical hypothesis which offered themselves to 
him ; some of which w*)uld have agreed with the phe- 
nomena with a certain degree of accuracy, but no£Vith 
so great ,a degree as Kepler, fortunately for the pro- 
gress of science, insisted upon obtaining. After these 



92 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

epicycles had been thus accumulated, they all dis- 
appeared and gave way to the simpler conception of an 
elliptical motion. In like manner, the discovery of new 
inequalities in the Moon’s motions encumbered her 
system more and more with new machinery, which was 
at last rejected all at once in favour o£ the elliptical 
theory? « Astronomers could not but suppose them- 
selves in a wrong path, when the prospect grew darker 
and more entangled at every step. 

Again; the Cartesian system of Vortices might be 
said to explain the primary phenomena of the revolu- 
tions of planets about the sun, and satellites 'about 
planets. But the elliptical form of the orbits required 
new suppositions. *¦ Bernoulli ascribed this curve to the 
shape of the planet, operating on the stream of the 
vortex in a manner similar to the rudder of a boat. 
But then the motions of the aphelia, -and of the nodes, 
— the perturbations, — even the action of gravity to- 
wards the earth, — could not be accounted for without 
new and independent suppositions. Here was none of 
the simplicity of truth. The theory of Gravitation, 
on the other hand, became more simple as the facts to 
be explained became more numerous. The attraction 
of the sun accounted for the motions of the jilanets; 
the attraction of the planets was the cause of the mo- 
tion of the satellites. But this being assumed, the 
perturbations, and the motions of the nodes and aphelia, 
only made it requisite to extend the attraction of the 
sun to the satellites, and that of the planets to each 
other: — the tides, the spheroidal form of the earth, 
the precession, stilT required nothing more than that 
the moon and sun should attract the parts of the earth, 
and that these should attract each other; — so that 
all the suppositions resolved themselves into the single 
one, of the universal gravitation of all matter. It is 
difficult to imagine a more convincing manifestation bf 
simplicity and unity. 

Again, to take an example from another science; — 
the doctrine of Phlogiston brought together many facts 
in a very plausible manner, — combustion, acidification, 
and others, — and very naturally prevailed for a while. 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 93 

But the balance came to be used in chemical opera- 
tions, and the facts of weight as well as of combination 
were to be accounted for. On the phlogistic theory, it 
appeared that this could not be done without a new 
supposition, £«nd that, a very strange one; — that phlo- 
giston was an element not only not heavy, Jwit ab- 
solutely light, so that it diminished the weight of the 
compounds into which it entered. Some chemists for a 
time adopted this extravagant view; but the wiser of 
them saw, in the necessity of such a supposition to the 
defendb of th? theory, an evidence that the hypothesis 
of an element phlogiston was erroneous. And the 
opposite hypothesis, which taught# that oxygen was 
subtracted, and not phlogiston added,, was accepted 
because it required no such novel and inadmissible 
assumption. 

Again, we find the same evidence of truth in the 
progress of the Undulatory Theory of light, in the 
course of its application from one class of facts to an- 
other. Thus we explain Reflection and Refraction by 
undulations; when we com*; to Thin Plates, the requi- 
site ‘ fits’ are already involved in our fundamental 
hypothesis, for they are the length of an undulation : 
the phenomena of Diffraction also require such inter- 
vals; and the intervals thus required agree exactly 
with the others in magnitude, so that no new property 
is needed. Polarization for a moment appears to re- 
quire some new hypothesis ; yet this is hardly the case ; 
for the direction of our vibrations is hitherto arbitrary : 
— we allo^ polarization to decide it, and we suppose 
the undulations to be transverse. Having done this 
for the sake of Polarization, we turn to the phenomena 
of Double Refraction, and inquire what new hypothesis 
they require. But the answer is, that they require 
none : the supposition of transverse vibrations, which 
we have made in order to explain Polarization, gives 
us also the law of Double Refraction. Truth may give 
rise to such a coincidence ; falsehood cannot. ^Lgain, 
the facf£ of Dipolarization come info view. But they 
hardly require any new assumption ; for the difference 
of optical elasticity of crystals in different directions, | 



94 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


which is already assumed in uniaxal crystals 16 , is ex- 
tended to biaxal exactly according to the law of sym- 
metry ;<• and this being done, the laws of the pheno- 
mena, curious and complex as they are, are fully- 
explained. The phenomena of Circular Polarization 
by internal reflection, instead of requiring a new hypo- 
thesis, are found to be given by an interpretation of 
an apparently inexplicable result of an old hypothesis. 
The Circular Polarization of Quartz and its Double 
Refraction does indeed appear to require a new assump- 
tion, but still not one which at all disturbs thb form 
of the theory; and in short, the whole history of this 
theory is a progress, constant and steady, often striking 
and startling, from one degree of evidence and consist- 
ence to another of a higher order. 

In the Emission Theory, on the other hand, as in 
the theory of solid epicycles, we see what we may 
consider as the natural course of things in the career 
of a false theory. Such a theory may, to a certain 
extent, explain the phenomena which it was at first 
contrived to meet ; but eve~;y new class of facts requires 
a new supposition — an addition to the machinery : and 
as observation goes on, these incoherent appendages 
accumulate, till they overwhelm and upset the original 
Rame-work. Such lias been the hypothesis of the 
Material Emission of light. In its original form, it 
explained Reflection and Refraction : but the colours 
of Thin Plates added to it the Fits of easy Transmis- 
sion and Reflection; the phenomena of Diffraction 
further invested the emitted particles with complex 
laws of Attraction and Repulsion ; Polarization gave 
them Sides: Double Refraction subjected them to 
peculiar Forces emanating from the axes of the crystal : 
Anally, Dipolarization loaded them with the complex 
and unconnected contrivance of Moveable Polarization : 
and even when all this had been done, additional 
mechanism was wanting. There is here no unexpected 
success, no happy coincidence, no convergence of prin- 
ciples from remote quarters. The philosopher builds 


16 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. ix. c. xi. sect. 5. 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 95 

'the machine, hut its parts do not fit. They hold 
together only while he presses them. This is not the 
character of truth. 

As another example of the application of the Maxim 
now under consideration, I may perhaps be allowed to 
refer to the judgment which, in the History of Ther- 
motics, I have ventured to give respecting £aplace’s 
Theory of Gases. I have stated 17 , that we cannot help 
forming an unfavourable judgment of this theory, by 
looking for that great characteristic of*true theory; 
namely, that the hypotheses which were assumed to 
account for Sne class of facts are found to explain 
another class of a different nature. Thus Laplace’s first 
suppositions explain the connexion of Compression 
with Density, (the law of Boyle and Mariotte,) and 
the connexion of Elasticity with Heat, (the law of 
Dalton and Gay Lussac). But the theory requires 
other assumptions when we come to Latent Heat ; and 
yet these new assumptions produce no effect upon the 
calculations in any application of the theory. When 
the hypothesis, constructed with reference to the Elas- 
ticity and Temperature, is applied to another class of 
fact#, those of Latent Heat, we have no Simplification 
of the Hypothesis, and therefore no evidence of the 
truth of the theory. 

13. The last two sections of this chapter direct our 
attention to two circumstances, which tend to prove, in 
a manner which we may term irresistible, the truth of 
the theories which they characterize : — the Consilience 
of Inductions from different and# separate classes of 
facts ; — and*tlie progressive Simplification of the Theory 
as it is extended to new cases. These two Characters 
are, in fact, hardly different; they are exemplified by 
the same cases. For if these Inductions, collected from 
one class of facts, supply an unexpected explanation of 
a new class, which is the case first spoken of, there 
will be no need for new machinery in the hypothesis 
to apply it to the newly-contemplated facts; and*Ihus, 
we have a case in which the system* does not become 


17 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. x. c. iv. 



g6 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

more complex when its application is extended to a 
wider field, which was the character of true theory- 
in its second aspect. The Consiliences of our Induc- 
tions give rise to a constant Convergence of our Theory 
towards Simplicity and Unity. ( 

But, moreover, both these cases of the extension of 
the theory, without difficulty or new suppositions, to a 
wider range and to new classes of phenomena, may be 
conveniently considered in yet another point of view ; 
namely, as successive steps by which we gradually 
ascend in our speculative views to a higher and Jbigher 
point of generality. For when the thebry, either by 
the concurrence of two indications, or by an extension 
without complication, has included a new range of 
phenomena, we have, in fact, a new induction of a 
more general kind, to which the inductions formerly 
obtained are subordinate, as particular cases to a gene- 
ral proposition. We have in such examples, in short, 
an iiistance of successive generalization. This i3 a sub- 
ject of great importance, and deserving of being well 
illustrated ; it will come under our notice in the next 
chapter. ’ 



CHAPTER YI. 


Of the Logic of Induction. 


Aphorism XYII. 

The Logic of Induction consists in stating the Facts and 
the Inference in such a manner , that the Evidence of the In- 
ference is manifest ; just as the Logic of Deduction consists 
in stating the Premises and the Conclusion in such a manner 
that the Evidence of the Conclusion is manifest . 

Aphorism XYIII. 

The Logic of Deduction is exhibited by means of a certain 
Formula; namely , a Syllogism f and every tg'ain of deductive 
reasoning, to be demonstrative, must be capable of resolution 
into a series of such Formulae legitimately constructed. In 
like manner , the Logic of Induction may be exhibited by 
means of certain Formula' ; and every train of inductive in- 
ference, to be sound, must be capable of resolution into a 
scheme of such Formulae , legitimately constructed. 

Aphorism XIX! 

The inductive act of thought by which several Facts are 
colligated into one Proposition , may be expressed by saying: 
The several Facts are exactly expressed as one Fact, if, 
and only if, we adopt the Conceptions and the Assertion 
of the Proposition . 


Aphorism XX. 

The One •Fact, thus inductively obtained from several 
Facts , may be combined with other Facts, and colligated 
with them by a new act of Induction . This process may be 
NOV. ORGt 7 



CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


98 

indefinitely repeated: and these successive processes are the 
Steps of Induction , or of Generalization, from the lowest to 
the highest. 

Aphorism XXI. 

The relation of the successive Steps of Induction may he 
exhibited by means of an Inductive Table, in which the 
several Facts are indicated , and tied together by a Bracket , 
and the Inductive Inference placed on the other side of the 
Bracket; and this arrangement repeated , so as to form a 
genealogical Table of each Induction , from the lowest to the 
highest . 

Aphorism XXII. 

The Logic of Induction is the Criterion of Truth inferred 
from Facts , as the Logic of Deduction is the Criterion of 
Truth deduced from necessary Principles . The Inductive 
Table enables us to apply such a Criterion ; for we can de- 
termine whether each Induction is verified and justified by 
the Facts which its Bracket includes; and if each induction 
in particular be sound , the highest , which merely combines 
them all , must necessarily be sound also . 

Aphorism XXIII. 

The distinction of Fact and Theory is only relative . 
Events and phenomena , considered as Particulars which may 
be colligated by Induction , are Facts ; considered as Generali- 
ties already obtained by colligation of other Facts , they are 
Theories. The same event or phenomenon is a Fact or a 
Theory , according as it is considered as standing on one side 
or the other of the Inductive Bracket . 

1. fTIHE subject to which the present chapter refers 

A is described by phrases which are at the present 
day ‘ lamiliarly used in speaking of the progress of 
knowledge. We hear very frequent mention of as- 
cending from particular to general propositions, and 
from these to propositions still more general; — of 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 


99 


truths included in other truths of a higher degree of 
generality ; — of different stages of generalization ; — 
and of the highest step of the process of discovery, to 
which all others are subordinate and preparatory. As 
these expressions, so familiar to our ears, especially 
since the time of Francis Bacon, denote, verysignifi- 
eantly, processes and relations which are of great im- 
portance in the formation of science, it is necessary for 
us to give a clear account of them, illustrated with 
general exemplifications ; and this we shall endeavour 
to do. 

We have, indeed, already explained that science con- 
sists of Propositions which include tlte Facts from which 
they were collected ; and other wider Propositions, col- 
lected in like manner from the former, and including 
them. Thus, that the stars, the moon, the sun, rise, 
culminate, and set, are facts included in the proposition 
that the heavens, carrying with them all the celestial 
bodies, have a diurnal revolution about the axis of the 
earth. Again, the observed monthly motions of the 
moon, and the annual motions of the sun, are included, 
in certaiu propositions concerning the movements of 
those Kiminaries with respect to the stars. But all 
these propositions are really included in the doctrine 
that the earth, revolving on its axis, moves round tli$ 
sun, and the moon round the earth. These move- 
ments, again, considered as facts, are explained and 
included in the statement of the forces which the earth 
exerts upon the moon, and the sun upon the earth. 
Again, this doctrine of the forces of* these three bodies 
is included in the assertion, that all the bodies of the 
solar system, and all parts of matter, exert forces, each 
upon each. And we might easily show that all the 
leading facts in astronomy are comprehended in the 
same generalization. In like manner with regard to 
any other science, so far as its truths have been well 
established and fully developed, we might &how tj\pt it 
consists of a gradation of propositions^ proceeding from 
the most .special facts to the most general theoretical 
assertions. We shall exhibit this gradation in some of 
the principal branches of science. 


7—2 



IOO 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


2. This gradation of truths, successively included 

in other truths, may be conveniently represented by 
Tables resembling the genealogical tables by which the 
derivation of descendants from a common ancestor is 
exhibited ; except that it is proper in this case to in- 
vert thU'form of the Table, and to make it converge to 
unity downwards instead of upwards, since it has for 
its purpose to express, not the derivation of many from 
one, but the collection of one truth from many things. 
Two or more co-ordinate facts or propositions may be 
ranged side by side, and joined by soma mark bf con- 
nexion, (a bracket, as s — v — " or v ',) beneath 

which may be placed the more general proposition 
which is collected by induction from the former. Again, 
propositions co-ordinate with this more general one 
may be placed on a level with it ; and the combination 
of these, and the result of the combination, may be 
indicated by brackets in the same manner ; and so on, 
through any number of gradations. By this means 
the streams of knowledge from various classes of facts 
will constantly run together into a smaller and smaller 
number of channels; like the confluent rivulets of a 
great river, coming together from many sources,' uniting 
their ramifications so as to form larger branches, these 
again uniting in a single trunk. The genealogical tree 
of each great portion of science, thus formed, will 
contain all the leading truths of the science arranged 
in their due co-ordination and subordination. Such 
Tables, constructed for the sciences of Astronomy and 
of Optics, will be given at the end of this chapter. 

3. The union of co-ordinate propositions into a pro- 
position of a higher order, which occurs in this Tree of 
Science wherever two twigs unite in one branch, is, in 
each case, an example of Induction . The single pro- 
position is collected by the process of induction from 
its several members. But here we may observe, that 
the image of a mere union of the parts at each of these 
points, which the figure of a tree or a river presents, is 
very inadequate to convey the true state of. the case ; 
for in Induction, as we have seen, besides mere collec- 
tion of particulars, there is always a new conception , a 



THE LOGIC OF INIttJCTION. 


IOI 


principle of connexion and unity, supplied by the 
mind, and superinduced upon the particulars. There 
is not merely a juxta-position .of materials, by which 
the new proposition contains all that its component 
parts contained; but also a formative act exerted by 
the understanding, so that these materials a^e con- 
tained in a new shape. We must remember, there- 
fore, that our Inductive Tables, although they repre- 
sent the elements and the order of these inductive 
steps, do not fully represent the whole signification of 
the process in each case. 

4. The principal features of the progress of science 
spoken of in the Last chapter are <;learly exhibited in 
these Tables; namely, the Consilience Inductions , 

and the constant Tendency to Simplicity observable in 
true theories. Indeed in all cases in which, from pro- 
positions of considerable generality, propositions of a 
still higher degree are obtained, there is a convergence 
of inductions; and if in one of the lines which thus 
converge, the steps be rapidly and suddenly made in 
order to meet the other lin^ we may consider that we 
have an example of Consilience. Thus when Newton 
had* collected, from Kepler’s Laws, the Central Force of 
the sun, and from these, combined with other facts, 
the Universal Force of all the heavenly bodies, btt- 
fsuddenly turned round to include in his generalization 
the Precession of the Equinoxes, which he declared to 
arise from the attraction of the sun and moon upon 
the protuberant part of the terrestrial spheroid. The 
apparent remoteness of this fact, innts nature, from the 
other facts with which he thus associated it, causes this 
part of his reasoning to strike us as a remarkable ex- 
ample of Consilience. Accordingly, in the Table of 
Astronomy we find that the columns which contain 
the facts and theories relative to the sun and placets, 
after exhibiting several stages of induction within 
themselves, are at le/igth suddenly connected with 
a column till theft quite distinct, containing the* pre- 
cession of the equinoxes. In like manner, in the Table 
of Optics, the columns which contain the facts and 
theories relative to double r ef r action, and those which 



102 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

include 'polarization by crystals , each go separately 
through several stages of induction; and then these 
two sets of columns are suddenly connected by Fres- 
nel’s mathematical induction, that double refraction and 
polarization arise from the same cause thus exhibit- 
ing a remarkable Consilience. 

5. The constant Tendency to Simplicity in the 
sciences of which the progress is thus represented, 
appears from the form of the Table itself ; for the 
single trunk into which all the branches converge, 
contains in itself the substance of all the propositions 
by means of which this last generalization was arrived 
at. It is true, that this ultimate result is sometimes 
not so simple as in the Table it appears : for instance, 
the ultimate generalization of the Table exhibiting the 
progress of Physical Optics, — namely, that Light con- 
sists in Undulations, — must be understood as includ- 
ing soine other hypotheses; as, that the undulations 
are transverse, that the ether through which they are 
propagated has its elasticity in crystals and other 
transparent bodies regulated by certain laws; and the 
like. Yet still, even acknowledging all the complica- 
tion thus implied, the Table in question evidences 
clearly enough the constant advance towards unity, 
•consistency, and simplicity, which have marked the 
progress of this Theory. The same is the case in the 
Inductive Table of Astronomy in a still greater 
degree. 

6. These Tables naturally afford the opportunity of 
assigning to each bf the distinct steps of which the 
progress of science consists, the name of the Dis- 
coverer to whom it is due. Every one of the inductive 
processes which the brackets of our Tables mark, 
directs our attention to some person by whom the in- 
duction was first distinctly made. These names I 
have endeavoured to put in their due places in the 
Tables; and the Inductive Tree of our knowledge in 
eacli science becomes, in this way, an exhibition of the 
claims of each discoverer to distinction, and, as it 
were, a Genealogical Tree of scientific nobility. It is 
by no means pretended that such a tree includes the 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 


103 


names of all the meritorious labourers in each depart- 
ment of science. Many persons are most usefully 
employed in collecting and verifying truths,* who do 
not advance to any new truths. The labours of a 
number of such are included in each stage of our 
ascent. But such Tables as we have now l^fore us 
will present to us the names of all the most eminent 
discoverers : for the main steps of which the progress 
of science consists, are transitions from more particu- 
lar to more general truths, and must ^therefore be 
rightly given # by these Tables; and those must be the 
greatest names in science to whom the principal events 
of its advance are thus due. 

7. The Tables, as we have presented them, exhibit 
the course by which we pass from Particular to General 
through various gradations, and so to the most general. 
They display the order of discovery. But by reading 
them in an inverted manner, beginning at the single 
comprehensive truths with which the Tables end, and 
tracing these back into the more partial truths, and 
these again into special fycts, they answer another 
purpose; — they exhibit the process of verification of 
discoveries once made. For each of our general pro- 
positions is true in virtue of the truth of the narrower 
propositions which it involves; and we cannot satisfy 
•ourselves of its truth in any other way than by ascer- 
taining that these its constituent elements are true. 
To assure ourselves that the sun attracts the planets 
with forces varying inversely as the square of the dis- 
tance, we ipust analyse by geometry the motion of a 
body in an ellipse about the focus, so as to see that such 
a motion does imply such a force. We must also verify 
those calculations hy which the observed places of each 
planet are stated to be included in an ellipse. These cal- 
culations involve assumptions respecting the path which 
the earth describes about the sun, which assumptions 
must again be verified Jby reference to observation. And 
thus, proceeding from step to step, we resolve the* most 
general truths into their constituent parts ; and these 
again into their parts ; and by testing, at each step, both 
the reality of the asserted ingredients and the propriety 



104 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

of the conjunction, we establish the whole system of 
truths, however wide and various it may be. 

8 . It is a very great advantage, in such a mode of 
exhibiting scientific truths, that it resolves the verifi- 
cation of the most complex and comprehensive theories, - 
into a qumber of small steps, of which almost any one 
falls within the reach of common talents and industry. 
That if the particulars of any one step be true, the 
generalization also is true, any person with a mind 
properly disciplined may satisfy himself by a little 
study. That each of these particular propositions is 
true, may be ascertained, by the same kind of atten- 
tion, when this prpposition is resolved into its consti- 
tuent and mare special propositions. And thus we 
may proceed, till the most general truth is broken up 
into small and manageable portions. Of these por- 
tions, each may appear by itself narrow and easy ; and 
yet they are so woven together, by hypothesis and con- 
junction, that the truth of the parts necessarily assures 
us of the truth of the whole. The verification is of 
the same nature as the verification of a large and com- 
plex statement of great sums received by a mercantile 
office on various accounts from many quartern The 
statement is separated into certain comprehensive heads, 
r.nd these into others less extensive ; and these again 
into smaller collections of separate articles, each of® 
which can be inquired into and reported on by separate 
persons. And thus at last, the mere addition of 
numbers performed by these various persons, and the 
summation of the results which they obtayi, executed 
by other accountants, is a complete and entire security 
that there is no errour in the whole of the process. 

9 . This comparison of the process by which wo 
verify scientific truth to the process of Book-keeping 
in a large commercial establishment, may appear to 
some persons not sufficiently dignified for the subject. 
But, in fact, the possibility of giving this formal and 
business-like aspect to the evidence of science, as in- 
volved in the process of successive generalization, is an 
inestimable advantage. For if no one could pronounce 
concerning a wide and profound theory except he who 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 


105 


could at once embrace in bis mind the whole range of 
inference, extending from the special facts up to the 
most general principles, none hut the greatest* geniuses 
would be entitled to judge concerning the truth or 
errour of scientific discoveries. But, in reality, we 
seldom need to verify more than one or two steps of 
such discoveries at one time ; and this may commonly 
be done (when the discoveries have been fully esta- 
blished and developed,) by any one who brings to the 
task clear conceptions and steady attention. The pro- 
gresstof science is gradual : the discoveries which are 
successively made, are also verified successively. We 
have never any very large collections of them on our 
hands at once. The doubts and uncertainties of any 
one who has studied science with care and perseverance 
are generally confined to a few points. If he can 
satisfy himself upon these, he has no misgivings re- 
specting the rest of the structure; which has indeed 
been repeatedly verified by other persons in like man- 
ner. The fact that science is capable of being resolved 
into separate processes of verification, is that which 
renders it possible to form a great body of scientific 
truth, 1 by adding together a vast number of truths, of 
which many men, at various times and by multiplied 
efforts, have satisfied themselves. The treasury 
Science is constantly rich and abundant, because it 
accumulates the wealth which is thus gathered by so 
many, and reckoned over by so many more : and the 
dignity of Knowledge is no more lowered by the mul- 
tiplicity o£ the tasks on which her servants are em- 
ployed, and the narrow field of labour to which some 
confine themselves, than the rich merchant is degraded 
by the number of offices which it is necessary for him 
to maintain, and the minute articles of which he re- 
quires an exact statement from his accountants. 

10. The analysis of doctrines inductively obtained, 
into their constituent facts, and the arrangement of 
them in such a form that the conclusiveness of* the in- 
duction may be distinctly seen, ffiay be termed the 
Logic of Induction, By Logic has generally been 
meant a system which teaches us so to arrange our 



io6 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


reasonings that their truth or falsehood shall be evi- 
dent in their form. In deductive reasonings, in which 
the general principles aye assumed, and the question is 
concerning their application and combination in parti- 
cular cases, the device which thus enables* us to judge 
whether our reasonings are conclusive is the Syllogism; 
and this m form, along with the rules which belong to it, 
does in fact supply us with a criterion of deductive or 
demonstrative reasoning. The Inductive Table , such 
as it is presented in the present chapter, in like manner 
supplies the means of ascertaining the truth o£ our 
inductive inferences, so far as the form in which our 
reasoning may be stated can afford such a criterion. Of 
course some care is requisite in order to reduce a train 
of demonstration into the form of a series of syllogisms ; 
and certainly not less thought and attention are re- 
quired for resolving all the main doctrines of any great 
department of science into a graduated table of co- 
ordinate and subordinate inductions. But in each 
case, when this task is once executed, the evidence or 
want of evidence of our conclusions appears immedi- 
ately in a most luminous manner. In each step of 
induction, our Table enumerates the particular* faets, 
and states the general theoretical truth which includes 
tjjese and which these constitute. The special act of 
attention by which we satisfy ourselves that the facts 
are so included, — that the general truth is so consti- 
tuted, — then affords . little room for errour, with 
moderate attention and clearness of thought. 

ii. We may find an example of this act of atten- 
tion thus required, at any one of the steps ol* induction 
in our Tables; for instance, at the step in the early 
progress of astronomy at which it was inferred, that 
the earth is a globe, and that the sphere of the heavens 
(relatively) performs a diurnal revolution round this 
globe of the earth. ITow was this established in the be- 
lief of the Greeks, and how is it fixed in our conviction? 
As todihe globular form, we find that as we travel to 
the north, the apparent pole of the heavenly motions, 
and the constellations which are near it, seem to mount 
higher, and as we proceed southwards they descend. 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 


107 


Again, if we proceed from two different points consi- 
derably to the east and west of each other, and travel 
directly northwards from each, as from the south of 
Spain to the north of Scotland, and from Greece to 
Scandinavia, .these two north and south lines will be 
much nearer to each other in their northern than in 
their southern parts. These and similar facti^’ as soon 
as they are clearly estimated and connected in the 
mind, are seen to be consistent with a convex surface of 
the earth, and with no other : and this notion is further 
confijgned by observing that the boundary of the earth’s 
shadow upoil the moon is always circular; it being 
supposed to be already established that the moon re- 
ceives her light from the sun, and* that lunar eclipses 
are caused by the interposition of the* earth. As for 
the assertion of the (relative) diurnal revolution of the 
starry sphere, it is merely putting the visible phenomena 
in an exact geometrical form : and thus we establish and 
verify the doctrine of the revolution of the sphere of 
the heavens about the globe of the earth, by contem- 
plating it so as to see that it does really and exactly 
include the particular facts from which it is collected. 

We may, in like manner, illustrate this mode of 
verification by any of the other steps of the same Table. 
Thus if we take the great Induction of Copernicus, the 
heliocentric scheme of the solar system, we find it in tLe 
Table exhibited as including and explaining, first, the 
diurnal revolution just spoken of; second , the motions 
of the moon among the fixed stars ; third, the motions 
of the planets with reference to the fixed stars and the 
sun ; fourth, the motion of the sun in the ecliptic. 
And the scheme being clearly conceived, we see that all 
the particular facts are faithfully represented by it; 
and this agreement, along with the simplicity of the 
scheme, in which respect it is so far superior to any 
other conception of the solar system, persuade us that 
it is really the plan of nature. 

In exactly the same way, if we attend ’to any* of the 
several remarkable discoveries of Newton, which form 
the principal steps in the latter part of the Table, as 
for instance, the proposition that the sun attracts all 



I08 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

the planets with a force which varies inversely as the 
square of the distance, we find it proved by its includ- 
ing thre$ other propositions previously established; — 
first, that the sun’s mean force on different planets 
follows the specified variation (which is t proved from 
Kepler’s third law); second, that the force by which 
each plariet is acted upon in different parts of its orbit 
tends to the sun (which is proved by the equable de- 
scription of areas) ; third, that this force in different 
parts of the s#me orbit is also inversely as the square 
of the distance (which is proved from the elliptical 
form of the orbit). And the Newton iah generaliza- 
tion, when its consequences are mathematically traced, 
is seen to agree with each of these particular proposi- 
tions, and thus is fully established. 

12 . But when we say that the more general propo- 
sition includes the several more particular ones, we 
must recollect what has before been said, that these 
particulars form the general truth, not by being merely 
enumerated and added together, but by being seen in a 
new light. No mere verbal recitation of the particu- 
lars can decide whether the general proposition is true ; 
a special act of thought is requisite in order to deter- 
mine how truly each is included in the supposed in- 
duction. In this respect the Inductive Table is not 
like a mere schedule of accounts, where the rightness 
of each part of the reckoning is tested by mere addi- 
tion of the particulars. On the contrary, the Inductive 
truth is never the mere sum of the facts. It is made 
into something more by the introduction of a new 
mental element; and the mind, in order to 'be able to 
supply this element, must have peculiar endowments 
and discipline. Thus looking back at the instances 
noticed in the last article, how are we to see that a 
convex surface of the earth is necessarily implied by 
the convergence of meridians towards the north, or by 
the visible descent of the north pole of the heavens as 
we travel south ? Manifestly the student, in order to 
see this, must have’ clear conceptions of the relations 
of space, either naturally inherent in his mind, or 
established there by geometrical cultivation, — by study- 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. IO9 

ing the properties of circles and spheres. When he 
is so prepared, he will feel the force of the expressions 
we have used, that the facts just mentioned afe seen to 
be consistent with a globular form of the earth ; but 
without such* aptitude he will not see this consistency : 
and if this be so, the mere assertion of it yi words 
will not avail him in satisfying himself of the truth of 
the proposition. 

In like manner, in order to perceive the force of the 
Copernican induction, the student must Ifave his mind 
so disciplined^ by geometrical studies, or otherwise, that 
he sees clearly how absolute motion and relative motion 
would alike produce apparent motion. He must have 
learnt to cast away all prejudices arising •from the seem- 
ing fixity of the earth ; and then he will see that there 
is nothing which stands in the way of the induction, 
while there is much which is on its side. And in the 
same manner the Newtonian induction of the law of 
the sun’s force from the elliptical form of the orbit, 
will be evidently satisfactory to him only who has such 
an insight into Mechanics as to see that a curvilinear 
path must arise from a constantly deflecting force; 
and who is able to follow the steps of geometrical 
reasoning by which, from the properties of the ellipse, 
Newton proves this deflection to be in the proportion 
?in which he asserts the force to be. And thus in all 
cases the inductive truth must indeed be verified by 
comparing it with the particular facts; but then this 
comparison is possible for him only whose mind is 
properly disciplined and preparer? in the use of those 
conceptions, which, in addition to the facts, the act of 
induction requires. 

13. In the Tables some indication is given, at 
several of the steps, of the act which the mind must 
thus perform, besides the mere conjunction of facts, in 
order to attain to the inductive truth. Thus in the 
cases of the Newtonian inductions just spoken of, the 
inferences are stated to be made 1 By Mechanics ;’ 
and in Jhe case of the Copernican induction, it is said 
that, ‘ By the nature of motion, the apparent motion is 
the ^ame, whether the heavens or the earth have a 



no 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


diurnal motion; and the latter is more simple.* But 
these verbal statements are- to be understood as mere 
hints 1 : they cannot supersede the necessity of the stu- 
dent’s contemplating for himself the mechanical prin- 
ciples and the nature of motion thus referred to. 

14. Jn the common or Syllogistic Logic, a certain 
Formula of language is used in stating the reasoning, 
and is useful in enabling us more readily to apply the 
Criterion of Form to alleged demonstrations. This 
formula is tHe usual Syllogism; with its members, 
Major Premiss, Minor Premiss, and Conclusion It 
may naturally be asked whether in Inductive Logic 
there is any such Formula? whether there is any 
standard form of words in which we may most pro- 
perly express the inference of a general truth from 
particular facts ? 

At first it might be supposed that the formula of 
Inductive Logic need only be of this kind : ‘ These 
particulars, and all known particulars of the same 
kind, are exactly included in the following general 
proposition.* But a moment’s reflection on what has 
just been said will show us that this is not sufficient 
for the particulars are not merely included in the 
general proposition. It is not enough that they apper- 
tain to it by enumeration. It is, for instance, no ade- 
quate example of Induction to say, 1 Mercury describes 
an elliptical path, so does Venus, so do the Earth, 
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uijanus ; therefore all the 
Planets describe elliptical paths.’ This is, as we have 
seen, the mode of stating the evidence when, the propo- 
sition is once suggested; but the Inductive step con- 
sists in the suggestion of a conception not before 
apparent. When Kepler, after trying to connect the 
observed places of the planet Mars in many other 
ways, found at last that the conception of an ellipse 
would include them all, he obtained a truth by induc- 
tion: for this conclusion was not obviously included 
in the phenomena, and had not been applied to these 


¦ In the Inductive Tables they axe marked by an asterisk. 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 


Ill 


facts previously. Thus in our Formula, besides stating 
that the particulars are included in the general propo- 
sition, we must also imply that the generality is consti- 
tuted by a new Conception, — new at least in its 
application. 

Hence our Inductive Formula might be sojnething 
like the following : ‘ These particulars, and all known 
particulars of the same kind, are exactly expressed by 
adopting the Conceptions and Statement of the follow- 
ing Proposition.’ It is of course requisite that the 
Conceptions should be perfectly clear, and should pre- 
cisely embrace the facts, according to the explanation 
we have already given of those conditions. 

1 5. It may happen, as we have already stated, that 
the Explication of a Conception, by which it acquires 
its due distinctness, leads to a Definition, which Defi- 
nition may be taken as the summary and total result 
of the intellectual efforts to which this distinctness is 
due. In such cases, the Formula of Induction may be 
modified according to this condition ; and we may state 
the inference by saying, ^fter an enumeration and 
analysis of the appropriate facts, ‘These facts are 
completely and distinctly expressed by adopting the 
following Definition and Proposition.’ 

This Formula has been adopted in stating the In 
/luctivc Propositions which constitute the basis of the 
science of Mechanics, in a work intitled The Mecha- 
nical Euclid. The fundamental truths of the subject 
are expressed in Inductive Fairs of Assertions, con- 
sisting each^of a Definition and a Proposition, such as 
the following : 

Def. — A Uniform Force is that which acting in the 
direction of the body’s motion, adds or subtracts equal 
velocities in equal times. 

Prop. — Gravity is a Uniform Force. 

Again, 

Def. — Two Motions are compounded, when each 
produces its separate effect in a direction parallel to 
itself. 

Prop. — When any Force acts upon a body in mo- 
tion, % the motion which the Force would produce in the 



112 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


body at rest is compounded with the previous motion 
of the body. 

And mi like manner in other cases. 

In these cases the proposition is, of course, esta- 
blished, and the definition realized, by an, enumeration 
of the facts. And in the case of inferences made in 
such a form, the Definition of the Conception and the 
Assertion of the Truth are both requisite and are cor- 
relative to one another. Each of the two steps con- 
tains the verification and justification of the other. 
The Proposition derives its meaning from the Defini- 
tion ; the Definition derives its reality from the Pro- 
position. If they are separated, the Definition is arbi- 
trary or empty, the Proposition vague or ambiguous. 

1 6 . But it must be observed that neither of the 
preceding Formulae expresses the full cogency of the 
inductive proof. They declare only that the results 
can be clearly explained and rigorously deduced by the 
employment of a certain Definition and a certain Pro- 
position. But in order to make the conclusion demon- 
strative, which in perfect examples of Induction it is, 
we ought to be able to declare that the results can be 
clearly explained and rigorously declared only by the 
Definition and Proposition which we adopt. And in 
•ideality, the conviction of the sound inductive reasoner 
does reach to this point. The Mathematician asserts 
the Laws of Motion, seeing clearly that they (or laws 
equivalent to them) afford the only means of clearly 
expressing and deducing the actual facts. But this 
conviction, that th«4, inductive inference is not only 
consistent with the facts, but necessary, finds its place 
in the mind gradually, as the Contemplation of the 
consequences of the proposition, and the various rela- 
tions of the facts, becomes steady and familiar. It 
is scarcely possible for the student at once to satisfy 
himself that the inference is thus inevitable. And 
when he arrives at this conviction, he sees also, in 
many' cases at least, that there may be other ways of 
expressing the substance of the truth established, 
besides that special Proposition which he has under 
his notice. 



THE LOGIC OP INrfCJCTION. 


113 

We may, therefore, without impropriety, renounce 
the undertaking of conveying in our formula this final 
conviction of the necessary truth of our inference. We 
may leave it to be thought, without insisting upon say- 
ing it, that in such cases what can be true, is true. 
But if we wish to express the ultimate significance of 
the Inductive Act of thought, we may take as our 
Formula for the Colligation of Facts by Induction, 
this : — ‘ The several Facts are exactly expressed as one 
Fact if, and only if, we adopt the Conception and the 
Assertion* of the inductive inference. 

17. I have said that the mind must be properly 
disciplined in order that it may see, the necessary con- 
nexion between the facts and the genei^l proposition 
in which they are included. And the perception of 
this connexion, though treated as one step in our 
inductive inference, may imply many steps of demon- 
strative proof. The connexion is this, that the parti- 
cular case is included in the general one, that is, may 
be deduced from it : but this deduction may often 
require many links of reasoning. Thus in the case of 
the inference of the law of the force from the elliptical 
fornf of the orbit by Newton, the proof that in the 
ellipse the deflection from the tangent is inversely as 
the square of the distance from the focus of the ellipse* 
is a ratiocination consisting of several steps, and in- 
volving several properties of Conic Sections ; these pro- 
perties being supposed to be previously established by 
a geometrical system of demonstration on the special 
subject of tjie Conic Sections. Ih this and similar 
cases the Induction involves many steps of Deduction. 
And in such cases, afthough the Inductive Step, the 
Invention of the Conception, is really the most im- 
portant, yet since, when once made, it occupies a 
familiar place in men’s minds ; and since the Deductive 
Demonstration is of considerable length and requires 
intellectual effort to follow it at every step > men often 
admire the deductive part of the proposition, the '’geo- 
metrical or algebraical demonstration, far more than 
that part in which the philosophical merit really resides. 

Ijpv. ORG. 8 



IT 4 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


1 8. Deductive reasoning is virtually a collection of 
syllogisms, as has already been stated; and in such 
reasoning, the general principles, the Definitions and 
Axioms, necessarily stand at the beginning of the 
demonstration. In an inductive infereuce, the Defi- 
nitions,and Principles are the final remit of the reason- 
ing, the ultimate effect of the proof. Hence when an 
Inductive Proposition is to be established by a proof 
involving several steps of demonstrative reasoning, the 
enunciation' 'of the Proposition will contain, explicitly 
or implicitly, principles which the demonstration pro- 
ceeds upon as axioms, but which are really inductive 
inferences. Thus in order to prove that the force 
which retains, a planet in an ellipse varies inversely as 
the square of the distance, it is taken for granted that 
the Laws of Motion are true, and that they apply to 
the planets. Yet the doctrine that this is so, as well 
as the law of the force, were established only by this and 
the like demonstrations. The doctrine which is the 
hypothesis of the deductive reasoning, is the inference 
of the inductive process. . The special facts which are 
the basis of the inductive inference, are the conclusion 
of the train of deduction. And in this manner the 
deduction establishes the induction. The principle 
?which we gather from the facts is true, because the 
facts can be derived from it by rigorous demonstratior. 
Induction moves upwards, and deduction downwards, 
on the same stair. 

But still there is a great difference in the character 
of their movements. Deduction descend^ steadily and 
methodically, step by step: Induction mounts by a 
leap which is out of the reach (S“ method. She bounds 
to the top of the stair at once; and then it is the busi- 
ness of Deduction, by trying each step in order, to 
establish the solidity of her companion’s footing. Yet 
these must be processes of the same mind. The In- 
ductive Intellect makes an assertion which is subse- 
quently justified by demonstration; and it shows its 
sagacity, its peculiar character, by enunciating the 
proposition when as yet the demonstration does not 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 115 

exist : but then it shows that it is sagacity, by also 
producing the demonstration. 

It has been said that inductive and deductive reason- 
ing are contrary in their scheme ; that in Deduction 
we infer particular from general truths; while in In- 
duction we infer general from particular : that^ Deduc- 
tion consists of many steps, in each of which we apply 
known general propositions in particular cases ; while 
in Induction we have a single step, in which we pass 
from many particular truths to one general propo- 
sition.* And this is truly said ; but though contrary 
in their motions, the two are the operation of the same 
mind travelling over the same groiyid. Deduction is 
a necessary part of Induction. Deduction justifies by 
calculation what Induction had happily guessed. In- 
duction recognizes the ore of truth by its weight; 
Deduction confirms the recognition by chemical ana- 
lysis. Every step of Induction must be confirmed by 
rigorous deductive reasoning, followed into such detail 
as the nature and complexity of the relations (whether 
of quantity or any other) render requisite. If not so 
justified by the supposed discoverer, it is not In- 
duction. 

19. Such Tabular arrangements of propositions as 
we have constructed may be considered as the Criterion 
<f Truth for the doctrines which they include. They 
are the Criterion of Inductive Truth, in the same 
sense in which Syllogistic Demonstration is the Cri- 
terion of Necessary Truth, — of the certainty of con- 
clusions, depending upon evident First Principles. 
And that such Tables are really a Criterion of the 
truth of the propositions which they contain, will be 
plain by examining their structure. For if the con- 
nexion which the inductive process assumes be ascer- 
tained to be in each case real and true, the assertion of 
the general proposition merely collects together ascer- 
tained truths; and in like manner each of. those more 
particular propositions is true, because it merely* ex- 
presses collectively more special facts : so that the most 
general tEeory is only the assertion of a great body 
of faefs, duly classified and subordinated. When we 

8—2 



Il6 (CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

assert the truth of theCopernican theory of the motions 
of the solar system, or of the Newtonian theoiy of the 
forces by which they &re caused, we merely assert the 
groups of propositions which, in the Table of Astrono- 
mical Induction, are included in these 'doctrines ; and 
ultimately, we may consider ourselves as merely as- 
serting at once so many Facts, and therefore, of course, 
expressing an indisputable truth. 

20. At, any one of these steps of Induction in the 
Table, the inductive proposition is a Theory with re- 
gard to the Facts which it includes, while it Ts to be 
looked upon as a Fact with respect to the higher gene- 
ralizations in which it is included. In any other 
sense, as was° formerly shown, the opposition of Fact 
and Theory is untenable, and leads to endless per- 
plexity and debate. Is it a Fact or a Theory that the 
planet Mars revolves in an Ellipse about the Sun? 
To Kepler, employed in endeavouring to combine the 
separate observations by the Conception of an Ellipse, 
it is a Theory; to Newton, engaged in inferring the 
law of force from a knowledge of the elliptical motion, 
it is a Fact. There are, as we have already seen, no 
special attributes of Theory and Fact which distinguish 
them from one another. Facts are phenomena appre- 
hended by the aid of conceptions and mental acts, as 
Theories also are. We commonly call our observations 
Facts , when we apply, without effort or consciousness, 
conceptions perfectly familiar to us : while we speak of 
Theories, when we have previously contemplated the 
Facts and the connecting Conception separately, and 
have made the connexion by a conscious mental act. 
The real difference is a difference of relation; as the 
same proposition in a demonstration is the premiss of 
one syllogism and the conclusion in another; — as the 
same person is a father and a son. Propositions arc 
Facts and Theories, according as they stand above or 
belpw the Inductive Brackets of our Tables. 

21. To obvirte mistakes I may remark that the 
terms higher and lower , when used of generalizations, 
are unavoidably represented by their opposites in our 
Inductive Tables. The highest generalization is that 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 1 1 7 

which includes all others ; and this stands the lowest 
on our page, because, reading downwards, that is the 
place which we last reach. # 

There is a distinction of the knowledge acquired by 
Scientific Induction into two kinds, which is so im- 
portant that we shall consider it in the succeeding 
chapter. 



CHAPTER VII. 


Of Laws of Phenomena and of Causes. 


Aphorism XXIV. 

Inductive truths are of two kinds, Laws of Phenomena, 
and Theories of Causes. It is necessary to begin in every 
science with the Laws of Phenomena; but it is impossible that 
we should be satisfied to stop short of a Theory of Causes. In 
Physical Astronomy, Physical Optics , Geology , and other 
sciences, we have instances showing that we can make a great 
advance in inquiries after true Theories of Causes. 

i. TN the first attempts at acquiring an exact and 

X connected knowledge of the appearances and ope- 
rations which nature presents, men went no further 
..than to learn what takes place, not why it occurs. 
They discovered an Order which the phenomena fob 
low, Rules which they obey; but they did not come in 
sight of the Powers by which these rules are deter- 
mined, the Causes of which this order is the effect. 
Thus, for example, they found that many of the celes- 
tial motions took place as if the sun and* stars were 
carried round by the revolutions of certain celestial 
spheres; but what causes kept these spheres in con- 
stant motion, they were never able to explain. In 
like manner in modem times, Kepler discovered that 
the planets describe ellipses, before Newton explained 
why they select this particular curve, and describe it 
in a 'particular manner. The laws of reflection, re- 
fraction, dispersion, and other properties of light have 
long been known ; the causes of these la^s are at 
present under discussion. And the same migljt be 



OF LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 1 10 

said of many other sciences. The discovery of the 
Laws of Phenomena is, in all cases, the first step in 
exact knowledge ; these Laws may often for* a long 
period constitute the whole of our science; and it is 
always a matter requiring great talents and great ef- 
forts, to advance to a knowledge of the Cause% of the 
phenomena. 

Hence the larger part of our knowledge of nature, 
at least of the certain portion* of it, consists of the 
knowledge of the Laws of Phenomena. In Astronomy 
indeed* beside^ knowing the rules which guide the ap- 
pearances, and resolving them into the real motions 
from which they arise, we can refea these motions to 
the forces which produce them. In Optics, we have 
become acquainted with a vast number of laws by 
which varied and beautiful phenomena are governed; 
and perhaps we may assume, since the evidence of the 
Undulatory Theory has been so fully developed, that 
we know also the Causes of the Phenomena. But in 
a large class of sciences, while we have learnt many 
Laws of Phenomena, the causes by which these arc 
produced are still unknown or disputed. Are we to 
ascribe to the operation of a fluid or fluids, and if so, 
in what manner, the facts of heat, magnetism, elec- 
tricity, galvanism? What are the forces by which the 
elements of chemical compounds are held together? 
What are the forces, of a higher order, as we cannot 
help believing, by which the course of vital action in 
organized bodies is kept up? In these and other cases, 
we have extensive departments of Science ; but we are 
as yet unable to trace the effects to their causes; and 
our science, so far as it is positive and certain, consists 
entirely of the laws of phenomena. 

2. In those cases in which we have a division of 
the science which teaches us the doctrine of the causes, 
as well as one which states the rules which the effects 
follow, I have, in the History , distinguished the two 
portions of the science by certain terjns. I have \hus 
spoken oiformal A stronomy and Physical Astronomy. 
The latter phrase has long been commonly employed to 
describe that department of Astronomy which deals with 



120 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


those forces by which the heavenly bodies are guided in 
their motions ; the former adjective appears well suited 
to describe a collection of rules depending on those ideas 
of space, time, position, number, which are, as we have 
already said, the forms of our apprehension of pheno- 
mena. f The laws of phenomena may be considered as 
formulas , , expressing results in terms of those ideas. 
In like manner, I have spoken of Formal Optics and 
Physical Optics; the. latter division including all 
speculations' concerning the machinery by which the 
effects are produced. Formal Acoustics and Physical 
Acoustics may be distinguished in like manner, al- 
though these two portions of science have been a good 
deal mixed together by most of those who have treated 
of them. Formal Thermotics, the knowledge of the 
laws of the phenomena of heat, ought in like manner 
to lead to Physical Thermotics, or the Theory of Heat 
with reference to the cause by which its effects are 
produced ; — a branch of science which as yet can hardly 
be said to exist. 

3. What kinds of muse are we to admit in science? 
This is an important, and by no means an easy ques- 
tion. In order to answer it, we must consider in fahat 
manner our progress in the knowledge of causes has 
hitherto been made. By far the most conspicuous in- 
stance of success in such researches, is the discovery 
of the causes of the motions of the heavenly bodies. 
In this case, after the formal laws of the motions, — 
their conditions as to space and time, — had become 
known, men were dnabled to go a step further; to re- 
duce them to the familiar and general cause of motion 
— mechanical force; and to determine the laws which 
this force follows. That this was a step in addition to 
the knowledge previously possessed, and that it was a 
real and peculiar truth, will not be contested. And a 
step in any other subject which should be analogous to 
this in astronomy; — a discovery of causes and forces 
as certain and clear as the discovery of universal gravi- 
tation; — would undoubtedly be a vast advance upon 
a body of science consisting only of the laws of phe- 
nomena. 



OF LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 12 1 


4. But ^though physical astronomy may well be 
taken as a standard in estimating the value and mag- 
nitude of the advance from the knowledge of pheno- 
mena to the knowledge of causes ; the peculiar features 
of the transition from formal to physical science in 
that subject must not be allowed to limit too narrowly 
our views of the nature of this transition in other 
cases. We are not, for example, to consider that the 
step which leads us to the knowledge of causes in any 
province of nature must necessarily consist in the dis- 
cover^ of centers of forces, and collections of such cen- 
ters, by which the effects are produced. The discovery 
of the causes of phenomena may ynply the detection 
of a fluid by whose undulations, or oilier operations, 
the results are occasioned. The phenomena of acoustics 
are, we know, produced in this manner by the air; 
and in the cases of light, heat, magnetism, and others, 
even if we reject all the theories of such fluids which 
have hitherto been proposed, we still cannot deny that 
such theories are intelligible and possible, as the dis- 
cussions concerning them have shown. Nor can it be 
doubted that if the assumption of such a fluid, in any 
case, were as well evidenced as the doctrine of univer- 
sal gravitation is, it must be considered as a highly 
valuable theory. 

5. But again; not only must we, in aiming at the 
formation of a Causal Section in each Science of Phe- 
nomena, consider Fluids and their various modes of 
operation admissible, as well as centers of mechanical 
force ; but ,we must be prepared, it be necessary, to 
consider the forces, or powers to which we refer the 
phenomena, under still more general aspects, and in- 
vested with characters different from mere mechanical 
force. For example ; the forces by which the chemical 
elements of bodies are bound together, and from which 
arise, both their sensible texture, their crystalline form, 
and their chemical composition, are certainly forces of 
a very different nature from the mere attraction of 
matter according to its mass. The*powers of assimila- 
tion and reproduction in plants and animals are obvi- 
ouslr still more removed from mere mechanism; yet 



122 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


these powers are not on that account les§ real, nor a 
less fit and worthy subject of scientific inquiry. 

6. In f fact, these forces — mechanical, chemical and 
vital, — as we advance from one to the other, each bring 
into our consideration new characters ; and what these 
characters are, has appeared in the historical survey 
which we made of the Fundamental Ideas of the various 
sciences. It was then shown that the forces by which 
chemical effects are produced necessarily involve the 
Idea of Polarity, — they are polar forces ; the particles 
tend together in virtue of opposite properties which in 
the combination neutralize each other. Hence, in at- 
tempting to advance to a theory of Causes in chemistry, 
our task is by no means to invent laws of mechanical 
force, and collections of forces, by which the effects 
may be produced. We know beforehand that no such 
attempt can succeed. Our aim must be to conceive 
such new kinds of force, including Polarity among 
their characters, as may best render the results in- 
telligible. 

7. Thus in advancing to a Science of Cause in any 
subject, the labour and the struggle is, not to analyse 
the phenomena according to any preconceived and 
already familiar ideas, but to form distinctly new con- 
ceptions, such as do really carry us to a more intimate 
view of the processes of nature. Thus in the case of 
astronomy, the obstacle which deferred the discovery 
of the true causes from the time of Kepler to that of 
Newton, was the difficulty of taking hold of mechanical 
conceptions and axioms with sufficient clearness and 
steadiness; which, during the whole of that interval, 
mathematicians were learning to do. In the question 
of causation which now lies most immediately in the 
path of science, that of the causes of electrical and 
chemical phenomena, the business of rightly fixing and 
limiting the conception of polarity, is the proper object 
of the efforts of discoverers. Accordingly a large por- 
tion of Mr Faraday^s recent labours 1 is directed, not to 


1 Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Series of Researches, Phil Trans. 
1837 and 8. 



OF LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 123 


the attempt at discovering new laws of phenomena, but 
to the task of throwing light upon #he conception of 
polarity, and of showing how it must be understood, so 
that it shall include electrical induction and other phe- 
nomena, whi<fii have commonly been ascribed to forces 
acting mechanically at a distance. He is by no means 
content, nor would it answer the ends of science that 
he should be, with stating the results of his experi- 
ments; he is constantly, in every page, pointing out 
the interpretation of his experiments, and Showing how 
the conception of Polar Forces enters into this inter- 
pretation. ‘ 1 shall/ he says®, ‘ use every opportunity 
which presents itself of returning to that strong test of 
truth, experiment ; but/ he adds, ‘ I sjiall necessarily 
have occasion to speak theoretically, and even hypo- 
thetically.’ His hypothesis that electrical inductive 
action always takes place by means of a continuous line 
of polarized particles, and not by attraction and repul- 
sion at a distance, if established, cannot fail to be a 
great step on our way towards a knowledge of causes, 
as well as phenomena, in the subjects under his con- 
sideration. 

8i The process of obtaining new conceptions is, to 
most minds, far more unwelcome than any labour in 
employing old ideas. The effort is indeed painful and 
.oppressive; it is feeling in the dark for an object which 
we cannot find. Hence it is not surprising that we 
should far more willingly proceed to seek for new causes 
by applying conceptions borrowed from old ones. Men 
were familiar with solid frames, and with whirlpools of 
fluid, when they had not learnt to form any clear con- 
ception of attraction at a distance. Hence they at 
first imagined the heavenly motions to be caused by 
Crystalline Spheres, and by Vortices. At length they 
were taught to conceive Central Forces, and then they 
reduced the solar system to these. But having done 
this, they fancied that all the rest of the jnachinery of 
nature must be central forces. We find Htwton 


8 Art. X318. 



124 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

expressing this conviction 3 , and the mathematicians of 
the last century ^ted upon it very extensively. We 
may especially remark Laplace’s labours in this field. 
Having explained, by such forces, the phenomena of 
capillary attraction, he attempted to apply the same 
kind of explanation to the reflection, refraction, and 
double refraction of light; — to the constitution of 
gases ; — to the operation of heat. It was soon seen that 
the explanation of refraction was arbitrary, and that 
of double refraction illusory ; while polarization entirely 
eluded the grasp of this machinery. Centers of force 
would no longer represent the modes- of causation 
which belonged to the phenomena. Polarization re- 
quired some other 'contrivance, such as the undulatory 
theory supplied. NTo theory of light can be of any 
avail in which the fundamental idea of Polarity is not 
clearly exhibited. 

9. The sciences of magnetism and electricity have 
given rise to theories in which this relation of polarity 
is exhibited by means of two opposite fluids 4 ; — a 
positive and a negative fluid, or a vitreous and a resin- 
ous, for electricity, and a boreal and an austral fluid 
for magnetism. The hypothesis of such fluids gives 
results agreeing, in a remarkable manner with the 
facts and their measures, as Coulomb and others have 
shown. It may be asked how far we may, in such a 
case, suppose that we have discovered the true cause of 
the phenomena, and whether it is sufficiently proved 
that these fluids really exist. The right answer seems 
to be, that the hypothesis certainly represents the 
truth so far as regards the polar relation” of the two 
energies, and the laws of the attractive and repulsive 
forces of the particles in which these energies reside; 
but that we are not entitled to assume that the vehi- 
cles of these energies possess other attributes of mate- 
rial fluids, or that the forces thus ascribed to the 
particles are the primary elementary forces from which 


3 Multa me movent, Pret to the Principia , already quoted in the 
History. 

4 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. xi. c. ii. 



OF LAWS OF PHENOMENA AtfD OF CAUSES. 1 25 

the action originates. We are the more bound to 
place this cautious limit to our acceptance of the Cou- 
lombian theory, since in electricity Faraday has in 
vain endeavoured to bring into view one of the polar 
fluids without the other : whereas such a result ought 
to be possible if there were two separable fluids. The 
impossibility of this separate exhibition of one fluid 
appears to show that the fluids are real only so far as 
they are polar . And Faraday’s view above mentioned, 
according to which the attractions at a ^distance are 
resolved into the action of lines of polarized particles 
of air, appears still further to show that the concep- 
tions hitherto entertained of electrical forces, according 
to the Coulombian theory, do not penetrate to the real 
and intimate nature of the causation belonging to this 
case. 

10. Since it is thus difficult to know when we have 
seized the true cause of the phenomena in any depart- 
ment of science, it may appear to some persons that 
physical inquirers are imprudent and unphilosophical 
in undertaking this Research of Causes; and that it 
would be safer and wiser to confine ourselves to the 
investigation of the laws of phenomena, in which field 
the knowledge which we obtain is definite and certain. 
Hence there have not been wanting those who have 
• laid it down as a maxim that ‘ science must study only 
the laws of phenomena, and never the mode of produc- 
tion 5 .’ But it is easy to see that such a maxim would 
confine the breadth and depth of scientific inquiries to 
a most sciyity and miserable lirflit. Indeed, such a 
rule would defeat its own object; for the laws of phe- 
nomena, in many cases, cannot be even expressed or 
understood without some hypothesis respecting their 
mode of production. How could the phenomena of 
polarization have been conceived or reasoned upon, 
except by imagining a polar arrangement of particles, 
or transverse vibrations, or some equivalent hypothe- 
sis ? The doctrines of fits of easy transmission, the doc- 
trine of jnoveable polarization, and the like, even when 


\ Comte, Philosophic Positive. 



126 


CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 


erroneous as representing the whole of the phenomena, 
were still useful ill combining some of them into laws ; 
and without some such hypotheses the facts could not 
have been followed out. The doctrine of a fluid caloric 
may be false; but without imagining sucSi a fluid, how 
could the movement of heat from one part of a body to 
another^be conceived ? It may be replied that Fourier, 
Laplace, Poisson, who have principally cultivated the 
Theory of Heat, have not conceived it as a fluid, but 
have referred conduction to the radiation of the mole- 
cules of bodies, which they suppose to be separate points. 
But this molecular constitution of bodies is itself an 
assumption of the /node in which the phenomena are 
produced; and, the radiation of heat suggests inquiries 
concerning a fluid emanation, no less than its conduc- 
tion does. In like manner, the attempts to connect 
the laws of phenomena of heat and of gases, have led 
to hypotheses respecting the constitution of gases, and 
the combination of their particles with those of caloric, 
which hypotheses may be false, but are probably the 
best means of discovering the truth. 

To debar science from inquiries like these, on the 
ground that it is her business to inquire into facts, 
and not to speculate about causes, is a curious example 
of that barren caution which hopes for truth without 
daring to venture upon the quest of it. This temper 
would have stopped with Kepler’s discoveries, and 
would have refused to go on with Newton to inquire 
into the mode in which the phenomena are produced. 
It would have stopped with Newton’s optical facts, 
and would have refused to go on with him and his 
successors to inquire into the mode in which these 
phenomena are produced. And, as we have abundantly 
shown, it would, on that very account, have failed in 
seeing what the phenomena really are. 

In many subjects the attempt to study the laws of 
phenomena, independently of any speculations respect- 
ing the causes which have produced them, is neither 
possible for human intelligence nor for human temper. 
Men cannot contemplate the phenomena without 
clothing them in terms of some hypothesis, and will 



OF LAWS QF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. J 2J 


not be schooled to suppress the questionings which at 
every moment rise up within them concerning the 
causes of the phenomena. Who can attend to the 
appearances which come under the notice of the geolo- 
gist; — strata regularly bedded, full of the remains, of 
animals such as now live in the depths of the ocean, 
raised to the tops of mountains, broken, contorted, 
mixed with rocks such as still flow from the mouths of 
volcanos; — who can see phenomena like th^ae? and 
imagine that he best promotes the process of our 
knowledge of the earth’s history, by noting down the 
facts, and abstaining from all inquiry whether these 
are really proofs of past states of the earth and of sub- 
terraneous forces, or merely an accidental imitation of 
the effects of such causes ? In this and similar cases, 
to proscribe the inquiry into causes would be to anni- 
hilate the science. 

Finally, this caution does not even gain its own 
single end, the escape from hypotheses. For, as we 
have said, those who will not seek for new and appro- 
priate causes of newly-studied phenomena, are almost 
inevitably led to ascribe the facts to modifications of 
causes already familiar. They may declare that they 
will not hear of such causes as vital powers, elective 
affinities, electric, or calorific, or luminiferous ethers or 
Jtiuids; but they will not the less on that account 
assume hypotheses equally unauthorized ; — for instance 
— universal mechanical forces; a molecular constitu- 
tion of bodies; solid, hard, inert matter; — and will 
apply these hypotheses in a manner which is arbitrary 
in itself as well as quite insufficient for its purpose. 

ii. It appears, then, to be required, both by the 
analogy of the most successful efforts of science in past 
times and by the irrepressible speculative powers of 
the human mind, that we should attempt to discover 
both the laws of phenomena, and their causes. In every 
department of science, when prosecuted .far enough, 
these two great steps of investigation must stxcceed 
each other. The laws of phenomena must be known 
before we can speculate concerning causes ; the causes 
must# be inquired into when the phenomena have been 



128 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


reduced to rule. In both these speculations the sup- 
positions and conceptions which occur must be con- 
stantly tested by reference to observation and experi- 
ment. In both we must, as far as possible, devise 
hypotheses which, when we thus test Hhem, display 
those characters of truth of which we have already 
spoken ; — an agreement with facts such as will stand 
the most patient and rigid inquiry; a provision for 
predicting truly the results of untried cases; a consi- 
lience of inductions from various classes of facts; and 
a progressive tendency of the scheme to simplicity and 
unity. 

We shall attempt hereafter to give several rules of a 
more precise and detailed kind for the discovery of the 
causes, and still more, of the laws of phenomena. But 
it will be useful in the first place to point out the 
Classification of the Sciences which results from the 
principles already established in this word. And for 
this purpose we must previously decide the question, 
whether the practical Arts, as Medicine and Engineer- 
ing, must be included in our list of Sciences. 



CHAPTER VIII. 


Of Art and Science. 


Aphorism XXV. 

Art and Science differ . The object % of Science is Know- 
ledge; the objects of Art , are Works . In Art , truth is a 
means to an end; in Science , it is the only end . Hence the 
Practical Arts are not to be classed among the Sciences . 

Aphorism XXVI. 

Practical Knowledge , such as Art implies, is not Know- 
ledge such as Science includes. Brute animals have a prac- 
tical knowledge of relations of space and force; but they have 
no knowledge of Geometry or Mechanics. 

i. rTlHE distinction of Arts and Sciences very mate- 
* JL rially affects all classifications of the departments 
of Human Knowledge. It is often maintained, ex-, 
pressly or tacitly, that the Arts are a part of our 
knowledge, in the same sense in which the Sciences 
are so ; and tjiat Art is the application of Science to the 
purposes of practical life. It will be found that these 
views require some correction, when we understand 
Silence in the exact sense in which we have through- ‘ 
out endeavoured to contemplate it, and in which alone 
our examination of its nature can instruct us in the 
true foundations of our knowledge. 

When we cast our eyes upon the early stages of 
the histories of nations, we cannot /ail to be struck 
with the consideration, that in many countries the 
Arts of life already appear, at least in some rude form 
or othfer, when, as yet, nothing of science exists. A 
spy. orgj* 9 



130 


CONSTRICTION OF SCIENCE. 


practical knowledge of Astronomy, such as enables them 
to reckon months and years, is found among all nations 
except the mere savages. A practical knowledge of 
Mechanics must have existed in those nations which 
have left us the gigantic monuments of early architec- 
ture. The pyramids and temples of Egypt and Nubia, 
the Cyclopean walls of Italy and Greece, the temples 
of Magna Graecia and Sicily, the obelisks and edifices 
of Indi#i ; .the cromlechs and Druidical circles of coun- 
tries formerly Celtic, — must have demanded no small 
practical mechanical skill and power. Yett those 
' modes of reckoning time must have preceded the rise 
of speculative Astronomy ; these structures must have 
been erected Jbefore the theory of Mechanics was 
known. To suppose, as some have done, a great body 
of science, now lost, to have existed in the remote 
ages to which these remains belong, is not only quite 
gratuitous and contrary to all analogy, but is a suppo- 
sition which cannot be extended so far as to explain 
all such cases. For it is impossible to imagine that 
every art has been preceded by the science which ren- 
ders a reason for its processes. Certainly men formed 
wine from the grape, before they possessed a Science of 
Fermentation ; the first instructor of every artificer in 
brass and iron can hardly be supposed to have taught 
the Chemistry of metals as a Science; the inventor 
of the square and the compasses had probably no more 
knowledge of demonstrated Geometry than have the 
artisans who now use those implements ; and finally, 
the use of speech/ the employment of the inflections 
and combinations or words, must needs be assumed as 
having been prior to any general view of the nature 
and analogy of Language. Even at this moment, tfie 
greater part of the arts which exist in the world are 
not accompanied by the sciences on which they theo- 
retically depend. Who shall state to us the general 
chemical truths to which the manufactures of glass, 
and porcelain, and iron, and brass, owe their existence? 
Do not almost ’all artisans practise many successful 
artifices long before science explains the ground of the 
process? Do not arts at this day exist, in a high state 



OF ART AND SCIENCE. 


*31 

of perfection, in countries in which there is no science, 
as China and India? These countries and many others 
have no theories of mechanics, of optics, of clfemistry, 
of physiology; yet they construct and use mechanical 
and optical instruments, make chemical combinations, 
take advantage of physiological laws. It is too # evident 
to need further illustration that Art may exist without 
Science ; — that the former has usually been anterior to 
the latter, and even now commonly advanf*sS*7nde- 
pendently, leaving science to follow as it can. 

2 . We here mean by Science , that exact, general, 
speculative knowledge, of which we have, throughout 
this work, been endeavouring to exhibit the nature 
and rules. Between such Science and. the practical 
Arts of life, the points of difference are sufficiently 
manifest. The object of Science is Knowledge ; the 
object of Art are Works. The latter is satisfied with 
producing its material results ; to the former, the ope- 
rations of matter, whether natural or artificial, are 
interesting only so far as they can be embraced by 
intelligible principles. The End of Art is the Beginning 
of Science; for when it is seen what is done, then 
comes the question why it is done. Art may have 
fixed general rules, stated in w T ords; but she has 
these merely as means to an end : to Science, the pro- 
positions which she obtains are each, in itself, a suffi- 
cient end of the effort by which it is acquired. When 
Art has brought forth her product, her task is finished ; 
Science is constantly led by one step of her path to 
another: eagh proposition which She obtains impels 
her to go onwards to other propositions more general, 
more profound, more simple. Art puts elements toge- 
ther, without caring to know what they are, or why 
they coalesce. Science analyses the compound, and at 
every such step strives not only to perform, but to 
understand the analysis. Art advances in proportion 
as she becomes able to bring forth products more 
multiplied, more complex, more various; but Scidhce, 
straining; her eyes to penetrate more and more deeply 
into the nature of things, reckons her success in pro- 
portioi as she sees, in all the phenomena, however 



132 


CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 


multiplied, complex, and varied, the results of one or 
two simple and general laws. 

3. There are many acts which man, as well as 
animals, performs by the guidance of nature, without 
seeing or seeking the reason why he d8es so; as, the 
acts •by which he balances himself in standing or 
moving, and those by which he judges of the form and 
position of the objects around him. These actions 
have tiWir^reason in the principles of geometiy and 
mechanics; but of such reasons he who thus acts is 
unaware : he works blindly, under the impulsS of an 
unknown principle which we call Instinct. When 
man’s speculative^ nature seeks and finds the reasons 
why he should act thus or thus; — why he should 
stretch out his arm to prevent liis falling, or assign a 
certain position to an object in consequence of the 
angles under which it is seen ; — he may perform the 
same actions as before, but they are then done by the 
aid of a different faculty, which, for the sake of dis- 
tinction, we may call Insight. Instinct is a purely 
active principle; it is seen in deeds alone; it has no 
power of looking inwards ; it asks no questions ; it has 
no tendency to discover reasons or rules; it is the 
opposite of Insight. 

4. Art ft not identical with Instinct : on the con- 
trary, there are broad differences. Instinct is station- 
ary; Art is progressive. Instinct is mute; it acts, 
but gives no rules for acting : Art can speak ; she can 
lay down rules. But though Art is thus separate 
from Instinct, she is not essentially combined with 
Insight. She can see what to do, but she needs not 
to see why it is done. She may lay down Buies, but it 
is not her business to give Beasons. When man makes 
that his employment, he enters upon the domain of 
Science. Art takes the phenomena and laws of nature 
as she finds them : that they are multiplied, complex, 
capricious, incoherent, disturbs her not. She is con- 
tent that the rides of nature’s operations should be 
perfectly arbitrary and unintelligible, provided they 
are constant, so that she can depend upon their effects. 
But Science is impatient of all appearance of caprice, 



OF ART AND SCIENCE. 


133 


inconsistency, irregularity, in nature. She will not 
believe in the existence of such characters. She re- 
solves one apparent anomaly after another ; he!* task is 
not ended till every thing is so plain and simple, that 
she is temptecf to believe that she sees that it could by 
no possibility have been otherwise than it is. 

5. It may be said thaf, after all, Art does really 
involve the knowledge which Science deli vers ;— that 
the artisan who raises large weights, pract ig&f*1cnow8 
the properties of the mechanical powers; — that he 
who manufactures chemical compounds is virtually 
acquainted with tlie laws of chemical combination. 
To this we reply, that it might on .the same grounds 
be asserted, that he who acts upon the* principle that 
two sides of a triangle are greater than the third is 
really acquainted with geometry; and that he who 
balances himself on one foot knows the properties of 
the center of gravity. But this is an acquaintance 
with geometiy and mechanics which even brute ani- 
mals possess. It is evident that it is not of such 
knowledge as this that we have here to treat. It is 
plain that this mode of possessing principles is alto- 
gether different from that contemplation of them on 
which science is founded. We neglect the most essen- 
tial and manifest differences, if we confound our un- 
oonscious assumptions with our demonstrative reason- 
ings. 

6. The real state of the case is, that the principles 
which Art involves , Science alone evolves. The truths 
on which the success of Art defends, lurk in the 
artist’s mind in an undeveloped state; guiding his 
hand, stimulating his invention, balancing his judg- 
ment, but not appearing in the form of enunciated 
Propositions. Principles are not to him direct objects 
of meditation: they are secret Powers of Nature, to 
which the forms which tenant the world owe their 
constancy, their movements, their changes, their luxu- 
riant and varied growth, but whicl^ he can nowhere 
directly contemplate. That the creative and directive 
Principles which have their lodgment in the artist’s 
mind, when unfolded by our speculative powers into 



134 


CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 


systematic shape, become Science, is true; but it is 
precisely this process of development which gives to 
them their character of Science. In practical Art, 
principles are unseen guides, leading us by invisible 
strings through paths where the end alone is looked 
at : it is for Science to direct and purge our vision so 
that these airy ties, these principles and laws, generali- 
zations and theories, become distinct objects of vision. 
Many m$fy- /eel the intellectual monitor, but it is only 
to her favourite heroes that the Goddess of Wisdom 
visibly reveals herself. 

7. Thus Art, in its earlier stages at least, is widely 
different from Science, is independent of it, and is ante- 
rior to it. At & later period, no doubt, Art may borrow 
aid from Science ; and the discoveries of the philo- 
sopher may be of great value to the manufacturer and 
the artist. But even then, this application forms no 
essential part of the science: the interest which be- 
longs to it is not an intellectual interest. The aug- 
mentation of human power and convenience may impel 
or reward the physical philosopher ; but the processes 
by which man’s repasts* are rendered more delicious, 
his journeys more rapid, his weapons more terrible, 
are not, therefore, Science. They may involve princi- 
ples which are of the highest interest to science; but 
as the advantage is not practically more precious be* 
cause it results from a beautiful theory, so the theore- 
tical principle has no more conspicuous place in science 
because it leads to convenient practical consequences. 
The nature of Science is purely intellectual y Knowledge 
alone, — exact general Truth, — is her object; and we 
cannot mix with such materials, as matters of the same 
kind, the merely empirical maxims of Art, without 
introducing endless confusion into the subject, and 
making it impossible to attain any solid footing in our 
philosophy. 

8., t I shall therefore not place, in our Classification 
of the Sciences, the Arts, as has generally been done ; 
nor shall I notice the applications of sciences to art, 
as forming any separate portion of each science.. The 
sciences, considered as bodies of general speculative 



OF ART AND SCIENCE. 


135 


truths, are what we are here concerned with; and 
applications of such truths, whether useful or useless, 
are important to us only as illustrations and examples. 
Whatever place in human knowledge the Practical 
Arts may hold, they are not Sciences. And it is only 
by this rigorous separation of the Practical fi;om the 
Theoretical, that we can arrive at any solid conclusions 
respecting the nature of Truth, and the mode of arriv- 
ing at it, such as it is our object to attain. 



CHAPTER IX. 

Of the Classification of Sciences. 


i. mHE Classification of Sciences has its chief use in 
1 pointing out to us the extent of our powers of 
arriving at truth, and the analogies which may obtain 
between those .certain and lucid portions of knowledge 
with which we are here concerned, and those other 
portions, of a very different interest and evidence, 
which we here purposely abstain to touch upon. The 
classification of human knowledge will, therefore, have 
a more peculiar importance when we can include in it 
the moral, political, and metaphysical, as well as the 
physical portions of our knowledge. But such a sur- 
vey does not belong to our present undertaking : and 
a general view of the connexion and order of the 
branches of sciences which our review has hitherto in-i 
eluded, will even now possess some interest ; and may 
serve hereafter as an introduction to a more complete 
scheme of the general body of human knowledge. 

2 . In this, as in any other case, a sound classifica- 
tion must be the result, not of any assumed principles 
imperatively applied to the subject, but an exami- 
nation of the objects to be classified; — of an analysis of 
them into the principles in which they agree and differ. 
The Classification of Sciences must result .from the 
consideration of their nature and contents. Accord- 
ingly, that review- of the Sciences in which the History of 
the Sciences engaged us, led to a Classification, of which 
the main features are indicated in that work. The 
Classification thu.% obtained, depends neither upon the 
faculties of the mind to which the separate parts of 
our knowledge owe their origin, nor upon the objects 
which each science contemplates; but upon a" more 



CLASSIFICATION OF •SCIENCES. 


137 


natural apd fundamental element ; — namely, the Ideas 
which each science involves. The Ideas regulate and 
connect the facts, and ate the foundations of*the rea- 
soning, in each science : and having in another work 
more fully examined these Ideas , we are now prepared 
to state here the classification to which they lead. If 
we have rightly traced each science to the Conceptions 
which are really fundamental with rega/rd to it , and 
which give rise to the first principles cm, it 

depends, it is not necessaiy for our purpose that we 
should decide whether these Conceptions are absolutely 
ultimate principles of thought, or whether, on the con- 
trary, they can be further resolvec^ into other Fundar- 
mental Ideas. We need not now suppose it deter- 
mined whether or not Number is a mere modification 
of the Idea of Time, and Force a mere modification of 
the Idea of Cause : for however this may be, our Con- 
ception of Number is the foundation of Arithmetic, 
and our Conception of Force is the foundation of Me- 
chanics. It is to be observed also that in our classifi- 
cation, each Science may involve, not only the Ideas 
or Conceptions which are placed opposite to it in the 
list, but also all which precede it. Thus Formal Astro- 
nomy involves not only the Conception of Motion, but 
also those which are the foundation of Arithmetic and 
Geometry. In like manner, Physical Astronomy em- 
ploys the Sciences of Statics and Dynamics, and thus, 
rests on their foundations ; and they, in turn, depend , 
upon the Ideas of Space and of Time, as well as of 
Cause. 

3. We may further observe, that this arrangement 
of Sciences according to the Fundamental Ideas which 
they involve, points out the transition from those parts 
of human knowledge which have been included in our 
History and Philosophy, to other regions of speculation 
into which we have not entered. We have repeatedly 
found ourselves upon the borders of inquiries of a 
psychological, or moral, or theological nature/ * Thus 
the Hjgtpry of Physiology 1 led us to the consideration 


1 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. xvii. c. v. sect 2. 


138 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE, 

of Life, Sensation, and Volition; and at these .Ideas we 
stopped, that we might not transgress the boundaries of 
our subject as then predetermined. It is plain that 
the pursuit of such conceptions and their consequences, 
would lead us to the sciences (if we are allowed to call 
them sciences) which contemplate not only animal, but 
human principles of action, to Anthropology, and Psy- 
chology. In other ways, too, the Ideas which we have 
exafiRfrai^although manifestly the foundations of sci- 
ences such as we have here treated of, also plainly 
pointed to speculations of a different order; thus the 
Idea of a Final Cause is an indispensable guide in 
Biology, as we have.seen ; but the conception of Design 
as directing thq order of nature, once admitted, soon 
carries us to higher contemplations. Again, the Class 
of Pal {etiological Sciences which we were in the His- 
tory led to construct, although we there admitted only 
one example of the Class, namely Geology, does in 
reality include many vast lines of research; as the 
history and causes of the diffusion of plants and ani- 
mals, the history of languages, arts, and consequently 
of civilization. Along with these researches, comes 
the question how far these histories point backwards to 
a natural or a supernatural origin ; and the Idea of a 
First Cause is thus brought under our donsideration. 
Finally, it is not difficult to see that as the Physical • 
Sciences have their peculiar governing Ideas, which 
support and shape them, so the Moral and Political 
Sciences also must similarly have their fundamental 
and formative Ideas,” the source of universal and cer- 
tain truths, each of their proper kind. But to follow 
out the traces of this analogy, and to verify the ex- 
istence of those Fundamental Ideas in Morals and 
Politics, is a task quite out of the sphere of the work 
in which we are here engaged. 

4. We may now place before the reader our Classi- 
fication of the Sciences. I have added to the list of 
Sciences, a few not # belonging to our present subject, 
that the nature of the transition by which wp .are to 
extend our philosophy into a wider and higher region 
may be in some measure perceived. 



CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENCES. 1 39 

The Classification of the Sciences is given over leaf. 

A few remarks upon it offer themselves. 

The Pure Mathematical Sciences can hardly ^e called 
Inductive Sciences. Their principles are not obtained 
by Induction 'from Facts, but are necessarily assumed 
in reasoning upon the subject matter Vrhi^h those 
sciences involve. 

The Astronomy of the Ancients aimed only at ex- 
plaining the motions of the heavenly bodies,^ mMhctr- 
nism. Modern Astronomy explains these motions on 
the principles of Mechanics. 

The term Physics, when confined to a peculiar 
class of Sciences, is usually understood to exclude the 
Mechanical Sciences on the one side, and Chemistry 
on the other; and thus embraces the Secondary Mecha- 
nical and Analytico-Mechanical Sciences. But the ad- 
jective Physical applied to any science and opposed 
to Formal, as in Astronomy and Optics, implies those 
speculations in which we consider not only the Laws 
of Phenomena but their Causes; and generally, as 
in those cases, their Mechanical Causes. 

The term Metaphysics is applied to subjects in which 
the Facts examined are emotions, thoughts and mental 
conditions ; subjects not included in our present survey. 



140. 


CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENCES. 


Fundamental Ideas or 
Conceptions. 

Sciences. 

Space 

Time . « 

Geometry . 

Number . 

Arithmetic • . * 

Sign 

Algebra . 

Limit 

Differentials . . J 

Motion . c 

Pure Mechanism . 1 

Formal Astronomy . j 

Cause 

Force 

Statics . . . -j 

Matter 

Dynamics . 

Inertia . 

Hydrostatics . . . 

Fluid Pressure. 

Hy drodynam ics . 
Physical Astronomy . 

Outness 


Medium of Sensation Acoustics . . . 

Intensity of Qualities Formal Optics . 

Scales of Qualities . 

Physical Optics . . L 

Thermotics . . | 

Atmology . . . J 

Polarity . 

Electricity . . \ 

Magnetism . . V- 

Galvanism . . J 

Elem en t ( Composition) 

Chemical Affinity 
Substance (Atoms) . 

Chemistry . 

‘Symmetry 

Crystallography 

Likeness. . 

SystematicMineralogy 

Degrees of Likeness . 

Systematic Botany . 
Systematic Zoology . >• 

Natural Affinity 

Comparative Anatomy 

( Vital Powers) 
Assimilation 

J- 

Irritability . 

( Organization ) . 

Biology 

Final Cause 

Instinct 

Emotion . 

Psychology 

Thought 

Historical Causation 

Geology . 

Distribution of Plants 


and Animals . • - 


Glossology 

Ethnography . . . 

First Cause 

Natural Theology. 


Glassification. 

Pure Mathematical 
f Sciences. 

Pure Motional Sci- 
ences. 


Mechanical Sci- 
ences. 


Secondary Mecha- 
nical Sciences. 

(. Physics .) 

Analytico-Mecha- 
nical Sciences. 
(Physics.) 


Analytical Science. 
Analytico -Classifi- 
catory Sciences. 

Classificatory Sci- 
ences. 


Organical Sciences. 


(Metaphysics.) 


Palaetiological Sci- 
ences » 





NOVUM ORGANON RENOVATUM. 


BOOK III. 

OF METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION 
OF SCIENCE. 


CHAPTER I. 
Introductiqn. 


Aphorism XXVII. 

The Methods hy which the construction of Science is pro- 
moted are , Methods of Observation, Methods of obtaining 
clear Ideas, and Methods of Induction. 

I N the preceding Book, we pointed out certain 
general Characters of scientific knowledge which 
may often serve to distinguish it from ©pinions of a 
looser or vaguer kind. In the course of thje progress 
of knowledge from the earliest to tl*3 present time, men 
have been led to a perception, more or less clear, of 
these characteristics. Various philosophers, from Plate 
and Aristotle in the ancient world, to Richard de Saint 
Victor and Roger Bacon in the middle ages, Galileo 
and Gilbert, Francis Bacon and Isaac Newton, in modem 
times, were led to offer precepts and maxims, as fitted 
to guide us to a real and fundamental knowledge of 
nature. It may on another occasion be dur business 
to estimate the value of these precepts and maxims. 
And other contributions of the same kind to the phi- 
losophy of science might be noticed, and some which 



I 4 2 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


contain still more valuable suggestions, and indicate a 
more practical acquaintance with the subject. Among 
these, I must especially distinguish Sir John Herschel’s 
Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy . But my 
object at present is not to relate the history, but to pre- 
sent the really valuable results of preceding labours : and 
I shall endeavour to collect, both from .them and from 
my own researches and reflections, such views and 
such rules as seem best adapted to assist us in the 
discovery and recognition of scientific truth; or, at 
least, such as may enable us to understand the pro- 
cess by which this truth is obtained. I would present 
to the reader the Philosophy and, if possible, the Art 
of Discovery. 

2. But, in truth, we must acknowledge, before we 
proceed with this subject, that, speaking with strict- 
ness, an Art of Discovery is not possible;— that we can 
give no Buies for the pursuit of truth which shall be 
universally and peremptorily applicable ; — and that the 
helps which we can offer to the inquirer in such cases 
are limited and precarious. Still, we trust it will be 
found that aids may be pointed out which are neither 
worthless nor uninsfcructive. The mere classification 
of examples of successful inquiry, to which our rules 
give occasion, is full of interest for the philosophical 
speculator. And if our maxims direct the discoyerej’ 
to no operations which might not have occurred to 
his mind of themselves, they may still concentrate our 
attention on that which is most important and cha- 
racteristic in these operations, and may direct us to 
the best mode of insimng their success. I shall, 
therefore, attempt to resolve the Process of Discovery 
into its parts, and to give an account as distinct as 
may be of Buies and Methods which belong to each 
portion of the process. 

3. In Book II. we considered the three main 
parts of the process by which science is constructed : 
namely, the Decomposition and Observation of Com- 
plex Facts ; the 'Explication of our Ideal Concep- 
tions; and the Colligation of Elementary f acts by 
means of those Conceptions. The first and last of 



INTRODUCTION. 


143 


these three steps are capable of receiving additional 
accuracy by peculiar processes. They may further the 
advance of science in a more effectual manner, when 
directed by special technical Methods , of which in the 
present Book e must give a brief view. In this more 
technical form, the observation of facts involves the 
Measurement of Phenomena; and the Colligation of 
Facts includes all arts and rules by which the process 
of Induction can be assisted. Hence we shall have 
here to consider Methods of Observation , and Methods 
of Induction t using these phrases in the widest sense. 
The second of the three steps above mentioned, the 
Explication of our Conceptions, does not admit of be- 
ing much assisted by methods, although something may 
be done by Education and Discussion. 

4 . The Methods of Induction, of which tve have to 
speak, apply only to the first step in our ascent from 
phenomena to laws of nature ; — the discovery of laws 
of Phenomena. A higher and ulterior step remains 
behind, and follows in natural order the discovery of 
Laws of Phenomena; namely, the Discovery of Causes; 
and this must be stated as a distinct and essential pro- 
cess in a complete view of the course of science. Again, 
when we have thus ascended ' to the causes of pheno- 
mena and of their laws, we can often reason down- 
wards from the cause so discovered ; and we are thus 
led to suggestions* of new phenomena, or to new expla- 
nations of phenomena already known. Such proceed- 
ings may be termed Applications of our Discoveries ; 
including in the phrase, Verifications of our Doctrines 
by such an application of them to observed facts. 
Hence we have the following series of processes con- 
cerned in the formation of science. 

S I.) Decomposition of Facts; 

2.) Measurement of Phenomena; 

f 3.) Explication of Conceptions ; 

4.) Induction of Laws of Phenomena; 

(5.) Induction of Causes; 

( 6 .) Application of Inductivh Discoveries. 

5. Of these six processes, the methods by which 
the sdcond and fourth may be assisted are here our 



144 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

peculiar object of attention. The treatment of these 
subjects in the present work must necessarily be scanty 
and imperfect, although we may perhaps be able to add 
something to what has hitherto been systematically 
taught on these, heads. Methods of Observation and 
of Induction might of themselves form an abundant 
subject for a treatise, and hereafter probably will do 
so, in the hands of future writers. A few remarks, 
offered as contributions to this subject, may serve to 
show how extensive it is, and how much more ready 
it now is than it ever before was, for a systematic dis- 
cussion. 

Of the above steps of the formation of science, the 
first, the Decomposition of Facts, has already been 
sufficiently explained in the Hist Book: for if we 
pursue it into further detail and exactitude, we find 
that we gradually trench upon some of the succeed- 
ing parts. I, therefore, proceed to treat of the second 
•step, the Measurement of Phenomena; — of Methods 
by which this work, in its widest sense, is executed, 
and these I shall term Methods of Observation. 



CHAPTER II. 


Of Methods of Observation. 


Aphorism XXVIII. 

The Methods of Observation of Quantity in general are, 
Numeration, which is precise by the naiure of Number; the 
Measurement of Space and of Time, whicit are easily made 
precise; the Conversion cf Space and Time, by which each 
aids the measurement of the other; the Method of Repe- 
tition; the Method of Coincidences or Interferences. The 
measurement of Weight is made precise by the Method of 
Double-weighing. Secondary Qualities are measured by 
means of ScaleB of Degrees; but in order to apply these 
Scales , the student requires the Education of the Senses. 
The Education of the Senses is forwarded by the practical 
study of Descriptive Natural History, Chemical Manipu- 
lation, and Astronomical Observation. 

i. I* SHALL speak, in this chapter, of Methods 
X of exact and systematic observation, by which 
such facts are collected as form the materials of precise 
scientific propositions. These Methods are very vari- 
ous, according to the nature of the subject inquired 
into, and other circumstances; but a great portion of 
them agree in being processes of measurement. These 
I shall peculiarly consider : and in the first place those 
referring to Number, Space, and Time, which are at 
the same time objects and instrument of measure- 
ment. 

2. But though we have to explain how observa- . 
tions gnav be made as perfect as possible, we must not 
forget that in most cases complete perfection is unat- 
tainable. Observations are never perfect . For we 

nov. ORa. 10 



146 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

observe phenomena by our senses, and measure their 
relations in time and space; but our senses and our 
measures are all, from various causes, inaccurate. If 
we have to observe the exact place of the moon among 
the stars, how much of instrumental apparatus is 
necessary ! This apparatus has been improved by 
many successive generations of astronomers, yet it is 
still far from being perfect. And the senses of man, 
as well as his implements, are limited in their exact- 
ness. Two different observers do not obtain precisely 
the same measures of the time and place of a pheno- 
menon ; as, for instance, of the moment at which the 
moon occults a stqr, and the point of her limb at which 
the occultatioi^ takes place. Here, then, is a source of 
inaccuracy and errour, even in astronomy, where the 
means of exact observation are incomparably more 
complete than they are in any other department of 
human research. In other cases, the task of obtaining 
accurate measures is far more difficult. If we have 
to observe the tides of the ocean when rippled with 
waves, we can see the average level of the water first 
rise and then fall ; but how hard is it to select the exact 
moment when it is at its greatest h eight, or the exact 
highest point which it reaches ! It is very easy, in such 
a case, to err by many minutes in time, and by several 
inches in Space. 

Still, in many cases, good Methods can remove very 
much of this inaccuracy, and to these we now proceed. 

3. (I.) Number . — Number is the first step of mea- 
surement, since it* measures itself, and does not, like 
space and time, require an arbitrary standard. Hence 
the first exact observations, and the first advances of 
rigorous knowledge, appear to have been made by means 
of number ; as for example, — the number of days in a 
month and in a year ; — the cycles according to which 
eclipses occur ; — the number of days in the revolutions 
of the planets; and the like. All these discoveries, as 
we have seen in the History of Astronomy, go back to 
the earliest perioS of the science, anterior to ar$r dis- 
tinct tradition ; and these discoveries presuppose a series, 
probably a very long series, of observations, made prin- 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 


147 


cipally by means of number. Nations so yude as to 
have no other means of exact measurement, have still 
systems of numeration by which they can reckon to a 
considerable extent. Y ery often, such nations have very 
complex systems, which are capable of expressing num- 
bers of great magnitude. Number supplies the means 
of measuring other quantities, by the assumption of a 
unit of measure of the appropriate kind: but where 
nature supplies the unit, number is applicable directly 
and immediately. Number is an important element in 
the Classificatory as well as in the Mathematical Sci- 
ences. The History of those Sciences shows how the 
formation of botanical systems was elf&cted by the adop- 
tion of number as a leading element, by Csesalpinus ; 
and how afterwards the Reform of Linnaeus in classifi- 
cation depended in a great degree on his finding, in the 
pistils and stamens, a better numerical basis than those 
before employed. In like manner, the number of rays 
in the membrane of the gills 1 , and the number of rays 
in the fins of fisli, were found to be important elements 
in ichthyological classification by Artedi and Linnaeus. 
There are innumerable instances, in all parts of Natural 
History, of the importance of the observation of num- 
ber. And in this observation, no instrument, scale or 
standard is needed, or can be applied ; except the 
scSle <3f natural numbers, expressed either in words or 
in figures, can be considered as an instrument. 

4. (IL) Measurement of Space . — Of quantities ad- 
mitting of continuous increase and decrease, (for num- 
ber is discontinuous,) space is the most simple in its 
mode of measurement, and requires most frequently to 
be measured. The obvious mode of measuring space is 
by the repeated application of a material measure, as 
when we take a foot-rule and measure the length of a 
room. And in this case the foot-rule is the unit of 
space, and the length of the room is expressed by the 
number of such units which it contains : or, as it hmy 
not contain an exact number, by aVnumber with a 
fraction. But besides this measurement of linear space, 


1 Hist. hid. Sc. b. xvi c. vii. 


10—2 



I48 FORMATION OF SCIENCE- 

there is another kind of space which, for purposes of 
science, it is still more important to measure, namely, 
angular space. The visible heavens being considered 
as a sphere, the portions and paths of the heavenly 
bodies are determined by drawing circles on the surface 
of this sphere, and are expressed by means of the parts 
of these circles thus intercepted : by such measures the 
doctrines of astronomy were obtained in the very begin- 
ning of the science. The arcs of circles thus measured, 
are not like linear spaces, reckoned by means of an 
arbitrary unit; for there is a natural unit , the total 
circumference, to which all arcs may be referred. For 
the sake of convenience, the whole circumference is 
divided into 360 parts or degrees; and by means of 
these degrees and their parts, all arcs are expressed. 
The arcs are the measures of the angles at the center , 
and the degrees may be considered indifferently as 
measuring the one or the other of these quantities. 

5. In the History of Astronomy 2 3 , I have described 
the method of observation of celestial angles employed 
by the Greeks. They determined the lines in which 
the heavenly bodies were seen, by means either of 
Shadows, or of Sights; and measured the angles be- 
tween such lines by arcs or rules properly applied to 
them. The Armill, Astrolabe, Dioptra, and Paral- 
lactic Instrument of the ancients, were some of the 
instruments thus constructed. Tycho Brahe greatly 
improved the methods of astronomical observation by 
giving steadiness to the frame of his instruments, 
(which were large quadrants ,) and accuracy to the 
divisions^ of the limb*. But the application of the tele- 
scope to the astronomical quadrant and the fixation of 
the center of the field by a cross of fine wires placed in 
the focus, was an immense improvement of the instru- 
ment, since it substituted a precise visual ray, pointing 
to the star, instead of the coarse coincidence of Sights. 
The accuracy of observation was still further increased 


2 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. iil c. iv. sect, 3. 

3 lb. b. vii. c. vL sect 1. 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 1 49 

by applying to the telescope a micrometer which might 
subdivide the smaller divisions of the arc. 

6. By this means, the precision of astronomical ob- 
servation was made so great, that very minute angular 
spaces could be« measured: and it then became a ques- 
tion whether discrepancies which appeared at first as 
defects in the theory, might not arise sometimes from 
a bending or shaking of the instrument, and from the 
degrees marked on the limb being really somewhat 
unequal, instead of being rigorously equal. Accord- 
ingly, the framing and balancing of the instrument, so 
as to avoid all possible tremor or flexure, and the exact 
division of an arc into equal parts, became great objects 
of those who wished to improve astumomical observa- 
tions. The observer no longer gazed at? the stars from 
a lofty tower, but placed his telescope on the solid 
ground, and braced and balanced it with various con- 
trivances. Instead of a quadrant, an entire circle was 
introduced (by Ramsden ;) and various processes were 
invented for the dividing of instruments. Among 
these we may notice Tr ought oil's method of dividing; 
in which the visual ray of a microscope was substituted 
for the points of a pair of compasses, and, by stepping 
round the circle, the partial arcs were made to bear 
their exact relation to the whole circumference. 

7. Astronomy is not the only science which de- 
fends on the measurement of angles. Crystallography 
also requires exact measures of this kind; and the 
goniometer , especially that devised by Wollaston, sup- 
plies the means of obtaining suqji measures. The 
science of Optics also, in many cases, requires the mea- 
surement of angles. 

8. In the measurement of linear space, there is no 
natural standard which offers itself. Most of the com- 
mon measures appear to be taken from some part of 
the human body; as a foot , a cubit, a fathom; but such 
measures cannot possess any precision, and are altered 
by convention : thus there were in ancient times many 
kinds of cubits; and in modern Europe, there are a 
great niimber of different standards of the foot, as the 
Rhenish foot, the Paris foot, the English foot. It is 



150 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

very desirable that, if possible, some permanent stand- 
ard, founded in nature, should be adopted ; for the con- 
ventional measures are lost in the course of ages; and 
thus, dimensions expressed by means of them become 
unintelligible. Two different natural ^standards have 
been employed in modern times : the French have 
referred their measures of length to the total circum- 
ference of a meridian of the earth ; a quadrant of this 
meridian consists of ten million units or metres. The 
English have fixed their linear measure by reference to 
the length of a pendulum which employs an exact 
second of time in its small oscillation. Both these 
methods occasion considerable difficulties in carrying 
them into effect; and are to be considered mainly as 
means of recovering the standard if it should ever be 
lost. For common purposes, some material standard is 
adopted as authority for the time : for example, the 
standard which in England possessed legal authority 
up to the year 1835 was preserved in the House of 
Parliament; and was lost in the conflagration which 
destroyed that edifice. The standard of length now 
generally referred to by men of science in England is 
that which is in the possession of the Astronomical 
Society of London. 

9. A standard of length being established, the 
artifices for applying it, and for subdividing it in the 
most accurate manner, are nearly the same as in tlie 
case of measures of arcs : as for instance, the employ- 
ment of the visual rays of microscopes instead of the 
legs of compasses .and the edges of rules; the use of 
micrometers for minute measurements; and the like. 
Many different modes of avoiding errour in such mea- 
surements have been devised by various observers, 
according to the nature of the cases with which they 
had to deal 4 . 

10. (III.) Measurement of Time . — The methods of 
measuring Time are not so obvious as the methods of 


4 On the precautions employed in Astronomy , (in the Cabinet Cyclopee- 
astronomical instruments for the dia,) Arts. 103— no. 
measure of space, see Sir J. Herschel’s 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 151 

measuring space; for we cannot apply one portion of 
time to another, so as to test their equality. We are 
obliged to begin by assuming some change as the mea- 
sure of time. Thus the motion of the sun in the sky, 
or the length *and position of the shadows of objects, 
were the first modes of measuring the parts of the day. 
But what assurance had men, or what assurance could 
they have, that the motion of the sun or of the shadow 
was uniform? They could have no such assurance, 
till they had adopted some measure of smaller times; 
which smaller times, making up larger times by repe- 
tition, they took as the standard of uniformity ; — for 
example, an liour-glass, or a clepsydra which answered 
the same purpose among the ancients. There is no 
apparent reason why the successive periods measured 
by the emptying of the hour-glass should be unequal; 
they are implicitly accepted as equal ; and by reference 
to these, the uniformity of the sun’s motion may be 
verified. But the great improvement in the measure- 
ment of time was the use of a pendulum for the pur- 
pose by Galileo, and the application of this device to 
clocks by Huyghens in 1656. For the successive oscil- 
lations of a pendulum are rigorously equal, and a clock 
is only a train of machinery employed for the purpose 
of counting these oscillations. By means of this inven- 
tion, the measure of time in astronomical observations 
became as accurate as the measure of space. 

1 1. What is the natural unit of time ? It was as- 
sumed from the first by the Greek astronomers, that 
the sidereal days, measured by thi? revolution of a star 
from any meridian to the same meridian again, are 
exactly equal ; and all improvements in the measure of 
time tended to confirm this assumption. The sidereal 
day is therefore the natural standard of time. But the 
solar day, determined by the diurnal revolution of the 
sun, although not rigorously invariable, as the sidereal 
day is, undergoes scarcely any perceptible variation; 
and since the course of daily occurrences is regulated 
by the^ sun, it is far more convenient to seek the basis 
of our unit of time in his motions. Accordingly the 
solar day (the mean solar day) is divided into 24 hours. 



152 FORMATION OF SCIENCE, 

and these, into minutes and seconds ; and this is our 
scale of time. Of such time, the sidereal day has 23 
hours 56 minutes 4*09 seconds. And it is plain that 
by such a statement the length of the hour is fixed, 
with reference to a sidereal day. The standard of 
time (and the standard of space in like manner) equally 
answers its purpose, whether or not it coincides with 
any whole number of units. 

1 2. Since the sidereal day is thus the standard of 
our measures of time, it becomes desirable to refer to 
it, constantly and exactly, the instruments by which 
time is measured, in order that we may secure our- 
selves against errour. For this purpose, in astronomical 
observatories, observations are constantly made of the 
transit of stars' across the meridian; the transit in - 
strument with which this is done being adjusted with 
all imaginable regard to accuracy 8 . 

13. When exact measures of time are required in 
other than astronomical observations, the same instru- 
ments are still used, namely, clocks and chronometers. 
In chronometers, the regulating part is an oscillating 
body ; not, as in clocks, a pendulum oscillating by the 
force of gravity, but a wheel swinging to and fro on 
its center, in consequence of the vibrations of a slen- 
der coil of elastic wire. To divide time into still 
smaller portions than these vibrations, other artificer 
are used ; some of which will be mentioned under the 
next head. 

14. (IV.) Conversion of Space and Time . — Space 
and time agree in being extended quantities, which are 
made up and measured by the repetition of homoge- 
neous parts. If a body move uniformly, whether in 
the way of revolving or otherwise, the space which any 
point describes, is. proportional to the time of its 
motion; and the space and the time may each be 
taken as a measure of the other. Hence in such cases, 
by taking space instead of time, or time instead of 


5 On the precautions employed in see Herschel’s Astronomy , 4^. 115 
the measure of time by astronomers, —127. 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 


153 


space, we may often obtain more convenient and pre- 
cise measures, than we can by measuring directly the 
element with which we are concerned. 

The most prominent example of such a conversion, 
is the measurement of the Right Ascension of stars, 
(that is, their angular distance from a standard meri- 
dian 6 on the celestial sphere,) by means of the time 
employed in their coming to the meridian of the place 
of observation. Since, as we have already stated, the 
visible celestial sphere, carrying the fixed stars, re- 
volves with perfect uniformity about the pole; if we 
observe the stars as they come in succession to a fixed 
circle passing through the poles, th^ intervals of time 
between these observations will be proportional to the 
angles which the meridian circles passing through these 
stars make at the poles where they meet ; and hence, 
if we have the means of measuring time with great 
accuracy, we can, by watching the times of the transits 
of successive stars across some visible mark in our own 
meridian, determine the angular distances of the meri- 
dian circles of all the stars from one another. 

Accordingly, now that the pendulum clock affords 
astronomers the means of determining time exactly, a 
measurement of the Right Ascensions of heavenly 
bodies by means of a clock and a transit instrument, 
in a part of the regular business of an observatory. If 
the sidereal clock be so adjusted that it marks the 
beginning of its scale of time when the first point of 
Right Ascension is upon the visible meridian of our 
observatory, the point of the scale # at which the clock 
points when any other star is in our meridian, will 
truly represent the Right Ascension of the star. 

Thus as the motion of the stars is our measure of 
time, we employ time, conversely, as our measure of 
the places of the stars. The celestial machine and our 
terrestrial machines correspond to each' other in their 
movements; and the star steals silently and steadily 


• A meridian is a circle passing dian of anyplace on tlic earth is that 
through ^he poles about which the meridian which is exactly over the 
celestial sphere revolves. The meri- place. 



154 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


across our meridian line, just as the pointer of the 
clock steals past the mark of the hour. W e may judge 
of the scale of this motion by considering that the full 
moon employs about two minutes of time in sailing 
across any fixed line seen against the sky, transverse 
to her path : and all the celestial bodies, carried along 
by the revolving sphere, travel at the same rate. 

1 5. In this case, up to a certain degree, we render 
our measures of astronomical angles more exact and 
convenient by substituting time for space; but when, 
in the very same kind of observation, we wish to pro- 
ceed to a greater degree of accuracy, we find that it 
is best done by substituting sjmce for time. In observ- 
ing the transit^ of a star across the meridian, if we 
have the clock within hearing, we can count the beats 
of the pendulum by the noise which they make, and 
tell exactly at which second of time the passage of the 
star across the visible thread takes place ; and thus we 
measure Bight Ascension by means of time. But our 
perception of time does not allow us to divide a second 
into ten parts, and to pronounce whether the transit 
takes place three-tenths, six-tenths, or seven-tenths of 
a second after the preceding beat of the clock. This, 
however, can be done by the usual mode of observing 
the transit of a star. The observer, listening to the 
beat of his clock, fastens his attention upon the star at 
each beat, and especially at the one immediately before 
and the one immediately after the passage of the 
thread : and by this means he has these two positions 
and the position cff the thread so far present to his 
intuition at once, that he can judge in what proportion 
the thread is nearer to one position than the other, and 
can thus divide the intervening second in its due pro- 
portion. Thus if he observe that at the beginning of 
the second the star is on one side of the thread, and at 
the end of the second on the other side ; and that the 
two distances from the thread are as two to three, he 
knows that the transit took place at two-fifths (or four- 
tenths) of a second after the former beat. ,In this 
way a second of time in astronomical observations 
may, by a skilful observer, be divided into ten equal 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 1 55 

parts ; although when time is observed as time, a tenth 
of a second appears almost to escape our senses. From 
the above explanation, it will be seen that the reason 
why the subdivision is possible in the way thus de- 
scribed, is thiS : — that the moment of time thus to be 
divided is so small, that the eye and the mind can 
retain, to the end of this moment, the impression of 
position which it received at the beginning. Though 
the two positions of the star, and the intermediate 
thread, are seen successively, they can be contemplated 
by the mind as if they were seen simultaneously : find 
thus it is precisely the smallness of this portion of 
time which enables us to subdivide it by means of 
space. 

1 6. There is another case, of somewhat a different 
kind, in which time is employed in measuring space ; 
namely, when space, or the standard of space, is de- 
fined by the length of a pendulum oscillating in a given 
time. We might in this way define any space by the 
time which a pendulum of such a length would take 
in oscillating; and thus we might speak, as was ob- 
served by those who suggested this device, of five 
minutes of cloth, or a rope half an hour long. We 
may observe, however, that in this case, the space is 
not proportional to the time. And we may add, that 
plough we thus appear to avoid the arbitrary stand- 
ard of space (for as we have seen, the standard of 
measures of time is a natural one,) we do not do so in 
fact: for we assume the invariableness of gravity, 
which, really varies (though very Slightly,) from place 
to place. 

17. (Y.) The Method of Repetition in Measure- 
ment . — 111 many cases we can give great additional 
accuracy to our measurements by repeatedly adding 
to itself the quantity which we wish to measure. Thus 
if we wished to ascertain the exact breadth of a thread, 
it might not be easy to determine whether it was one- 
ninetieth, or one-ninety-fifth, or one-hundredth part of 
an inch; but if we find that ninety-six such threads 
placed Side by side occupy exactly an inch, we have 
the precise measure of the breadth of the thread. In 



156 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

1 

the same manner, if two clocks are going nearly at the 
same rate, yre may not be able to distinguish the ex- 
cess of an oscillation of one of thfe pendulums over an 
oscillation of the other : but when the two clocks have 
gone for an hour, one of them may hstve gained ten 
seconds upon the other; thus showing that the propor- 
tion of their times of oscillation is 3610 to 3600. 

In the latter of these instances, we have the princi- 
ple of repetition truly exemplified, because (as has been 
justly observed by Sir J. Herschel 7 ,) there is then ‘a 
juxtaposition of units without errour,’ — ‘ one vibration 
commences exactly where the last terminates, no part 
of time being lost or gained in the addition of the 
units so counted.’ 'In space, this juxtaposition of units 
without errour cannot be rigorously accomplished, 
since the units must be added together by material 
contact (as in the above case of the threads,) or in 
some equivalent manner. Yet the principle of repeti- 
tion has been applied to angular measurement with 
considerable success in Borda’s Repeating Circle. In 
this instrument, the angle between two objects which 
we have to observe, is repeated along the graduated 
limb of the circle by turning the telescope from one 
object to the other, alternately fastened to the circle 
(by its clamp) and loose from it (by unclamping). In 
this manner the errours of graduation may (theoreti- 
cally) be entirely got rid of : for if an angle repeated 
nine times be found to go twice round the circle, it 
must be exactly, eighty degrees: and where the repeti- 
tion does not give an exact number of circumferences, 
it may still be made to subdivide the errour to any 
required extent. 

18. Connected with the principle of repetition, is 
the Method of coincidences or interferences. If we have 
two Scales, on one of which an inch is divided into 10, 
and on the other into 11 equal parts; and if, these 
Scales bein^ placed side by side, it appear that the 
beginning of the latter Scale is between the 2nd and 
3rd division of tlfe former, it may not be apparent 


7 Disc. Nat Phil, art 121. 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 


157 


what fraction added to 2 determines the place of begin- 
ning of the second Scale as measured on the first. But 
if it appear also that the 3rd division of the second 
Scale coincides with a certain division of the first, (the 
5th,) it is certain that 2 and three-tenths is the exact 
place of the beginning of the second Scale, measured 
on the first Scale. The 3rd division of the 11 Scale 
will coincide (or interfere with) a division of the 10 
Scale, when the beginning or zero of the 1 1 divisions 
is three-tenths of a division beyond the preceding line 
of the 10 Scale; as will be plain on a little considera- 
tion. And if we have two Scales of equal units, in 
which each unit is divided into nearly, but not quite, 
the same number of equal parts (as 10, and 11, 19 and 
20, 29 and 30,) and one sliding on the other, it will 
always happen that some one or other of the division 
lines will coincide, or very nearly coincide ; and thus 
the exact position of the beginning of one unit, mea- 
sured on the other scale, is determined. A sliding 
scale, thus divided for the purpose of subdividing the 
units of that on which it slides, is called a Vernier, 
from the name of its inventor. 

1 9. The same Principle of Coincidence or Interfer- 
ence is applied to the exact measurement of the length 
of time occupied in the oscillation of a pendulum. If 
*a detached pendulum, of such a length as to swing in 
little less than a second, be placed before the seconds’, 
pendulum of a clock, and if the two pendulums begin 
to move together, the former will gain upon the latter, 
and in a little while their moticftis will be quite dis- 
cordant. But if we go on watching, we shall find 
them, after a time, to agree again exactly; namely, 
when the detached pendulum has gained one complete 
oscillation (back and forwards,) upon the clock pendu- 
lum, and again coincides with it in its motion. If this 
happen after 5 minutes, we know that the times of 
oscillation of the two pendulums are in 4 he proportion 
of 300 to 302, and therefore thq detached pendulum 
oscillates in J of a second. The accuracy which* can 
be obtained in the measure of an oscillation by this 
means is great; for the clock can be compared (by, 



158 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

observing transits of the stars or otherwise) with 
the natural standard of time, the sidereal day. And 
the moment of coincidence of the two pendulums 
may, by proper arrangements, be very exactly deter- 
mined. 

We have hitherto spoken of methods of measuring 
time and space, but other elements also may be very 
precisely measured by various means. 

20. (VI.) Measurement of Weight — Weight, like 
space and time, is a quantity made up by addition of 
parts, and may be measured by similar methods. The 
principle of repetition is applicable to the measurement 
of weight ; for if two bodies be simultaneously put in 
the same pan of a balance, and if they balance pieces in 
the other pan, their weights are exactly added. 

There may be difficulties of practical workmanship 
in carrying into effect the mathematical conditions of 
a perfect balance; for example, in securing an exact 
equality of the effective arms of the beam in all posi- 
tions. These difficulties are evaded by the Method of 
double weighing; according to which the standard 
weights, and the body which is to be weighed, are suc- 
cessively put in the same pan, and made to balance by 
a third body in the opposite scale. By this means the 
different lengths of the arms of the beam, and other 
imperfections of the balance, become of no con sc- - 
quence B . 

21. There is no natural Standard of weight. The 
conventional weight taken as the standard, is the 
weight of a given bulk of some known substance; for 
instance, a cubic foot of water. But in order that this 
may be definite, the water must not contain any por- 
tion of heterogeneous substance; hence it is required 
that the water be distilled water. 

22. (VII.) Measurement of Secondary Qualities . — 
We have already seen 8 9 that secondary qualities are 
estimated by means of conventional Scales, which refer 


8 For other methods of measuring weights accurately, see Faraday’*, Cl ini- 
cal Manipulation , p. 25. 

9 B. iii. c. ii. Of the Measure of Secondary Qualities. 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 1 59 

them to space, number, or some other definite ex- 
pression. *Thus the Thermometer measures heat; the 
Musical Scale, with or without the aid of number, ex- 
presses the pitch of a note ; and we may have an exact 
and complete Scale of Colours, pure and impure. We 
may remark, however, that with regard to sound and 
colour, the estimates of the ear and the eye are not 
superseded, but only assisted: for if we determine 
what a note is, by comparing it with an instrument 
known to be in tune, we still leave the ear to decide 
when the note is in unison with one of the notes of the 
instrument. And when we compare a colour with our 
chromatometer, we judge by the e^re which division 
of the cliromatometer it matches. Colour and sound 
have their Natural Scales, which the eye and ear 
habitually apply ; what science’ requires is, that those 
scales should be systematized. We have seen that 
several conditions are requisite in such scales of qua- 
lities: the observer s skill and ingenuity are mainly 
shown in devising such scales and methods of applying 
them. 

23. The Method of Coincidences is employed in 
harmonics : for if two notes are nearly, but not quite, 
in unison, the coincidences of the vibrations produce 
an audible undulation in the note, which is called the 
howlj and the exactness of the unison is known by 
this howl vanishing. 

24. (VIII.) Manipulation.— The process of ap- 
plying practically methods of experiment and observa- 
tion, is termed Manipulation ; and *the value of obser- 
vations depends much upon the proficiency of the 
observer in this art. This skill appears, as we have 
said, not only in devising means and modes in measur- 
ing results, but also in inventing and* executing ar- 
rangements by which elements are subjected to such 
conditions as the investigation requires: in finding and 
using some material combination by which nature shall 
be asked the question which we have in our ininds. 
To do this in any subject may be considered as a pecu- 
liar but especially in Chemistry; where ‘many 
experiments, and even whole trains of research, are 



l60 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

« 

essentially . dependent for success on mere manipu- 
lation 10 .’ The changes which the chemist hks to study, 
— compositions, decompositions, and mutual actions, 
affecting the internal structure rather than the ex- 
ternal form and motion of bodies, — arh not familiarly 
recognized by common observers, as those actions are 
which operate upon the total mass of a body: and 
hence it is only when the chemist has become, to a 
certain degree, familiar with his science, that he has 
the power of observing. He must learn to interpret 
the effects of mixture, heat, and other Chemical agen- 
cies, so as to see in them those facts which chemistry 
makes the basis of her doctrines. And in learning to 
interpret this language, he must also learn to call it 
forth ; — to place bodies under the requisite conditions, 
by the apparatus of his own laboratory and the opera- 
tions of his own fingers. To do this with readiness 
and precision, is, as we have said, an Art, both of the 
mind and of the hand, in no small degree recondite 
and difficult. A person may be well acquainted with 
all the doctrines of chemistry, and may yet fail in the 
simplest experiment. How many precautions and ob- 
servances, what resource and invention, what delicacy 
and vigilance, are requisite in Chemical Manipulation, 
may be seen by reference to Dr. Faraday’s work on 
that subject. c . ( 

25. The same qualities in the observer are requi- 
site in some other departments of science ; for example, 
in the researches of Optics : for in these, after the first 
broad facts have been noticed, the remaining features 
of the phenomena are both very complex and very 
minute; and require both ingenuity in the invention 
of experiments, and a keen scrutiny of their results. 
We have instances of the application of these qualities 
in most of the optical experimenters of recent times, 
and certainly in no one more than Sir David Brewster. 
Omitting here all notice of his succeeding labours, his 
Treatise on New Philosophical Instruments , published 
in 1813, is an excellent model of the kind of resource 


Faraday’s Chemical Manipulation, p. 3. 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. l6l 

and skill of which we now speak. I may mention as 
an example of this skill, his modesof determining the 
refractive power of an irregular fragment of any trans- 
parent substance. At first this might appear an im- 
possible problem ; for it would seem that a regular and 
smooth surface are requisite, in order that we may 
have any measurable refraction. But Sir David Brew- 
ster overcame the difficulty by immersing the fragment 
in a combination of fluids, so mixed, that they had the 
same refractive power as the specimen. The question, 
when they had this power, was answered by noticing 
when the fragment became so transparent that its sur- 
face could hardly be seen; for this happened when, the 
refractive power within and without the # fragment being 
the same, there was no refraction at the surface. And this 
condition being obtain ed, the refractive power of the fluid, 
and therefore of the fragment, was easily ascertained. 

2 6. (IX.) The Education of the Senses. — Colour 

and Musical Tone are, as we have seen, determined by 
means of the Senses, whether or not Systematical Scales 
are used in expressing the observed fact. Systematical 
Scales of sensible qualities, however, not only give pre- 
cision to the record, but to the observation. But for 
this purpose such an Education of the Senses is requi- 
site as may enable us to apply the scale immediately. 
The. memory must retain the sensation or. perception 
to which the technical term or degree of the scale 
refers. Thus with regard to colour, as we have said 
already 11 , when we find such terms as tin-white or 
pinchbeck-brown , the metallic colouf so denoted ought 
to occur at once to our recollection without delay or 
search. The observer’s senses, therefore, must be edu- 
cated, at first by an actual exhibition of the standard, 
and afterwards by a familiar use of it, to understand 
readily and clearly each phrase and degree of the scales 
which in his observations he has to apply. This is not 
only the best, but in many cases the only way in which 
the observation can be expressed. Thus gtassy lustre, 
fatty* hi§tre, adamantine lustre, denote certain kinds of 


n B. viii c. Hi. Terminology. 


NOV. ORQ. 


II 



1 62 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

shining in minerals,, which appearances we should 
endeavour in vain* to describe by periphrasis; and 
which the terms, if considered as terms in common 
language, would by no means clearly discriminate : for 
who, in common language, would say that coal has a 
fatty bistre 1 But these terms, in their conventional 
sense, are perfectly definite ; and when the eye is once 
familiarized with this application of them, are easily 
and clearly intelligible. 

27. The education of the senses, which is thus 
requisite in order to understand well the terminology 
of any science, must be acquired by an inspection of 
the objects which the science deals with ; and is, per- 
haps, best promoted by the practical study of Natural 
History. In the different departments of Natural 
History, the descriptions of species are given by means 
of an extensive technical terminology : and that educa- 
tion of which we now speak, ought to produce the effect 
of making the observer as familiar with each of the terms 
of this terminology as we are with the words of our 
common language. The technical terms have a much 
more precise meaning than other terms, since they are 
defined by express convention, and not learnt by com- 
mon usage merely. Yet though they are thus defined, 
not tlie definition, but the perception itself) is that 
which the term suggests to the proficient. 

In order to use the terminology to any good pur- 
pose, the student must possess it, not as a dictionary, 
but as a language. The terminology of his sciences 
must be the natural historian’s most familiar tongue. 
He must learn to think in such language. And when 
this is achieved, the terminology, as 1 have elsewhere 
said, though to an uneducated eye cumbrous and 
pedantical, is felt to be a useful implement, not an op- 
pressive burden 12 . The impatient schoolboy looks upon 
his grammar and vocabulary as irksome and burden- 
some; but the accomplished student who has learnt 
the language by means of them, knows that they have 
given him the means of expressing what he thinks, and 


12 Hist Ind. Sc. b. xvi. c. iv. sect. 2. 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 1 63 

even of thinking more precisely. And as the study of 
language thus gives precision to the thoughts, the study 
of Natural History, and especially of the descriptive 
part of it, gives # precision to the senses. 

The Education of the Senses is also greatly pro- 
moted by the practical pursuit of any science of ex- 
periment and observation, as chemistry or astronomy. 
The methods of manipulating, of which we have just 
spoken, in chemistry, and the methods of measuring 
extremely minute portions of space and time which are 
employed in astronomy, and which are described in 
the former part of this chapter, are among the best 
modes of educating the senses for purposes of scientific 
observation. 

28. By the various Methods of precise observation 
which we have thus very briefly descitbed, facts are 
collected, of an exact and definite, kind ; they are then 
bound together in general laws, by the aid of general 
ideas and of such methods as we have now to consider. 
It is true, that the ideas which enable us to combine 
facts into general propositions, do commonly operate in 
our minds while we are still engaged in the office of 
observing. Ideas of one kind or other are requisite to 
connect our phenomena into facts, and to give mean- 
ing to the terms of our descriptions : and it frequently 
happens, that long before we have collected all the 
facts which induction requires, the mind catches the 
suggestion which some of these ideas offer, and leaps 
forwards to a conjectural law while the labour of obser- 
vation is yet unfinished. But though this actually 
occurs, it is easy to see that the process of combining 
and generalizing facts is, in the order of nature, pos- 
terior to, and distinct from, the process of observing 
facts. Not only is this so, but there is an intermediate 
step which, though inseparable from all successful 
generalization, may be distinguished from it in our 
survey ; and may, in some degree, be assisted by .pecu- 
liar methods. To the consideration of such methods 
we nojy proceed. 



CHAPTER III. 


Of Methods of acquiring clear Scientific Ideas ; 
and first of Intellectual Education. 


l Apihjrism XXIX. 

The Method : by which the acquisition of clear Scientific 
Ideas is promoted, are mainly two ; Intellectual Education 
and Discussion of Ideas. 

Aphorism XXX. 

The Idea of Space becomes more clear by studying Geo- 
metry; the Idea of Force , by studying Mechanics; the Ideas 
of Likeness, of Kind, of Subordination of Classes, by study ing 
Natural History. 


Aphorism XXXI. 

Elementary Mechanics should now form a part of intel- 
lectual education, in order that the student may understand 
the Theory of Universal Gravitation : for an intellectual 
education should cultivate such ideas as enable the student to 
understand the most complete and admirable portions of the 
knowledge which the human race has attained to . 

Aphorism XXXII. 

Natural History ought to form a part of intellectual edu- 
cation, in order to correct certain prejudices which arise from 
cultivating the intellect by means of mathematics alone; and 
in order to lead the student to see that the division of things 
into Kinds, and the attribution and use of Names, (are pro- 
cesses susceptible of great precision . 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 1 65 

T HE ways in which men become masters of those 
clear and yet comprehensive conceptions which 
the formation and reception of science require, are 
mainly two ; which, although we cannot reduce them 
to any exact scheme, we may still, in a loose use of 
the term, call Methods of acquiring clear Ideas. These 
two ways are Education and Discussion. 

1. (I.) Idea of Space. — It is easily seen that Edu- 
cation may do at least something to render our ideas 
distinct and precise. To learn Geometry in youth, 
tends, manifestly, to render our idea of space clear and 
exact. By such an education, all the relations, and all 
the consequences of this idea, .come .to be readily and 
steadily apprehended ; and thus it becoipes easy for us 
to understand portions of science which otherwise we 
should by no means be able to comprehend. The con- 
ception of similar triangles was to be mastered, before 
the disciples of Thales could f sce the validity of his 
method of determining the height of lofty objects by 
the length of their shadows. The conception .of the 
sphere with its circles had to become familiar, before 
the annual motion of the sun and its influence upon 
the lengths of days could be rightly traced. The pro- 
perties of circles, combined with the pure' doctrine of 
motion , were required as an introduction to the theory 
of Epicycles: the properties of’ conic sections were 
needed, as a preparation for the discoveries of Kepler. 
And not only was it necessary that men should possess 
a knowledge of certain figures and their properties ; but 
it was equally necessary that the^ should have the 
habit of reasonmg with perfect steadiness, precision, 
and conclusiveness concerning the relations of space. 
No small discipline of the mind is requisite, in most 
cases, to accustom it to go, with complete insight and 
security, through the demonstrations respecting inter- 
secting planes and lines, dihedral and trihedral angles, 
which occur in solid geometry. Yet how absolutely 
necessary is a perfect mastery of sqch reasonings, to 
hirujsvl^p is to explain the motions of the moon in 


1 See Hist. Sc. Ideas , b. ii. c. xiii. 



1 66 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


latitude and longitude ! How necessary, again, is the 
same faculty to the student of crystallography ! With- 
out mathematical habits of conception and of thinking, 
these portions of science are perfectly inaccessible. But 
the early study of plane and solid geometry gives to 
all tolerably gifted persons, the habits which are thus 
needed. The discipline of following the reasonings of 
didactic works on this subject, till we are quite familiar 
with them, and of devising for ourselves reasonings of 
the same kind, (as, for instance, the solutions of pro- 
blems proposed,) soon gives the mind the power of dis- 
coursing with perfect facility concerning the most 
complex and multiplied relations of space, and enables 
us to refer 'to, the properties of all plane and solid 
figures as surely as to the visible forms of objects. 
Thus we have here a signal instance of the efficacy of 
education in giving to our Conceptions that clearness, 
which the formation and existence of science indispen- 
sably require. 

2. It is not my intention here to enter into the 
details of the form which should be given to education, 
in order that it may answer the purposes now contem- 
plated. But I may make a remark, which the above 
examples naturally suggest, that in a mathematical 
education, considered as a preparation for furthering 
or understanding physical science, Geometry is to bn 
cultivated, far rather#han Algebra : — the properties of 
space are to be studied and reasoned upon as they are 
in themselves, not as they are replaced and disguised 
by symbolical representations. It is true, that when 
the student is become quite familiar with elementary 
geometry, he may often enable himself to deal in a 
more rapid and comprehensive manner with, the rela- 
tions of space, by using the language of symbols and 
the principles of symbolical calculation : but this is an 
ulterior step, which may be added to, but can never be 
substituted for, the direct cultivation of geometry. 
The method of symbolical reasoning employed upon 
subjects of geometry and mechanics, has certainly 
achieved some remarkable triumphs in the treatment 
of the theory of the universe. These successful appli- 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 1 67 

cations of symbols in tbe highest problems of physical 
astronom/ appear to have made some teachers of mathe- 
matics imagine that it is best to begin the pupil’s course 
with such symbolical generalities. But this mode of 
proceeding will be so far from giving the student clear 
ideas of mathematical relations, that it will involve 
him in utter confusion, and probably prevent his ever 
obtaining a firm footing in geometry. To commence 
mathematics in such a way, would be much as if we 
should begin the study of a language by reading the 
highest strains of its lyrical poetry. 

3. (II.) Idea of Number, < i' 6 . — The study of mathe- 
matics, as I need hardly observe, developes and renders 
exact, our conceptions of the relations of number, as 
well as of space. And although, as we have already 
noticed, even in their original form the conceptions of 
number are for the most part very distinct, they may 
be still further improved by such discipline. In com- 
plex cases, a methodical cultivation of the mind in such 
subjects is needed : for instance, questions concerning 
Cycles, and Intercalations, and Epacts, and the like, 
require very great steadiness of arithmetical apprehen- 
sion in ouder that the reasoner may deal with them 
rightly. In the same manner, a mastery of problems 
belonging to the science of Pure Motion, or, as I have 
.termed it, Mechanism, requires either great natural 
aptitude in the student, or a mind properly disci- 
plined by suitable branches of mathematical study. 

4. Arithmetic and Geometry have long been standard 
portions of the education of cultured persons through- 
out the civilized world ; and hence all such persons have 
been able to accept and comprehend those portions of 
science which depend upon the idea of space : for in- 
stance, the doctrine of the globular form of the earth, 
with its consequences, such as the measures of latitude 
and longitude; — the heliocentric system of the universe 
in modern, or the geocentric in ancient times; — the 
explanation of the rainbow ; and the like. In nations 
whgre ;l there is no such education, these portions of 
science cannot exist as a part of the general stock of 
the knowledge of society, however intelligently they 



i68 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


may be pursued by single philosophers dispersed here 
and there in the commnity. 

5. (III.) Idea of Force . — As the idea of Space is 
brought out in its full evidence by the study of Geo- 
metry, so the idea of Force is called up 'and developed 
by the study of the science of Mechanics. It has 
already been shown, in our scrutiny of the Ideas of the 
Mechanical Sciences, that Force, the Cause of motion 
or of equilibrium, involves an independent Fundamental 
Idea, and is quite incapable* of being resolved into any 
mere modification of our conceptions of space, time, 
and motion. 1 And in order that the student may pos- 
sess this idea in a precise and manifest shape, he must 
pursue the science of Mechanics in the mode which 
this view of its nature demands; — that is, he must 
study it as an independent science, resting on solid 
elementary principles of its own, and not built upon 
some other unmechanical science as its substructure. 
He must trace the truths of Mechanics from their own 
axioms and definitions ; these axioms and definitions 
being considered as merely means of bringing into 
play the Idea on which the science depends. The con- 
ceptions of fotce and matter, of action and inaction, of 
momentum and inertia, with the reasonings in which 
they are involved, cannot be evaded by any substitu- 
tion of lines or symbols for the conceptions. Any at- & 
tempts at such substitution would render the study of 
Mechanics useless as a preparation of the mind for 
physical science; and would, indeed, except counter- 
acted by great natural clearness of thought on such 
subjects, fill the mind with confused and vague notions, 
quite unavailing for any purposes of sound reasoning. 
But, on the other hand, the study of Mechanics, in its 
genuine form, as a branch of education, is fitted to give 
a most useful and valuable precision of thought on 
such subjects and is the more to be recommended, 
since, in the general habits of most men’s minds, the 
mechanical exceptions are tainted with far greater ob- 
scurity and perplexity than belongs to the conceptions 
of number, space, and motion. 

6. As habitually distinct conceptions of space and 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 1 69 

motion were requisite for the reception of the doctrines 
of formal Astronomy, (the Ptolemaic and Copernican 
system,) so a clear and steady conception of force is in- 
dispensably necessary for understanding the Newtonian 
system of physical astronomy. It may be objected 
that the study of Mechanics as a science has not 
commonly formed part of a liberal education in Euro^, 
and yet that educated persons have commonly accepted 
the Newtonian system. Put to this we reply, that al- 
though most persons of good intellectual culture have 
professed to assent to the Newtonian system of the uni- 
verse, yet they have, in fact, entertained it in so vague 
and perplexed a manner 4s to show very clearly that a 
better mental preparation^ than *the usual one is neces- 
sary, in order that such persons may really understand 
the doctrine of universal attraction. I have elsewhere 
spoken of the prevalent indistinctness of mechanical 
conceptions 2 ; and need not here dwell upon the indi- 
cations, constantly occurring in conversation and in 
literature, of the utter inaccuracy of thought on such 
subjects which may often be detected; for instancy, in 
the mode in which many men speak of centrifugal and 
centripetal forces; — of projectile and central forces;— 
of the effect of the moon upon the waters of the ocean ; 
and the like. The incoherence of ideas which we 
frequently witness on such points, shows us clearly 
that, in the minds of a great number of men, well 
educated according to the present standard, the accept- • 
ance of the doctrine of Universal Gravitation is a result 
of traditional prejudice, not? of National conviction. 
And those who are Newtonians on such grounds, are 
not at all more intellectually advanced by being New- 
tonians in the nineteenth century, than they would 
have been by" being Ptolemaics in the fifteenth. 

7. It is undoubtedly in the highest degree desirable 
that all great advances in science should become the 
common property of all cultivated men. And this can 
only be done by introducing into the course of a*liberal 
edqpatjon such studies as unfold and fix in men’s minds 


3 Htit. Sc. Ideas , b. iii. c. x. 



170 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


the fundamental ideas upon which the new-discovered 
truths rest. The progress made by the ancients in 
geography, astronomy, and other sciences, led them to 
assign, wisely and well, a place to arithmetic and geo- 
metry among the steps of an ingenuous education. The 
discoveries of modem times have rendered these steps 
sftll more indispensable ; for we cannot consider a man 
as cultivated up to the standard of his times, if he is 
not only ignorant of, but incapable of comprehending, 
the greatest achievements of the human intellect. And 
as innumerable discoveries of all ages have thus secured 
to Geometry her place as a part of good education, so 
the great discoveries of Newton make it proper to in- 
troduce Elementary Mechanics as a part of the. same 
course. If the education deserve to be called good, 
the pupil will no,t remain ignorant of those discoveries, 
the most remarkable extensions of the field of human 
knowledge which have ever occurred. Yet he cannot 
by possibility comprehend them, except his mind be 
previously disciplined by mechanical studies. The pe- 
riod appears now to be arrived when we may venture, 
or rather when we are bound to endeavour, to include 
a new class of Fundamental Ideas in the elementary 
discipline of the human intellect. This is indispensa- 
ble, if we wish to educe the powers which we know 
that it possesses, and to enrich it with the wealth which 
lies within its reach 3 . 

8. By the view which is thus presented to us of the 
nature and objects of intellectual education, we are led 
to consider the miitd of man as undergoing a progress 
from age to age. By the discoveries which are made, 
and by the clearness and evidence which, after a time, 
(not suddenly nor soon,) the truths thus discovered ac- 
quire, one portion of knowledge after another becomes 
elementary ; and if we would really secure this pro- 
gress, and make men share in it, these new portions 
must be treated as elementary in the constitution of a 


* The University of Cambridge has, tion in Elementary Mechanics requi- 
by a recent law, made an examina- site for the Degree of B.A. 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 


171 


liberal education. Even in the rudest forms of intelli- 
gence, ma& is immeasurably elevated above the unpro- 
gressive brute, for the idea of number is so far deve- 
loped that he can count his flock or his arrows. But 
when number is contemplated in a speculative form, he 
has made a vast additional progress ; when he steadily 
apprehends the relations of space, he has again ad- 
vanced; when in thought he carries these relations into 
the vault of the sky, into the expanse of the universe, 
he reaches a higher intellectual position. And when 
he carries into these wide regions, not only the rela- 
tions of space and time, but of cause and effect, of 
force and reaction, he has again made an intellectual 
advance; which, wide as it is at first, is accessible to 
all; and with which all should acquaint themselves, if 
they really desire to prosecute with energy the ascend- 
ing path of truth and knowledge which lies before 
them. This should be an object of exertion to all in- 
genuous and hopeful minds. For, that exertion is 
necessary, — that after all possible facilities have been 
afforded, i# is still a matter of toil and struggle to 
appropriate to ourselves the acquisitions of great dis- 
coverers, is not to be denied. Elementary mechanics, 
like elementary geometry, is a study accessible to all : 
but like that too, or perhaps more than that, it is a 
.study which requires effort and contention of mind, — a 
forced steadiness of thought. It is long since one com- 
plained of this labour in geometry ; and was answered ‘ 
that in that region there is no Royal Road. The same 
is true of Mechanics, and must be 'true of all branches 
of solid education. But we should express the truth 
more appropriately in our days by saying that there is 
no Popular Road to these sciences. In the mind, as 
in the body, strenuous exercise alone can give strength 
and activity. The art of exact thought can be acquired 
only by the labour of close thinking. 

9. (IV.) Chemical Ideas . — We appear then Jo have 
arrived at a point of human progress in which a liberal 
edqcatjon of the scientific intellect should include, be- 
sides Arithmetic, elementary geometry and mechanics. 



172 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


The question then occurs to us, whether there are any 
other Fundamental Ideas, among those belonging to 
other sciences, which ought also to be made part of 
such an education; — whether, for example, we should 
strive to develope in the minds of all cultured men 
the ideas of polarity , mechanical and chemical, of which 
we spoke in a former part of this work. 

The views to which we have been conducted by the 
previous inquiry lead us to reply that it would not be 
well at present to make chemical Polarities, at any 
rate, a subject of ’ elementary instruction. For even 
the most profound and acute philosophers who have 
speculated upon this subject, — they who are leading 
the van in the march of discovery, — do not seem yet 
to have reduced their thoughts on this subject to a 
consistency, or to have taken hold of this idea of Po- 
larity in a manner quite satisfactory to their own 
minds. This part of the subject is, therefore, by no 
means ready to be introduced into a course of general 
elementary education ; for, with a view to such a pur- 
pose, nothing less than the most thorough!^ luminous 
and transparent condition of the idea will suffice. Its 
whole efficacy, as a means and object of disciplinal 
study, depends upon there being no obscurity, per- 
plexity, or indefiniteness with regard to it, beyond that 
transient deficiency which at first 4 exists in the le^n-, 
er’s mind, and is to be removed by his studies. The 
idea of chemical Polarity is not yet in this condition; 
and therefore is not yet fit for a place in' education. 
Yet since this idea 6f Polarity is the most general idea 
which enters into chemistry, and > appears to be that 
which includes almost all the others, it would be un- 
philosophical, and inconsistent with all sound views of 
science, to introduce into education some chemical 
conceptions, and to omit those which depend upon this 
idea : indeed such a partial adoption of the science 
could hardly take place without not only omitting, but 
misrepresenting, a ^reat part of > our chemical know- 
ledge. The conclusion to which we are necessarily 
led, therefore, is this: — that at present chemistry can- 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 1 73 

not with any advantage, form a portion of the general 
intellectual education 4 . 

10. (Y.) Natural-History Ideas . — But there re- 

mains still another class of Ideas, with regard to 
which we may very properly ask whether they may 
not advantageously form a portion of a liberal educa- 
tion : I mean the Ideas of definite Resemblance and 
Difference, and of one set of resemblances subordinate 
to another, which form the bases of the classificatory 
sciences. These Ideas are developed by the study of 
the various branches of Natural History, as Botany, 
and Zoology; and beyond all doubt, those pursuits, if 
assiduously followed, very materially affect the mental 
habits. There is this obvious advantage to be looked 
for from' -the study of Natural History, considered as 
a means of intellectual discipline : — that it gives us, in 
a precise and scientific form, examples of the classing 
and naming of objects; which operations the use of 
common language leads us constantly to perform in a 
loose and inexact • way. In the usual habits of our 
minds and tongues, things are distinguished or brought 
together, and names are applied, in a manner very in- 
definite, vacillating, and seemingly capricious : and we 
may naturally be led to doubt whether such defects 
can be avoided; — whether exact distinctions of things, 
and rigorous use of words be possible. Now upon this 
point we may receive the instruction of Natural His- 
tory ; which proves to us, by the actual performance of 
the task, that a precise classification and nomenclature 
are attainable, at least for a mass $f objects all of the 
same kind. Further, we also learn from this ' study, 
that there may exist, not only an exact distinction of 
kinds of things,! but a Series of distinctions, one set 
subordinate to another, and the more general including 


4 1 do not here &op to prove that fore cannot even understand the 

an education (if it lie so called) in words in which its doctrines are ex- 

which the memory only retains the pressed,^ of no value whatever to 

verbal Repression of results, while the intellect, but rather, is highly 

the mind does not apprehend the hurtful to the habits of thinking and 

principles of the subjeot, and there* reasoning. 



174 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

the more special, so as to form a system of classifica- 
tion. All these are valuable lessons. If by^the study 
of Natural History we evolve, in -a clear and well de- 
fined form, the conceptions of genus , species, and of 
higher and lower steps of classification, f we communi- 
cate precision, clearness, and method to the intellect, 
through a great range of its operations. 

11. It must be observed, that in order to attain the 
disciplinal benefit which the study of Natural History 
is fitted to bestow, we must teach the natural not the 
artificial classifications ; or at least the natural as well 
as the artificial. For it is important for the student to 
perceive that there are classifications, not merely arbi- 
trary, founded upon some assumed character, but na- 
tural, recognized by some discovered character : he ought 
to see that our classes being collected according to one 
mark, are confirmed by many marks not originally stated 
in our scheme; and are thus found to be grouped 
together, not by a single resemblance, but by a mass of 
resemblances, indicating a natural affinity. That ob- 
jects may be collected into such groups, is a highly im- 
portant lesson, which Natural History alone, pursued 
as the science of natural classes , can teach. 

12 . Natural History has not unfrequently been 
made a portion of education : and has in some degree 
produced such effects as we have pointed out. It 
would appear, however, that its lessons have, for the 
most part, been very imperfectly learnt or understood 
by persons of ordinary education : and that there are 
perverse intellectuasl habits very commonly prevalent 
in the cultivated classes, which ought ere now to have 
been corrected by the general teaching of Natural 
History. We may detect among speculative men 
many prejudices respecting the nature and rules of 
reasoning, which arise from pure mathematics having 
been so long and so universally the instrument of in- 
tellectual cultivation. Pure Mathematics reasons from 
definitibns : whatever term is introduced into her 
pages, as a circle , oi^a square, its definition comes along 
with it : and this definition is supposed to supply all 
that the reasoner needs to know, respecting the term. 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 


175 


If there be any doubt concerning the validity of the 
conclusion,# the doubt is resolved by recurring to the 
definitions. Hence it has come to pass that in other 
subjects also, men seek for and demand definitions as 
the most secure foundation of reasoning. The defini- 
tion and the term defined are conceived to be so far 
identical, that in all cases the one may be substituted 
•for tjie other; and such a substitution is held to be 
the best mode of detecting fallacies. 

13. Jt has already been shown that even geometry 
is not founded upon definitions alone: and we shall 
not here again analyse the fallacy ef this belief in the 
supreme value of definitions. But we may remark 
that the study of Natural History Appears to be the 
proper remedy for this erroneous habit oT thought. For 
in every department of Natural History the object of 
our study is kinds of things, not one of which kinds 
can be rigorously defined, yet all of them are suffi- 
ciently definite. In these cases we may indeed give a 
specific description of one of the kinds, and may call it 
a definition; but it is clear that such a definition does 
not contain the essence of the tiling. We say 5 that the 
Bose Tribe are ‘ Polypetalous dicotyledons, with lateral 
styles, superior simple ovaria, regular perigynous sta- 
mens, exalbuminous definite seeds, and alternate stipu- 
late leaves/ But no one would say that this was our 
essential conception of a rose, to be substituted for it 
in all cases of doubt or obscurity, by way of making 
our reasonings perfectly clear. Not only so; but as 
we • have already seen 6 , the definitkm does not even 
apply to all the tribe. For the stipulse are absent in 
Lowea : the albumen is present in Neillia : the fruit of 
Spiraea sorbifolia is capsular. If, then, we can possess 
any certain knowledge in Natural History, (which no 
cultivator of the subject will doubt,) it is evident that 
our knowledge cannot depend on the possibility of lay- 
ing down exact definitions and reasoning from them. 

14. But it may be asked, if we cannot define a 


5 Lindley’s Nat Syst. Bot. p. 81. 

* Hist. Sc. Ideas , b. viii. c. ii. sect. 3. 



1 76 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

word, or a class of things which a word denotes, how 
can we distinguish what it does mean from what it 
does not mean 1 How can we say that it signifies one 
thing rather than another, except we declare what is 
its signification ? 

The answer to this question involves the general 
principle of a natural method of plassification, which 
has already been stated 7 and need not here be again 
dwelt on. It has been shown that names of kinds of 
things {genera) associate them according to total re- 
semblances, not partial characters. The principle 
which connects a group of objects in natural history is 
not a definition, but a type. Thus we take as the type 
of the Rose family, it may be, the common wild rose; 
all species which resemble this flower more than they 
resemble any other group of species are also roses , and 
form one genus . All genera which resemble Roses 
more than they resemble any other group of genera 
are of the same family. And thus the Rose family 
is collected about some one species, which is the type 
or central point of the group. 

In such an arrangement, it may readily be conceived 
that though the nucleus of each group may cohere 
firmly together, the outskirts of contiguous groups 
may approach, and may even be intermingled, so that 
some species may doubtfully adhere to one group or 
another. Yet this uncertainty does not at all affect 
the truths which we find ourselves enabled to assert 
with regard to the general mass of each group. And 
thus we are taughu that there may be very important 
differences between two groups of objects, although we 
are unable to tell where the one group ends and where 
the other begins; and that there may be propositions 
of indisputable truth, in which it is impossible to give 
unexceptionable definitions of the terms employed. 

15. These lessons are of the highest value with 
regard to all employments of the human mind ; for the 
mode 'in which words in common use acquire their 
meaning, approaches far more nearly to the Method of 


7 Hist. Sc. Ideas , b. viiL c. ii. sect. 3. 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 


1 77 


Type than to the method of definition. The terms 
which bettmg to our practical concerns, or to our spon- 
taneous and unscientific speculations, are rarely capable 
of exact definition. They have been devised in order 
to express assertions, often very important, yet very 
vaguely conceived: and the signification of the word is 
extended, as far as the assertion conveyed by it can be 
* extended, by apparent connexion or by analogy. And 
thus, in all the attempts of man to grasp at knowledge, 
we have an exemplification of that which we have 
stated as the rule of induction, that Definition and 
Proposition are mutually dependent, each adjusted so 
as to give value and meaning to th^ other : and this is 
so, even when both the elements of trufh are defective 
in precision : the Definition being replaced by an in- 
complete description or a loose reference to a Type; 
and the Proposition being in a corresponding degree 
insecure. 

1 6. Thus the study of Natural History, as a cor- 
rective of the belief tha^ definitions are essential to 
substantial truth, might be of great use ; and the ad- 
vantage which might thus be obtained is such as well 
entitles this study to a place in a liberal education. 
We may further observe, that in order that Natural 
History may produce such an effect, it must be studied 
by inspection of the objects themselves, and not by the 
reading of books only. Its lesson is, that we must in 
all cases of doubt or obscurity refer, not to words or 
definitions, but to things. The Book of Nature is its 
dictionary : it is there that the natural historian looks, 
to find the meaning of the words which he uses 8 . So 


8 It is a curious example of the 
influence of the belief in definitions, 
that elementary books have been 
written in which Natural History is 
taught in the way of question and 
answer, and consequently by means of 
word; alojte. In such a scheme, of 
course all objects are defined: and we 
may easily anticipate the value of 
nov. qpg. 


the knowledge thus conveyed. Thus, 
‘Iron is a well-known hard metal, of 
a darkish gray colour, and very elas- 
tic:’ ‘Copper is an orange-coloured 
metal, more sonorous than cay other, 
and the ny>sfc elastic of any except 
iron.’ This is to pervert the meaning 
of education, and to make it a busi- 
ness of mere words. 


12 



I78 FORMATION OV SCIENCE. 

long as a plant, in its most essential parts, is more like 
a rose than any thing else, it is a rose. He fenows no 
other definition. 

1 7. (VI.) Well-established IdeajS alone to be used . — 
We may assert in general what we have* elsewhere, as 
above, stated specially with reference to the fundamental 
principles of chemistry : — no Ideas are suited to become 
the elements of elementary education, till they have not 
only become perfectly distinct and fixed in the minds 
of the leading cultivators of the science to which they 
belong ; but till they have been so for some considerable 
period. The entire clearness and steadiness of view 
which is essential tp sound science, must have time to 
extend itself to t a wide circle of disciples. The views 
and principles which are detected by the most profound 
and acute philosophers, are soon appropriated by all the 
most intelligent and active minds of their own and of 
the following generations; and when this has taken 
place, (and not till then,) it is right, by a proper con- 
stitution of our liberal education, to extend a general 
knowledge of such principles to all cultivated persons. 
And it follows, from this view of the matter, that we 
are by no means to be in haste to adopt, into our 
course of education, all new discoveries as soon as they 
are made. They require some time, in order to settle 
into their proper place and position in men’s minds, 
and to show themselves under their true aspects; and 
till this is done, we confuse and disturb, rather than 
enlighten and unfold, the ideas of learners, by intro- 
ducing the discoveries into our elementary instruction. 
Hence it was perhaps reasonable that a century should 
elapse from the time of Galileo, before the rigorous 
teaching of Mechanics became a general element of in- 
tellectual training; and the doctrine of Universal Gra- 
vitation was hardly ripe for such an employment till 
the end of the last century. We must not direct the 
unforiped youthful mind to launch its little bark upon 
the waters of speculation, till all the agitation of dis- 
covery, with its consequent fluctuation and contro- 
versy, has well subsided. 

18. But it may be asked, How is it that time ope^ 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 1 79 

rates to give distinctness and evidence to scientific 
ideas? 2n what way does it happen that views and 
principles, obscure and wavering at first, after a while 
become luminous and steady ? Can we point out any 
process, any intermediate steps, by which this result is 
produced? If we can, this process must be an impor- 
tant portion of the subject now under our consideration. 

To this we reply, that the transition from the hesi- 
tation and contradiction with which true ideas are first 
received, to the general assent and clear apprehension 
which they afterwards obtain, takes place through 
the circulation of various arguments for and against 
them, and various modes of presenting and testing 
them, all which we may include under the term Dis- 
cussion, which we have already mentioned as the 
second of the two ways by which scientific views are 
developed into full maturity. 


12—2 



CHAPTER IV. 


Of Methods of acquiring clear Scientific Ideas, 
continued. — Of the Discussion of Ideas. 


Aphorism XXXIII. 

The conceptions involved in scientific truths have attained 
the requisite degree of clearness by means of the Discussions 
respecting ideas which have taken place among discoverers 
and their followers. Such discussions are very far from 
being unprofitable to science . They are metaphysical, and 
must be so: the difference between discoverers and barren 
reasoners is, that the former employ good, and the latter bad 
metaphysics. 

i. TT is easily seen that in every part of science, the 

X establishment of a new set of ideas has been ac- 
companied with much of doubt and dissent. And by 
means of discussions so occasioned, the new conoep-. 
tions, and the opinions which involve them, have gra 1 
dually become definite and clear. The authors and 
asserters of the ne^ opinions, in order to make them 
defensible, have been compelled to. make them consist- 
ent: in order to recommend them to others, they have 
been obliged to make them more entirely intelligible 
to themselves. And thus the Terms which formed the 
main points of the controversy, although applied in a 
loose and vacillating manner at first, have in the end 
become perfectly definite and exact. The opinions dis- 
cussed c have been, in their main features, the same 
throughout the debate; but they have at first been 
dimly, and at last clearly apprehended : like the .objects 
of a landscape, at which we look through a telescope 
ill adjusted, till, by sliding the tube backwards and 



DISCUSSION OF IDEAS. l8l 

forwards, we at last bring it into focus, and perceive 
every feature of the prospect sharp and bright. 

2. We have in the last Book 1 fully exempli- 
fied this gradual progress of conceptions from obscu- 
rity to clearness by means of Discussion. We have 
seen, too, that this mode of treating the subject has 
never been successful, except when it has been asso- 
ciated with an appeal to facts as well as to reasonings. 
A combination of experiment with argument, of ob- 
servation with demonstration, has always been found 
requisite in order that men should arrive at those dis- 
tinct conceptions which give them substantial truths. 
The arguments used led to the rejection of undefined, 
ambiguous,, self-contradictory notion^; but the refer- 
ence to facts led to the selection, or at least to the re- 
tention, of the conceptions which were both true and 
usefill. The two correlative processes, definition and 
true assertion, the formation of clear ideas and the in- 
duction of laws, went on together. 

Thus those discussions by which scientific concep- 
tions are rendered ultimately quite distinct and fixed, 
include both reasonings from Principles and illustra- 
tions from Facts. At present we turn -our attention 
more peculiarly to the former part of the process; ac- 
cording to the distinction already drawn, between the 
, Explication of Conceptions and the Colligation of Facts. 
The Discussions of which we here speak, are the Me- 
thod (if they may be called a method) by which the 
Explication of Conceptions is carried to the requisite 
point among philosophers. 

3. In the History of the Fundamental Ideas of the 
Sciences which forms the Prelude to this work, and 
in the History of the Inductive Sciences, I have, in 
several instances, traced the steps by which, histori- 
cally speaking, these Ideas have obtained their ulti- 
mate and permanent place in the minds of speculative 
men. I have thus exemplified the reasonings apd con- 
troversies which constitute such Discussion as we now 
sppak # of. I have stated, at considerable length, the 


1 B. i. c. iL Of the Explication of Conceptions. 



182 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


various attempts, failures, and advances, by which the 
ideas which enter into the science of Mechanics were 
evolved into their present evidence. In like manner 
we have seen the conception of refracted rays of light, 
obscure and confused in Seneca, growing clearer in 
Roger Bacon, more definite in Descartes, perfectly dis- 
tinct in Newton. The 'polarity of light, at first con- 
templated with some perplexity, became very distinct 
to Malus, Young, and Fresnel; yet the phenomena of 
circular polarization , and still more, the circular pola- 
rization of fluids , leave us, even at present, some dif- 
ficulty in fully mastering this conception. The related 
polarities of electricity and magnetism are not yet 
fully comprehended, even by our greatest philosophers. 
One of Mr. Faraday’s late papers (the Fourteenth Se- 
ries of his Researches) is employed in an experimental 
discussion of this subject, which leads to no satisfactory 
result. The controversy between MM. Biot and Am- 
pere 2 , on the nature of the Elementary Forces in elec- 
tro-dynamic action, is another evidence that the discus- 
sion of* this* subject has not yet reached its termination. 
With regard to chemical polarity , I have already stated 
that this idea is as yet very far from being brought to 
an ultimate condition of definiteness; and the subject 
of Chemical Forces, (for that whole subject must be in- 
cluded in this idea of polarity,) which has already t oc-. 
casioned much perplexity and controversy, may easily 
occasion* much more, before it is settled to the satis- 
faction of the philosophical world. The ideas of the 
classiflcatory sciences also have of late been undergoing 
much, and very instructive discussion, in the contro- 
versies respecting the relations and offices of the na- 
tural and artificial methods. And with regard to phy- 
siological ideas, it would hardly be too much to say, 
that the whole history of physiology up to the present 
time has consisted of the discussion of the fundamental 
ideas of the science, such as Yital Forces, Nutrition, 
Reproduction, and^the like. We had before us at 
some length, in the History of Scientific Ideas , a review 


* Hist. Ind. Sc. b. xiii c. 6. 



DISCUSSION OF IDEAS. 


183 

of the opposite opinions which have been advanced 
on this subject; and we attempted in some degree to 
estimate the direction in which these ideas are perma- 
nently settling. But without attaching any importance 
to this attempt, the account there given may at least 
serve to show, how important a share in the past pro- 

f ress of this subject the discussion of its Fundamental 
deas has hitherto had. 

4. There is one reflexion which is very pointedly 
suggested by what has been said. The manner in 
which our scientific ideas acquire their distinct and 
ultimate form being such as has been described, — 
always involving much abstract reasoning and analysis 
of our conceptions, often much opposite argumentation 
and debate; — how unphilosophical is it to speak of 
abstraction and analysis, of dispute and controversy, as 
frivolous and unprofitable processes, by which true 
science can never be benefitted; and how erroneous 
to put such employments in antithesis with the study 
of facts! 

Yet some writers are accustomed to talk with con- 
tempt of all past controversies, and to wonder at the 
blindness of those who did not at first take the view 
which was established at last . Such persons forget 
that it was precisely the controversy, which established 
, air^ong speculative men that final doctrine which they 
themselves have quietly accepted. It is true, they 
have had no difficulty in thoroughly adopting the’ 
truth; but that has occurred because all dissentient 
doctrines have been suppressed and forgotten ; and be- 
cause systems, and books, and language itself, have 
been accommodated peculiarly to the expression of 
the accepted truth. To despise those who have, by 
their mental struggles and conflicts, brought the sub- 
ject into a condition in which err our is almost out of 
our reach, is to be ungrateful exactly in proportion to 
the amount of the benefit received. It is .as if a child, 
when its teacher had with many trials and* much 
trouble prepared a telescope so that the vision through 
it was distinct, should wonder at his stupidity in push- 
ing the tube of the eye-glass out and in so often. 



1 84 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

g. Again, some persons condemn all that we have 
here spoken of as the discussion of ideas, terming it 
metaphysical: and in this spirit, one writer 3 has 
spoken of the ' ‘ metaphysical period’ of each science, 
as preceding the period of ‘ positive knowledge/ , But 
as we have seen, that process which is here termed 
c metaphysical,’ — the analysis of our conceptions anjd 
the exposure of their inconsistencies, — (accompanied 
with the study of facts,) — has always gone on most 
actively in the most prosperous periods of each science. 
There is, in Galileo, Kepler, Gassendi, and the other 
fathers of mechanical philosophy, as much of meta- 
physics as in their adversaries. The main difference 
is, that the metaphysics is of a better kind ; it is more 
conformable to metaphysical truth. And the same is 
the case in other sciences. Nor can it be otherwise. 
For all truth, before it can be consistent with /acts, 
must be consistent with itself: and although this rule 
is of undeniable authority, its application is often far 
from easy. The perplexities and ambiguities which 
arise from our having the same idea presented to us 
under different aspects, are often difficult to disen- 
tangle: and no common acuteness and steadiness of 
thought must be expended on the task. It would be 
easy to adduce, from the works of all great discoverers, 
passages more profoundly metaphysical than any which, 
are to be found in the pages of barren a priori reasoners. 

6. As we have said, these metaphysical discussions 
are not to be put in opposition to the study of facts ; 
but are to be stimulated, nourished and directed by a 
constant recourse to experiment and observation. The 
cultivation of ideas is to be conducted as having for 
its object the connexion of facts ; never to- be pursued 
as a mere exercise of the subtil ty of the mind, striving 
to build up a world of its own, and neglecting that 
which exists about us. For although man may in this 
way please himself, and admire the creations of his 
own brain, he can never, by this course, hit upon the 


1 M. Auguste Comte, Cours de Philosophic Positive. 



DISCUSSION OF IDEAS. 


185 

real scheme of nature; With his ideas unfolded by 
education, Iharpened by controversy, rectified by meta- 
physics, he may understand the natural world, but he 
cannot invent i^ At every step, he must try the value 
of the advances he has made in thought, by applying 
his thoughts to things. The Explication of Concep- 
tions must be carried on with a perpetual reference to 
'the Colligation of Facts. 

Having here treated of Education and Discussion as 
the methods by which the former of these two pro- 
cesses is to be promoted, we have now to explain the 
methods which science employs in order most success- 
fully to execute the latter. But ^he Colligation of 
Facts, as already stated, may offer to two steps of 
a very different kind, — the laws of Phenomena,- and 
their Causes. We shall first describe some of the 
methods employed in obtaining truths of the former of 
these two kinds. 



CHAPTER V. 


Analysis of the Process of Induction. 


Aphorism XXXIV.* 

The Process of Induction may be resolved into three steps; 
the Selection of the Idea, the Construction of the Concep- 
tion, and the Determination of the Magnitudes. 

Aphorism XXXY. 

These three steps correspond to the determination of the 
Independent Variable, the Formula, and the Coefficients, 
in mathematical investigations; or to the Argument, the 
Law, and the Numerical Data, in a Table of an astrono- 
mical or other Inequality. 

Aphorism XXXYI. 

The Selection of the Idea depends mainly upon inventive 
sagacity: which operates by suggesting and trying various 
hypotheses . Some inquirers try erroneous hypotheses; and 
thus , exhausting the forms of errour , form the Prelude to 
Discovery . 

Aphorism XXXVII. 

The following Rules may be given , in order to the selection 
of the Idea for purposes of Induction: — the Idea and the 
Facts must be homogeneous; and the Rule must be tested 
by the Facts. 

Sect. I. — The Three Steps of Induction. 

i. "VXTHEN facts have been decomposed and phe- 
? f noinena measured, the philosopher endea- 
vours to combine them into general laws, by the aid of 



ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. 1 87 

Ideas and Conceptions ; these being illustrated and re- 
gulated by fuch means as we have spoken of in the last 
two chapters. In this task, of gathering laws of nature 
from observed facts, as we have already said 1 , the na- 
tural sagacity of gifted minds is the power by which 
the greater part of the successful results have been 
obtained ; and this power will probably always be more 
efficacious than any Method can be. Still there are 
certain methods of procedure which may, in such in- 
vestigations, give us no inconsiderable aid, and these I 
shall endeavour to expound. 

2. For this purpose, I remark that the Colligation 
of ascertained Facts into general Propositions may be 
considered as containing three steps, which I shall 
term the Selection of the Idea , the Construction of the 
Conception , and the Determination of the Magnitudes . 
It will be recollected that by the word Idea , (or Funda- 
mental Idea,) used in a peculiar sense, I mean certain 
wide and general fields of intelligible relation, such as 
Space, Number, Cause, Likeness; while by Conception 
I denote more special modifications of these ideas, as a 
circle , a square number , a uniform force , a like form of 
flower. Now in order to establish any law by reference 
to facts, we must select the true Idea and the true 
Conception . For example; when Hipparchus found 2 
tfyat the distance of the bright star Spica Yirginis from 
the equinoxial point had increased by two degrees in 
about two hundred years, and desired to reduce this 
change to a law, he had first to assign/ if possible’ the 
idea on which it depended ; — whethdfc it was regulated 
for instance, by space , or by time; whether it was de- 
termined by the positions of other stars at each mo- 
ment, or went on progressively with the lapse of ages. 
And when there was found reason to select time as the 
regulative idea of this change, it was then to be deter- 
mined how the change went on with the time; — 
whether uniformly, or in some other manner : th^bw- 
ception , or the rule of the progression, was £0 be 


1 B. il c. vi. 

3 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. iii. c. iv. sect 3. 



1 88 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

rightly constructed. Finally, it being ascertained that 
the change did go on uniformly, the question then 
occurred what was its amount : — whether exactly a 
degree in a century, or more, or less, and how much : 
and thus the determination of the magnitude com- 
pleted the discovery of the law of phenomena respect- 
ing this star. 

3. Steps similar to these three may be discerned 
in all other discoveries of laws of nature. Thus, in 
investigating the laws of the motions of the sun, moon 
or planets, we find that these motions may be resolved, 
besides a uniform' motion, into a series of partial mo- 
tions, or Inequalities ; and for each of these Inequalities, 
we have to learn upon what it directly depends, whe- 
ther upon the progress of time only, or upon some con- 
figuration of the heavenly bodies in space ; then, we have 
to ascertain its law ; and finally, we have to determine 
what is its amount. In the case of such Inequalities, 
the fundamental element on which the Inequality de- 
pends, is called by mathematicians the Argument. And 
when the Inequality has been fully reduced to known 
rules, and expressed in the form of a Table, the Argu- 
ment is the fundamental Series of Numbers which 
stands in the margin of the Table, and by means of 
which we refer to the other Numbers which express 
the Inequality. Thus, in order to obtain from a .Solar 
Table the Inequality of the sun’s annual motion, the 
Argument is the Number which expresses the day of 
the year; the Inequalities for each day being (in the 
Table) ranged in' a line corresponding to the days. 
Moreover, the Argument of an Inequality being as- 
sumed to be known, we must, in order to calculate the 
Table, that is, in order to exhibit the law of nature, 
know also the Law of the Inequality, and its Amount 
And the investigation of these three things, - the Argu- 
ment, the Law,* and the A mount of the Inequality, 
repIPlents . the three steps above described, the Selec- 
tion of the Idea, the Construction of the Conception, 
and the Determination of the Magnitude. 

4. In a great body of cases, matheijiatical language 
and calculation are used to express the connexion be- 



ANALYSIS OF ^HE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. 1 89 

tween the general law and the special facts. And when 
this is don 1, the three steps above described may be 
spoken of as the Selection of the Independent Variable , 
the Cpnstruction of the Formula, and the Determina- 
tion of the Coefficients. It may be worth our while to 
attend to an exemplification of this. Suppose then, 
that, in such observations as we have just spoken of, 
ftamely, the shifting of a star from its place in the 
heavens by an unknown law, astronomers had, at the 
end of three successive years, found that the star had 
removed by 3, by 8, and by 15 minutes from its ori- 
ginal place. Suppose it to be ascertained also, by 
methods of which we shall hereafter treat, that this 
change depends upon the time; we must then take the 
time , (which we may denote by the symbol t,) for the 
independent variable. But though the star changes 
its place with the time, the change is not proportional 
to the time; for its motion which is only 3 minutes in 
the first year, is 5 minutes in the second year, and 7 
ill the third. But it is not difficult for a person a little 
versed in mathematics to perceive that the series 3, 8, 
15, may be obtained by means of two terms, one of 
which is proportional to the time, and the other to the 
square of the time ; that is, it is expressed by the for- 
mula at + bit. The question then occurs, what are the 
v^luqs of the coefficients a and b; and a little examina- 
tion of the case shows us that a must be 2, and b, 1 : 
so that the formula is 2 t + tt. Indeed if we add to- 
gether the series 2, 4, 6, which expresses a change 
proportional to the time, and 1, 4, 9* which is propor- 
tional to the square of the time, we obtain the series 
3, 8, 1 5, which is the series of numbers given by obser- 
vation. And thus the three steps which give us the 
Idea, the Conception, and the Magnitudes ; or the 
Argument, the Law, and the Amount, of the change; 
give us the Independent Variable, the Formula, and 
the Coefficients, respectively. 

We now proceed to offer some suggestions of methods 
by which each of these steps may be in some degree 
promoted. 



FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


I90 


Sect. II . — Of the Selection of the Fundamental Idea , 

5. When we turn ^>ur thoughts upon any assem- 
blage of facts, with a view of collecting from them 
some connexion or law, the most important step, and 
at the same time that in which rules can least aid us, is 
the Selection of the Idea by which they are to be 
collected. So long as this idea has not been detected, 
all seems to be hopeless confusion or insulated facts ; 
when the connecting idea has been caught sight of, we 
constantly regard the facts with reference to their 
connexion, and wonder that it should be possible for 
any one to consider them in any other point of view. 

Thus the different seasons, and the various aspects 
of the heavenly bodies, might at first appear to be 
direct manifestations from some superior power, which 
man could not even understand : but it was soon found 
that the ideas of time and space, of motion and recur- 
rence, would give coherency to many of the pheno- 
mena. Yet this took place by successive steps. Eclipses, 
for a long period, seemed to follow no law; and being 
very remarkable events, continued to be deemed the 
indications of a supernatural will, after the common 
motions of the heavens were seen to be governed by 
relations of time and space. At length, however^ the 
Chaldeans discovered that, after a period of eighteen 
years, similar sets of eclipses recur ; and, thus selecting 
the idea of time; simply, as that to which these events 
were to be referred, they were able to reduce them to 
rule ; and from that time, eclipses were recognized as 
parts of a regular order of things. We may, in the 
same manner, consider any other course of events, and 
may enquire by what idea they are bound together. 
For example, if we take the weather, years peculiarly 
wet or dry, hot and cold, productive and unproductive, 
follow each other in a manner which, at first sight at 
least, *seems utterly lawless and irregular. Now can we 
in any way discover some rule and order in these 
occurrences? Is there, for example, in these ’ events, 
as in eclipses, a certain cycle of years, after which like 



ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. 39I 

seasons come round again? or does the weather depend 
upon the foj-ce of some extraneous body — for instance, 
the moon— and follow in some way her aspects? or 
would the most proper way of investigating this subject 
be to consider the effect of the moisture and heat of 
various tracts of the earths surface upon the ambient 
air ? It is at our choice to try these and other modes 
#f obtaining a science of the weather : that is, we may 
refer the phenomena to the idea of time, introducing 
the conception of a cycle ; — or to the idea of external 
force , by the conception of the moon’s action ; — or to the 
idea of mutual action , introducing the conceptions of 
thermotical and atmological agencies, operating between 
different regions of earth, water, and Sir. 

6 . It may be asked, How are we to decide in such 
alternatives ? How are we to select the one right idea 
out of several conceivable ones? To which we can only 
reply, that this must be done by trying which will suc- 
ceed. If there really exist a cycle of the weather, as 
well as of eclipses, this must be established by comparing 
the asserted cycle with a good register of the seasons, 
of sufficient extent. Or if the moon really influence 
the meteorological conditions of the air, the asserted 
influence must be compared with the observed facts, 
and so accepted or rejected. When Hipparchus had 
observed the increase of longitude of the stars, the idea 
of* a motion of the celestial sphere suggested itself as 
the explanation of the change; but this thought was 
verified only by observing several star*. It was con- 
ceivable that each star should have> an independent 
motion, governed by time only, or by other circum- 
stances, instead of being regulated by its place in the 
sphere; and this possibility could be rejected by trial 
alone. In like manner, the original opinion of the 
composition of bodies supposed the compounds to derive 
their properties from the elements according to the law 
of likeness ; but this opinion was overturned by a 
thousand facts; and thus the really applicable ’Idea 
of Chemical Composition was introduced in modern 
timeS. 'In what has already been said on the Histoiy 
of Ideas, we have seen how each science was in a state 



192 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


of confusion and darkness till the right idea was in- 
troduced. j 

7. No general method of evolving such ideas can be 
given. Such events appear to result from a peculiar 
sagacity and felicity of mind; — never ‘without labour, 
never without preparation 1 %et with no constant de- 
pendence upon preparation, or upon labour, or even 
entirely upon personal endowments. Newton explained 
the colours which refraction produces, by referring 
each colour to a peculiar angle of refraction , thus intro- 
ducing the right idea. But when the same philosopher 
tried to explain the colours produced by diffraction, he 
erred, by attempting to apply the same idea, (the course 
of a single ray,) instead of applying the truer idea, of 
the interference of two rays. Newton gave a wrong 
rule for the double refraction of Iceland spar, by. 
making the refraction* depend on the edges oi the rhom- 
bohedron: Huyghens, more happy, introduced the 
idea of the axis of symmetry of the solid, and thus was 
able to give the true law of the phenomena. 

8. Although the selected idea is proved to be the 
right one, only when the true law of nature is esta- 
blished by means of it, yet it often happens that there 
prevails a settled conviction respecting the relation 
which must afford the key to the phenomena, before 
the selection has been confirmed by the laws to which 
it leads. Even before the empirical laws of the' tides 
were made’ out, it was not doubtful dihat these laws 
depended upon ‘die places and motions of the sun and 
moon. We know that the crystalline form of a body 
must depend upon its chemical composition, though 
we are as yet unable to assign the law of this de- 
pendence. 

Indeed in most cases of great discoveries, the right 
idea to which the facts were to be referred, was se- 
lected by many philosophers, before the decisive demon- 
stration that it was the right idea, was given by the 
discoverer. Thus Newton showed that the motions of 
the planets might 1 be explained by means of a central 
force in the sun : but though he established, he* did not 
first select the idea involved in the conception of a 



ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. I93 

central force. The idea had already been sufficiently 
pointed c&it, dimly by Kepler, more clearly by Borelli, 
Huyghens, Wren, and Hooke. Indeed this anticipa- 
tion of the trap idea is alway# a principal part of that 
which, in the History of the Sciences, we have termed 
the Prelude of a Discovery. The two steps of propos- 
ing a philosophical problem, and of solving it, are, as 
we have elsewhere said, both important, and are often 
performed by different persons. The former step is, in 
fact, the Selection of the Idea. In explaining any 
change, we have to discover first the Argument, and 
then the Law of the change. The selection of the 
Aigument is the step of which we Jiere speak ; and is 
that in which inventiveness of mind |ind justness of 
thought are mainly shown. 

9. Although, as we have s%id, we can give few pre- 
cise directions for this cardinal process, the Selection of 
the Idea, in speculating on phenomena, yet there is 
one Rule which may have its use : it is this : — The idea 
and the facts must be homogeneous: the elementary 
Conceptions, into which the facts have been decom- 
posed, must be of the same nature as the Idea by 
which we attempt to collect them into laws. Thus, if 
facts have been observed and measured by reference to 
space, they must be bound together by the idea of 
space : if we would obtain a knowledge pf mechanical 
forces in the solar system, we must observe mechanical 
phenomena. Kepler erred against ^this rule in his 
attempts at obtaining physical laws of the' system ; for 
the facts which he took were the‘ velocities, not the 
changes of velocity, which are really the mechanical 
facts. Again, there has been a transgression of this 
Rule committed by all chemical philosophers who have 
attempted to assign the relative position of the ele- 
mentary particles of bodies in their component mole- 
cules. For their purpose has been to discover the 
relations of the particles in space; and yet th$y have 
neglected the only facts in the constitution of bodies 
wl$ch # have a reference to space — namely, crystalline 
form, and optical properties . No progress can be made 
in the theory of the elementary structure of bodies, 
NOV. OPfi. 13 



FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


194 

without making these classes of facts the main basis of 
our speculations. 

10. The only other Rule which I have to offer on 
this subject, is that whi«h I have already given : — the 
Idea must be tested by 'the facts. It must .be tried by 
applying to the facts the conceptions which are derived 
from the idea, and not accepted till some of these suc- 
ceed in giving the law of the phenomena. The justice 
of the suggestion cannot be known otherwise than by 
making the trial. If we can discover a true law by 
employing any conceptions, the idea from which these 
conceptions are derived is the right one ; nor can there 
be any proof of its rightness so complete and satisfac- 
tory, as that wp are by it led to a solid and permanent 
truth. 

This, however, can Jiardly be termed a Rule; for 
when we would know, to conjecture and to try the 
truth of our conjecture by a comparison with the facts, 
is the natural and obvious dictate of common sense. 

Supposing the Idea which we adopt, or which we 
would try, to be now fixed upon, we still have before 
us the range of many Conceptions derived from it; 
many Formulae may be devised depending on the same 
Independent Yariable, and we must 110V consider how 
our selection among these is to be made. 



CHAPTER VI. 

General Rules for the Construction of the 
Concetti on. 


Aphorism XXXVIII. 

The Construction of ike Conception very tflen includes , in 
a great Measure, the Determination of the Magnitudes. 

Aphorism XXXIX. 

When a series of progressive numbers is given as the 
result of observation , it may generally be reduced to law by 
combinations of arithmetical and geometrical progressions . 

Aphorism XL. 

A true formula for a progressive series of numbers cannot 
commonly be obtained from a narrow range of observations. 

ApnoRiSM XLI. 

Recurrent series of numbers must , in 9 most cases , be ex- 
pressed by circular formulae. 

Aphorism XLII. 

The true construction of the conception is frequently sug- 
gested by some hypothesis; and in these cases , the hypothesis 
may be useful , though containing superfluous parts. 

i. TN speaking of the discovery of law& of nature, 

X those which depend upon quantity, as number, 
space, and the like, are most prominent and most easily- 
conceived, and therefore in speaking of such researches, 
we shall often use language which applies peculiarly to 

13—2 



196 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

the cases in which quantities numerically measurable 
are concerned, leaving it for a subsequent trsk to ex- 
tend our principles to ideas of other kinds. 

Hence we may at present consider th,e Construction 
of a Conception which shall include and connect the 
facts, as being the construction of a Mathematical For- 
mula, coinciding with the numerical expression of the 
facts ; and we have to consider how this process can be ' 
facilitated, it being supposed that we have already be- 
fore us the numerical measures given by observation. 

2. We may remark, however, that the construction 
of the right Formula for any such case, and the deter- 
mination of the Coefficients of such formula, which we 
have spoken of as two separate steps, are in practice 
almost necessarily simultaneous; for the neaft* coinci- 
dence of the results o£ the theoretical rule with the 
observed facts confirms at the same time the Formula 
and its Coefficients. In this case also, the mode of 
arriving at truth is to try various hypotheses ; — to 
modify the hypotheses so as to approximate to the 
facts, and to multiply the facts so as to test the hy- 
potheses. 

The Independent Variable, and the Formula which 
we would try, being once selected, mathematicians have 
devised certain special and technical processes by which 
the value of the coefficients may be determined. These 
we shall treat of in the next Chapter; but in the mean 
time we may noty), in a more general manner, the mode 
in which, in physical researches, the proper formula 
may be obtained. 

3. A person somewhat versed in mathematics, hav- 
ing before him a series of numbers, will generally be 
able to devise a formula which approaches near to 
those numbers. If, for instance, the series is con- 
stantly progressive, he will be able to see whether it 
more nearly resembles an arithmetical or a geometrical 
progression. For example, MM. Dulong and Petit, in 
their investigation of the law of cooling of bodies, 
obtained the following series of measures. A thermo- 
meter, made hot, was placed in an enclosure of which 
the temperature was 0 degrees, and the rapidity of 



CONSTRUCTION OF THE CONCEPTION. ±97 

cooling of the thermometer was noted for many tern- 
peratures # It was found that 
For the temperature 240 the rapidity of cooling was 10 ‘69 



220 

ft 

8*8i 

ft 

200 

ft 

7*40 

tt 

l80 

tr 

6'io 

»> 

l6o 

ft 

4-89 

ft 

I4O 

ft 

3*88 


and so on. Now this series of numbers manifestly in- 
creases with greater rapidity as we proceed from the 
lower to the higher parts of the scale. The numbers 
do not, however, form a geometrical series, as we may 
easily ascertain. But if we were to take the differences 
of the successive terms we should find them to be — 
i-88, 1-41, 1-30, 1*21, roi? &c. 
and these numbers are very nearly the terms of a geo- 
metric series. For if we divide each term by the suc- 
ceeding one, we find these numbers, 

1*33, i*o7, i'2o, 1*27, 

in which there does not appear to be any constant ten- 
dency to diminish or increase. And we shall find that 
a geometrical series in which the ratio is 1*165, maybe 
made to approach very near to this series, the devi- 
ations from it being only such as may be accounted for 
by conceiving them as err ours of observation. In this 
manner a certain formula 1 is obtained, giving results 


• 1 The formula is v ==2,037 where v is the velocity of cooling, t the 

temperature of the thermometer expressed in degrees, and a is the quantity 
1,0077. 

The degree of coincidence is as follows 


Excess of teuqierature of 

Observed 


Calculated 

the thermometer, or 

values 


values 

values of t. 

of V. 


of V. 

240 

10 'Gq 


10-63 

220 

8'8r 


00 

200 . 

7*40 


7*34 

180 

6'io 


6 ’03 

160 

4‘8g 


4*87 

140 

3’88 

• j • 

3*89 

320 . . 

3*02 


3*05 

106 

2*30 


2*33 

80 p 

*’74 

. 

1-72 



198 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

which very nearly coincide with the observed facts, as 
may be seen in the margin. 

The physical law 1 expressed by the formula just 
spoken of is this : — that when a body is cooling in an 
empty inclosure which is kept at a constant tempera- 
ture, the quickness of the cooling, for excesses of tem- 
perature in arithmetical progression, increases as the 
terms of a geometrical progression, diminished by a 
constant number. 

4. In the actual investigation of Dulong and Petit, 
however, the formula was not obtained in precisely the 
manner just described. For the quickness of cooling 
depends upon two elements, the temperature of the hot 
body and the temperature of the inclosure ; not merely 
upon the excess of one of these over the other. And 
it was found most convenient, first, to make such expe- 
riments as should exhibit the dependence of the velo- 
city of cooling upon the temperature of the enclosure ; 
which dependence is contained in the following law : — 
The quickness of cooling of a thermometer in vacuo 
for a constant excess of temperature, increases in geo- 
metric progression, when the temperature of the inclo- 
sure increases in arithmetic progression. From this 
law the preceding one follows by necessary conse- 
quence 2 * * * * * * . 

This example may serve to show the nature of th$ 
artifices which may be used for the construction of 
formulae, when we have a constantly progressive series 
of numbers to represent. W e must not only endeavour 
by trial to contrive a formula which will answer the 
conditions, but we must vary our experiments so as to 
determine, first one factor or portion of the formula, 
and then the other; and we must use the most pro- 


2 For if 0 be the temperature of 

the inclosure, and t the excess of 

temperature of the hot body, it ap- 

pears, by this law, that thet radiation 

of heat is as ae. And hence the quick- 

ness of cooling, which is as the excess 

of radiation, is as a 9 +- -a«; that is, 


as ae(a'-i) which agrees with the 
formula given in the last note. 

The whole of this series of re- 
searches of Dulong and Petit is full of 
the most beautiful and instructive 
artifices for the construction of the 
proper formulae in physical research. 



CONSTRUCTION OF THE CONCEPTION. 1 99 

bable hypothesis as means of suggestion for our for- 
mules. 

5. In # a progressive series of numbers, unless the 
formula which we adopt be really that which expresses 
the law of natkre, the deviations of the formula from 
the facts will generally become enormous, when the 
experiments are extended into new parts of the scale. 
True formulae for a progressive series of results can 
hardly ever be obtained from a very limited range of 
experiments : just as the attempt to guess the general 
course of a road or a river, by knowing two or three 
points of it in the neighbourhood of one another, would 
generally fail. In the investigation respecting the 
laws of the cooling of bodies just *noticed, one great 
advantage of the course pursued by the experimenters 
was, that their experiments included so great a range 
of temperatures. The attempts to assign the law of 
elasticity of steam deduced from experiments made 
with moderate temperatures, were found to be enor- 
mously wrong, when very high temperatures were 
made the subject of experiment. It is easy to see that 
this must be so: an arithmetical and a geometrical 
series may nearly coincide for a few terms moderately 
near each other : but if we take remote corresponding 
terms in the two series, one of these will be very many 
times the other. And hence, from a narrow range of 
experiments, we may infer one of these series when we 
ought to infgr the other; and thus obtain a law which 
is widely erroneous. 

6. In Astronomy, the serieses of observations which 
we have to study are, for the most part, not progressive, 
but recurrent. The numbers observed do not go on 
constantly increasing; but after increasing up to a cer- 
tain amount they diminish ; then, after a certain space, 
increase again; and so on, changing constantly through 
certain cycles. In cases in which the observed numbers 
are of this kind, the formula which expresses them 
must be a circular function , of some sort or other; in- 
volving, for instance, sines, tangeilts, and other forms 
of ‘calculation, which have recurring values when the 
angle on which they depend goes on constantly 



200 


F0BMATI0N OF SCIENCE. 


increasing. The main business of formal astronomy con- 
sists in resolving the celestial phenomena into a series 
of .terms of this land, in detecting their arguments, and 
in determining their coefficients . 

*j. In constructing the formulae by Which laws of 
nature are expressed, although the first object is to 
assign the Law of the Phenomena, philosophers have, 
in almost all cases, not proceeded in a purely empirical 
manner, to connect the observed numbers by some ex- 
pression of calculation, but have been guided, in the 
selection of their formula, by some Hypothesis respect- 
ing the mode of connexion of the facts. Thus the for- 
mula of Dulong and Petit above given was suggested 
by the Theory of Exchanges ; the first attempts at the 
resolution of the heavenly motions into circular func- 
tions were clothed in the hypothesis of Epicycles. And 
this was almost inevitable. i We must confess,’ says 
Copernicus 3 , ‘that the celestial motions are circular, 
or compounded of several circles, since their inequali- 
ties observe a fixed law, and recur in value at certain 
intervals, which could not be except they were circu- 
lar : for a circle alone can make that quantity which 
has occurred recur again.’ In like manner the first 
publication of the Law of the Sines, the true formula of 
optical refraction, was accompanied by Descartes with 
an hypothesis, in which an explanation of the law was 
pretended. In such cases, the mere comparison of 
observations may long fail in suggesting the true for- 
mulae. The fringes of shadows and other diffracted 
colours were studied in vain by Xewton, Gramaldi, 
Comparetti, the elder Herschel, and Mr. Brougham, 
so long as these inquirers attempted merely to trace 
the laws of the facts as they appeared in themselves ; 
while Young, Fresnel, Fraunhofer, Schwerdt, and 
others, determined these laws in the mo$it rigorous 
manner, when they applied to the observations the 
Hypothesis of Interferences. 

8. But with all the aid that Hypotheses and Calcu- 
lation can afford, tlie construction of true formulae, in 


3 De Rev. L L c. iv. 



CONSTRUCTION OF THE CONCEPTION. 201 

those cardinal discoveries by which the progress of 
science ha^ mainly been caused, has been a matter of 
great labour and difficulty, and of good fortune added 
to sagacity. In the History of Science , we have seen 
how long and*how hard Kepler laboured, before he 
converted the formula for the planetary motions, from 
an epicyclical combination, to a simple ellipse. The same 
-philosopher, labouring with equal zeal and perseverance 
to discover the formula of optical refraction, which 
now appears to us so simple, was utterly foiled. Malus 
sought in vain the formula determining the Angle at 
which a transparent surface polarizes light: Sir D. 
Brewster 4 , with a happy sagacity, discovered the for- 
mula to be simply this, that the index of refraction is 
the tangent t>f the angle of polarization. 

Though we cannot give rules which will be of 
much service when we have thus to divine the general 
form of the relation by which phenomena are con- 
nected, there are certain methods by which, in a nar- 
rower field, our investigations may be materially pro- 
moted; — certain special methods of obtaining Laws 
from Observations. Of these we shall now proceed to 
treat. 


4 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. ix. c. vL 



CHAPTER VII. 


Special Methods of Induction applicable to 
Quantity. 


Aphorism XLIII. 

There are special Methods of Induction applicable to 
Quantity; of which the principal are , the MetHbd of Curves, 
the Method of Means, tty Method of Least Squares, and 
the Method of Residues. 

Aphorism XLIV. 

The Method of Curves consists in drawing a curve , of 
which the observed quantities are the Ordinates, the quantity 
on which the change of these quantities depends being the 
Abscissa. The efficacy of this Method depends upon the 
faculty which the eye possesses , of readily detecting regu- 
larity and irregularity in forms. The Method may be used 
to detect the Laws which the observed quantities follow ; and 
also , when the Observations are inexact , it may* be used to cor- 
rect these Observations , so as to obtain data more true than the 
observed facts themselves. 

Aphorism XLV. 

The Method of Means gets rid of irregularities by taking 
the arithmetical mean of a great number of observed quanti- 
ties. Its efficacy depends upon this; that in cases in which 
observed quantities are affected by other inequalities , besides 
that of which we wish to determine the law , the excesses above 
and defects below thz quantities which the law in question 
would produce, will, in a collection of many observations, 
balance each other . 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 203 
Aphorism XLYI. 

Tho Method of Least Squares is a Method of Means , in 
which the mean ts taken according to the condition , that the 
sum of the squares of the errours of observation shall be the 
lecsst possible which the law of the facts allows . It appears , 
by the Doctrine of Chances , that this is the most probable 
jnean. 


Aphorism XLYII. 

The Method of Residues consists in subtracting , from 
the quantities given by Observation , the quantity given by any 
Law already discovered; and then examining the remainder , 
or Residue, order to discover the leading Law which it 
follows . When this second Law has been discovered, the 
quantity given by it may be subtracted from the first Residue; 
thus giving a Second Residue, which may be examined in 
the same manner; and so on. The efficacy of this method 
depends principally upon the circumstance of the Laws of 
variation being successively smaller and smaller in amount 
(or at least in their mean effect) ; so that the ulterior undis- 
covered Laws do not prevent the Law in question from being 
prominent in the observations. 

Aphorism XLYIIL 

The Method of Means and the Method of Least Squares 
cannot be applied without our knowing vhe Arguments of 
the Inequalities which we seek. The Method of Curves and 
the Method of Residues, when the Arguments of the principal 
Inequalities are known, often make it easy to find the others. 

I N cases where the phenomena admit of numerical 
measurement and expression, certain mathemati- 
cal methods may be employed to facilitate and give 
accuracy to the determination of the formula by Which 
the observations are connected into laws. Among the 
mo& usual and important of these Methods are the 
following : — 



2104 • FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


I. The Method of Curves. 

II. The Method of Means. 

III. The Method of Least Squares. 

IV. The Method of Residues. 

Sect. I . — The Method of Curves . 

1. The Method of Curves proceeds upon this basis;* 
that when one quantity undergoes a series of changes 
depending on the progress of another quantity, (as, for 
instance, the Deviation of the Moon from her equable 
place depends upon the progress of Time,) this depend- 
ence may be expressed by means of a curve . In the 
language of mathematicians, the variable quantity, 
whose changes* we would consider, is made the ordi- 
nate of the curve, and the quantity on which the 
changes depend is made the abscissa. In this manner, 
the curve will exhibit in its form a series oft undula- 
tions, rising and falling so as to correspond with the 
alternate Increase and Diminution of the quantity re- 
presented, at intervals of Space which correspond to 
the intervals of Time, or other quantity by which the 
changes are regulated. Thus, to take another example, 
if we set up, at equal intervals, a series of ordinates re- 
presenting the Height of all the successive High Waters 
brought by the tides at a given place, for a year, the 
curve which connects the summits of all these ordi- 
nates will exhibit a series of undulations, ascending 
and descending Once in about each Fortnight ; since, in 
that interval, we have, in succession, the high spring 
tides and the low neap tides. The curve thus drawn 
offers to the eye a picture of the order and magnitude 
of the changes to which the quantity under contem- 
plation, (the height of high water,) is subject. 

2. How the peculiar facility and efficacy of the 
Method of Curves depends upon this circumstance ; — 
that order and regularity are more readily and clearly 
recognized, when thus exhibited to the eye in a picture, 
than they are wheh presented to the mind in any other 
manner. To detect the relations of Humber consi- 
dered directly as Humber, is not easy : and we might 



SPECIAL METHODS OP INDUCTION. 20 5 


contemplate for a long time a Table of recorded Num- 
bers withcjat perceiving the oraer of their increase and 
diminution, even if the law were moderately simple ; 
as any one may satisfy himself by looking at a Tide 
Table. But if these Numbers are expressed by the 
magnitude of Lines , and if these Lines are arranged in 
regular order, the eye readily discovers the rule of 
their changes : it follows the curve which runs along 
their extremities, and takes note of the order in which 
its convexities and concavities succeed each other, if 
any order be readily discoverable. The separate ob- 
servations are in this manner compared and generalized 
and reduced to rule by the eye aloye. And the eye, 
so employed, detects relations of order jmd succession 
with a peculiar celerity and evidence. If, for example, 
we thus arrange as ordinates tl.^ prices of com in each 
year for a series of years, we shall see the order, rapi- 
dity, an# amount of the increase and decrease of price, 
far more clearly than in any other manner. And if 
there were any recurrence of increase and decrease at 
stated intervals of years, we should in this manner 
perceive it. The eye, constantly active and busy, and 
employed in making into shapes the hints and traces 
of form which it contemplates, runs along the curve 
thus offered to it; and as it travels backwards and 
forwards, is ever on the watch to detect some resem- 
blance or contrast between one part and another. And 
these resemblances and contrasts, whep discovered, are 
the images of Laws of Phenomena; which are made 
manifest at once by this artifice, although the mind 
could not easily catch the indications of their exist- 
ence, if they were not thus reflected to her in the clear 
mirror of Space. 

Thus when we have a series of good Observations, 
and know the argument upon which their change of 
magnitude depends, the Method of Curves enables us to 
ascertain, almost at a glance, the law of the? change; and 
by further attention, may be made tg give us a formula 
witji great accuracy. The Method enables us to perceive, 
among our observations, an order, which without the 
method, is concealed in obscurity and perplexity. 



206 formation of science. 

3. But the Method of Curves not only enables us 
to obtain laws of nature from good Observations, but 
also, in a great degree, from observations which are 
very imperfect For the imperfection .of observations 
may in part be corrected by this consideration ; — that 
though they may appear irregular, the correct facts 
which they imperfectly represent, are really regular. 
And the Method of Curves enables us to remedy this 
apparent irregularity, at least in part. For when Ob- 
servations thus imperfect are laid down as Ordinates, 
and their extremities connected by a line, we obtain, 
not a smooth and flowing curve, such as we should 
have if the observations contained only the rigorous 
results of regular laws; but a broken and irregular 
line, full of sudden and capricious twistings, and bear- 
ing on its face marks pf irregularities dependent, not 
upon law, but upon chance. Yet these irregular and 
abrupt deviations in the curve are, in most cases, but 
small in extent, when compared with those bendings 
which denote the effects of regular law. And this 
circumstance is one of the great grounds of advantage 
in the Method of Curves. .For when the observations 
thus laid down present to the eye such a broken and 
irregular line, we can still see, often with great ease 
and certainty, what twistings of the line are probably 
due to the irregular errours of observation; andean 
at once reject these, by drawing a more regular curve, 
cutting off all such small and irregular sinuosities, 
leaving some to the right and some to the left; and 
then proceeding as if this regular curve, and not the 
irregular one, expressed the observations. In this 
manner, we suppose the errours of observation to 
balance each other; some of our corrected measures 
being too great and others too small, but with no great 
preponderance either way. We draw our main regular 
curve, not through the points given by our observa- 
tions, * but among them: drawing it, as has been said 
by one of the philosophers 1 who first systematically 
used this method, ‘ with a bold but careful, hand.’ 


1 Sir J. Herschel, Ast Soc. Trans. voL v. p. u 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 20 7 


The regular curve which we thus obtain, thus freed 
from the casual errours of observation, is that in which 
we endea\^)ur to discover the laws of change and suc- 
cession. 

4. By this method, thus getting rid at once, in a 
great measure, of errours of observation, we obtain 
data which are more true than the individual facts 
themselves. The philosopher’s business is to compare 
his hypotheses with facts, as we have often said. But 
if we make the comparison with separate special facts, 
we are liable to be perplexed or misled, to an unknown 
amount, by the errours of observation; which may 
cause the hypothetical and the observed result to agree, 
or to disagree, when otherwise they wo^ld not do so. 
If, however, we thus take the whole mass of the facts, 
and remove the errours of actual observation 2 , by 
making the curve which expresses the supposed obser- 
vation regular and smooth, we have the separate facts 
corrected by their general tendency. We are put in 
possession, as we have said, of something more true 
than any fact by itself is. 

One of the most admirable examples of the use of 
this Method of Curves is found in Sir J ohn Herschel’s 
Investigation of the Orbits of Double Stars ' \ The author 
there shows how far inferior the direct observations of 
tb^ angle of position are, to the observations corrected 
by a curve in the manner above stated. ‘ This curve, 
once drawn/ he says, ( must represent, it is evident, 
the law of variation of the angle of position, with the 
time, not only for instants intermediate between the 
dates of observations, but even at the moments of 
observation themselves, much better than the indivi- 
dual raw observations can possibly (on an average) do. 
It is only requisite to try a case or two, to be satisfied 
that by substituting the curve for the points, we have 
made a nearer approach to nature, and in a great 
measure eliminated errours of observation.’ ‘ 1$ fol- 
lowing the graphical process/ he adds, ‘we have a 
conviction, almost approaching to moral certainty that 



208 formation of science. 

we cannot be greatly misled.’ Again, having thus 
corrected the raw observations, he makes ^nother use 
of the graphical method, by trying whether an ellipse 
can be drawn ‘ if not through , at l^ast among the 
points, so as to approach tolerably near them all ; and 
thus approaching to the orbit which is the subject of 
investigation.’ 

5. The Obstacles which principally impede the ap 1 
plication of the Method of Curves are (I.) our ignorance 
of the argument of the changes, and (II.) the complica- 
tion of several laws with one another. 

(I.) If we do not know on what quantity those 
changes depend which we are studying, we may fail 
entirely in defecting the law of the changes, although 
we throw the observations into curves. For the true 
argument of the chaqge should, in fact, be made the 
abscissa of the curve. If we were to express, by a 
series of ordinates, the hour of high water eta succes- 
sive days, we should not obtain, or should obtam. very 
imperfectly, the law which these times folloipSror the 
real argument of this change is not the solar hour 9 but 
the hour at which the moon passes the meridian. But 
if we are supposed to be aware that this is the argu- 
ment, (which theory suggests and trial instantly con- 
firms) we then do immediately obtain the primary 
Buies of the Time of High Water, by throwing a series 
of observations into a Curve, with the Hour of the 
Moon’s Transit for the abscissa. 

In like manner, when we have obtained the first 
great or Semi-mensual Inequality of the tides, if we 
endeavour to discover the laws of other Inequalities by 
means of curves, we must take from theory the sug- 
gestion that the Arguments of such inequalities will 
probably be the parallax and the declination of the 
moon. This suggestion again is confirmed by trial; 
but if we were supposed to be entirely ignorant of the 
dependence of the changes of the tide on the Distance 
and Declination of the moon, the curves would exhibit 
unintelligible and seemingly capricious changes. t< For 
by the effect of the Inequality arising from tjie Paral- 
lax, the convexities of the curves which belong to ’the 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 20Q 

• 

spring tides, are in some years made alternately greater 
and less all the year through; while in other years 
they are Aade all nfearly equal. This difference does 
not betray its origin, till we refer it to the Parallax; 
and the same difficulty in proceeding would arise if we 
were ignorant that the moon’s Declination is one of the 
Arguments of tidal changes. 

In like manner, if we try to reduce to law any me- 
teorological changes, those of the Height of the Baro- 
meter for instance, we find that we can make little 
progress in the investigation, precisely because we do 
not know the Argument on which these changes de- 
pend. That there is a certain regular diurnal change 
of small amount, we know ; but when ^e have abstracted 
this Inequality, (of which the Argument is the time of 
day,) we find far greater Changes left behind, from day 
to day and from hour to hour; and we express these 
in curves, but we cannot reduce them to Buie, because 
we cannot discover on what numerical quantity they 
depend. assiduous study of barometrical observa- 

tions, throwS into curves, may perhaps hereafter point 
out to us what are the relations of time and space by 
which these variations are determined; but in the 
mean time, this subject exemplifies to us our remark, 
that the method of curves is of comparatively small 
use, so long as we are in ignorance of the real Argu- 
ments of the Inequalities. 

6. (II.) In the next place, I remark that a diffi- 

culty is thrown in the way of the Metlfbd of Curves by 
the Combinatio7i of several laws one with another. It 
will readily be seen that such a cause will produce a 
complexity in the curves which exhibit the succession 
of facts. If, for example, we take the case of the Tides, 
the Height of high water increases and diminishes with 
the Approach of the sun to, and its Becess from, the 
syzygies of the moon. Again, this Height increases 
and diminishes as the moon’s Parallax increases and 
diminishes; and again, the Height diminishes when 
the Declination increases, and vice virsa; and all these 
Arguments of change, the Distance from Syzygy, the 
Parallax, the Declination, complete their circuit and 
NOV. ORG\ 14 



210 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


return into themselves in different periods. Hence 
the curve which represents the Height of high water 
has not any periodical interval in which it Completes 
its changes and commences a new cycle. The sinuosity 
which would arise from each Inequality separately 
considered, interferes with, disguises, and conceals the 
others ; and when we first cast our eyes on the curve 
of observation, it is very far from offering any obvious f 
regularity in its form. And it is to be observed that 
we have not yet enumerated all the elements of this 
complexity : for there are changes of the tide depend- 
ing upon the Parallax and Declination of the Sun as 
well as of the Moon. Again; besides these changes, of 
which the Arguments are obvious, there are others, as 
those depending upon the Barometer and the Wind, 
which follow no known regular law, and which con- 
stantly affect and disturb the results produced by other 
laws. 

In the Tides, and in like manner in the motions of 
the Moon, we have very eminent examples of the way 
in which the discovery of laws may be rendered diffi- 
cult by the number of laws which operate to affect the 
same quantity. In such cases, the Inequalities are 
generally picked out in succession, nearly in the order 
of their magnitudes. In this way there were succes- 
sively collected, from the study of the Moon’s motions 
by a series of astronomers, those Inequalities which we 
term the Equation of the Center , the Erection , the 
Variation, and the Annual Equation . These Inequa- 
lities were not, in fact, obtained by the application of 
the Method of Curves; but the Method of Curves 
might have been applied to such a case with great ad- 
vantage. The Method lias been applied with great 
industry and with remarkable success to the investiga- 
tion of the laws of the Tides ; and by the use of it, 
a series of Inequalities both of the Times and of the 
Heights of high water has been detected, which explain 
all the main features of the observed facts. 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 21 1 


J$ect. II . — The Method of Means. 

7. The Method of Curves, as we have endeavoured 
to explain aboVe, frees us from the casual and extra- 
neous irregularities which arise from the imperfection 
of observation ; and thus lays bare the results of the 

# laws which really operate, and enables us to proceed in 
search of those laws. But the Method of Curves is 
not the only one which effects such a purpose. The 
errours arising from detached observations may be got 
rid of, and the additional accuracy which multiplied 
observations give may be obtained, by operations upon 
the observed numbers, without expressing them by 
spaces. The process of curves assumes tftat the errours 
of observation balance each other ; — that the accidental 
excesses and defects are nearly £qual in amount ; — that 
the true quantities which would have been observed 
if all accidental causes of irregularity were removed, 
are obtained, exactly or nearly, by selecting quantities, 
upon the whole, equally distant from the extremes of 
great and small, which our imperfect observations offer 
to us. But when, among a number of unequal quan- 
tities, we take a quantity equally distant from the 
greater and the smaller, this quantity is termed the 
Mean of the unequal quantities. Hence the correction 
of* odr observations by the method of curves consists in 
taking the Mean of the observations. 

8 . Now without employing curves, We may proceed 
arithmetically to take the Mean of all the observed 
numbers of each class.’ Thus, if we wished to know 
the Height of the spring tide at a given place, and if 
we found that four different ^spring tides were mea- 
sured as being of the height of ten, thirteen, eleven, 
and fourteen feet, we should conclude that the true 
height of the tide was the Mean of these numbers, — 
namely, twelve feet; and we should suppose that the 
deviation from this height, in the individual Cases, 
arose from the accidents of weather, *the imperfections 
of observation, or the operation of other laws, besides 
tb<2» alternation of spring and neap tides. 


14—2 



212 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


This process of finding the Mean of an assemblage of 
observed numbers is much practised in discovering, 
and still more in confirming and correcting, laws of 
phenomena. We shall notice a few of its peculiarities. 

9. The Method of Means requires a knowledge of 
the Argument of the changes which we would study; 
for the numbers must be arranged in certain Classes, 
before we find the Mean of each Class; and the prin-« 
ciple on which this arrangement depends is the Argu- 
ment. This knowledge of the Argument is more in- 
dispensably necessary in the Method of Means than in 
the Method of Curves ; for when Curves are drawn, the 
eye often spontaneously detects the law of recurrence in 
their sinuositjes ; but when we have collections of 
Numbers, we must divide them into classes by a selec- 
tion of our own. Tims, in order to discover the law 
which the heights of the tide follow, in the progress 
from spring to neap, we arrange the observed tides 
according to the day of the moon's age ; and we then 
take the mean of all those which thus happen at the 
same period of the Moon’s Revolution. In this manner 
we obtain the law which we seek; and the process is 
very nearly the same in all other applications of this 
Method of Means. In all cases, we begin by assuming 
the Classes of measures which we wish to compare, the 
Law which we could confirm or correct, the Formula 
of which we would determine the coefficients. 

10. The Argument being thus assumed, the Method 
of Meanft is very efficacious in ridding our inquiry of 
errours and irregularities which .would impede and per- 
plex it. Irregularities which are altogether accidental, 
or at least accidental with reference to some law which 
we have under consideration, compensate each other in 
a very remarkable way, when we take the Means of 
many observations. If we have before us a collection 
of observed tides, some of them may be elevated, some 
depressed by the wind, some noted too high and some 
too low by the observer, some augmented and some 
diminished by uncontemplated changes in the moon’s 
distance or motion : but in the course of a year' or Wo 
at the longest, all these causes of irregularity balance 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 213 


each other; and the law of succession, which runs 
through tjie observations, comes out as precisely as if 
those disturbing influences did not exist. In any par- 
ticular case, thore appears to be no possible reason why 
the deviation should be in one way, or of one moderate 
amount, rather than another. But taking the mass of 
observations together, the deviations in opposite ways 
will be of equal amount, with a degree of exactness 
very striking. This is found to be the case in all in- 
quiries where we have to deal with observed numbers 
upon a large scale. In the progress of the population 
of a country, for instance, what can appear more incon- 
stant, in detail, than the causes which produce births 
and deaths? yet in each country, and* even in each 
province of a country, the proportions of the whole 
numbers of births and deaths remain nearly constant. 
What can be more seemingly beyond the reach of rule 
than the occasions which produce letters that cannot 
And their destination? yet it appears that the number 
of ‘ dead letters’ is nearly the same from year to year. 
And the same is the result when the deviations arise, 
not from mere accident, but from laws perfectly regu- 
lar, though not contemplated in our investigation 4 . 
Thus the effects of the Moon’s Parallax upon the Tides, 
sometimes operating one way and sometimes another, 
according to certain rules, are quite eliminated by 
taking the Means of a long scries of observations; the 
excesses and defects neutralizing cacli mother, ^o far as 
concerns the effect upon any law of the tides which we 
would investigate. 

ii. In order to obtain very great accuracy, very 
large masses of observations are often employed by 
philosophers, and the accuracy of the result increases 
with the multitude of observations. The immense col- 
lections of astronomical observations which have in 
this manner been employed in order to form and cor- 
rect the Tables of the celestial motions are perhaps 
the most signal instances of the attempts to obtain 

4 «Provided the argument of the law dcnce wifh the argument of the law 
which we neglect* have no coinci- which we would determine. 



214 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

accuracy by this accumulation of observations. Delam- 
bre’s Tables of the Sun are founded upon nearly 3000 
observations; Burg’s Tables of the Moon upon above 
.4000. 

But there are other instances hardly less remark- 
able. Mr. Lubbock’s first investigations of the laws of 
the tides of London 5 , included above 13,000 observa- 
tions, extending through nineteen years ; it being con- 
sidered that this large number was necessary to remove 
the effects of accidental causes 6 . And the attempts 
to discover the laws of change in the barometer have 
led to the performance of labours of equal amount: 
Laplace and Bouvard examined this question by means 
of observation!, made at the Observatory of Paris, four 
times every day for eight years. 

12. We may remark one striking evidence of the 
accuracy thus obtained by employing large masses of 
observations. In this way we may often detect inequa- 
lities much smaller than the errours by which they are 
encumbered and concealed. Thus the Diurnal Oscilla- 
tions of the Barometer were discovered by the com- 
parison of observations of many days, classified accord- 
ing to the hours of the day ; and the result was a clear 
and incontestable proof of the existence of such oscilla- 
tions, although the differences which these oscillations 
produce at different hours of the day are far smaller 
than the casual changes, hitherto reduced to no law, 
which gg on from hour to hour and from day to day. 
The effect of law, operating incessantly and steadily, 
makes itself more and more felt as we give it a longer 
range; while the effect of accident, followed out in the 


* Phil. Trans. 1831. 


6 This period of nineteen years 
was also selected for a reason which 
is alluded to in a former note,. It 
was thought that this period se- 
cured the inquirer from ‘the errours 
which might be produced by the par- 
tial coincidence of the Arguments of 
different irregularities ; for example, 


those due to the moon’s Parallax and 
to the moon’s Declination. It has 
since been found (Phil. Tr. 1838. On 
the Determination of the Laws of the 
Tides from Short Seines of Observa- 
tions), that with regard to Parallax at 
least, the Means of one year j,ive 
sufficient accuracy. 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 215 

same manner, is to annihilate itself, and to disappear 
altogether from the result. 


Sect. hi. — The Method of Least Squares. 

13. The Method of Least Squares is in fact a 
method of means, but with some peculiar characters. 
Its object is to determine the best Mean of a number 
of observed quantities; or the most probable Law 
derived from a number of observations, of which some, 
or all, are allowed to be more or less imperfect. And 
the method proceeds upon this supposition ; — that all 
errours are not equally probable, but that small 
errours are more probable than latge ones. By rea- 
soning mathematically upon this ground, we find that 
the best result is obtained (since we cannot obtain a 
result in which the errours vaftish) by making, not the 
Errours themselves, but the Sum of their Squares of 
the smallest possible amount. 

14. An example may illustrate this. Let a quan- 
tity which is known to increase uniformly, (as the dis- 
tance of a star from the meridian at successive in- 
stants,) be measured at equal intervals of time, and be 
found to be successively 4, 12, 14. It is plain, upon 
the face of these observations, that they are erroneous ; 
for they ought to form an arithmetical progression, but 
fh£y deviate widely from such a progression. But the 
question then occurs, what arithmetical progression do 
they most probably represent: for • we m§ty assume 
several arithmetical progressions which more or less 
approach the observed series; as for instance, these 
three; 4, 9, 14; 6, 10, 14; 3, 10, 15. Now in order 
to see the claims of each of these to the truth/ we may 
tabulate them thus. 


Observation 

4, 12, 14 

Series (1) 4, 9 , 14 

„ (2) 6, 10, 14 

• „. (3) 5, to, 15 


Errours. 

3, o 
2, 2, o 
1, 2, 1 


Sums of Sums of Squares 
Errours. of Errours. 



Here, although the first series 'gives the sum of the 



2l6 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


errours less than the others, the third series gives the 
sum of the squares of the errours least ; and is there- 
fore, by the proposition on which this Method depends, 
the most probable series of the three. t 

This Method, in more extensive and complex cases, 
is a great aid to the calculator in his inferences from 
facts, and removes much that is arbitrary in the Method 
of Means. 

Sect. TV .^-The Method of Residues . 

t 5. By either of the preceding Methods we obtain, 
from observed facts, such Laws as readily offer them- 
selves; and by the "Laws thus discovered, the most pro- 
minent changes of the observed quantities are accounted 
for. But in many cases we have, as we have noticed 
already, several Laws off nature operating at the same 
time, and combining their influences to modify those 
quantities which are the subjects of observation. In 
these cases we may, by successive applications of the 
Methods already pointed out, detect such Laws one 
after another : but this successive process, though only 
a repetition of what we have already described, offers 
some peculiar features which make it convenient to 
consider it in a separate Section, as the Method of 
Residues. 

16. When we have, in a series of changes of 
a variable quantity, discovered one Law which the 
changes follow, detected its Argument, and determined 
its Magnitude, so as to explain most clearly the course 
of observed facts, we may still find that the observed 
changes are not fully accounted for. When we com- 
pare the results of our Law with the observations, 
there may be a difference, or as we may term it, a 
Residue , still unexplained. But this Residue being 
thus detached from the rest, may be examined and 
scrutinized in the same manner as the whole observed 
quantify was treated at first : and we may in this way 
detect in it also a Lhw of change. If We can do this, 
we must accommodate this new found Law as rfearly 
as possible to the Residue to which it belongs; and 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 21 7 


this being done, the difference of our Buie and of the 
Besidue itself, forms a Second Residue . This Second 
Besidue ^re may again bring under our consideration; 
and may perhaps in it also discover some Law of change 
by which its alterations may be in some measure ac- 
counted for. If this can be done, so as to account for 
a large portion of this Besidue, the remaining unex- 
plained part forms a Third Residue; and so on. 

17. This course has really been followed in various 
inquiries, especially in those of Astronomy and Tido- 
logy. The Equation of the Center , for the Moon, was 
obtained out of the Residue of the Longitude, which 
remained when the Mean Anomaly was taken away. 
This Equation being applied and disposed of, the Second 
Residue thus obtained, gave to Ptolemy the Erection, 
The Third Residue , left by the Equation of the Center 
and the Evection, supplied to Tycho the Variation 
and the Annual Equation. And the Besidue, remain- 
ing from these, has been exhausted by other Equations, 
of various arguments, suggested by theory on by obser- 
vation. In this case, the successive generations of 
astronomers have gone on, each in its turn executing 
some step in this Method of Residues. In the exami- 
nation of the Tides, on the other hand, this method 
has been applied systematically and at once. The 
observations readily gave the Semimensual Inequality ; 
the Residue of this supplied the corrections due to the 
Moon’s Parallax and Declination ; and when these 
were determined, the remaining Residue was explored 
for the law of the Solar Correction. 

18. In a certain degree, the Method of Residues and 
the Method of Means are opposite to each other. For 
the Method of Residues extricates Laws from their 
combination, bringing them into view in succession; 
while the Method of Means discovers each Law, not by 
bringing the others into view, but by destroying their 
effect through an accumulation of observations. By 
the Method of Residues we should first ‘extract the 
Law of the Parallax Correction of tlie Tides, and then, 
from fhe Besidue left by this, obtain the Declination 
Correction. But we might at once employ the Method 



218 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


of Means, and put together all the cases in which the 
Declination was the same ; not allowing for the Paral- 
lax in each case, but taking for granted that the 
Parallaxes belonging to the same Declination would 
neutralize each other ; as many falling above as below 
the mean Parallax. In cases like this, where the 
Method of Means is not impeded by a partial coinci- 
dence of the Arguments of different unknown Inequa- 
lities, it may be employed with almost as much success 
as the Method of Residues. But still, when the Argu- 
ments of the Laws are clearly known, as in this in- 
stance, the Method of Residues is more clear and 
direct, and is the, rather to be recommended. 

1 9. If for example, we wish to learn whether the 
Height of the Barometer exerts any sensible influence 
on the Height of the .Sea’s Surface, it would appear 
that the most satisfactoiy mode of proceeding, must be 
to subtract, in the first place, what we know to be the 
effects of the Moon’s Age, Parallax and Declination, 
and other .ascertained causes of change; and to search 
in the unexplained Residue for the effects of barome- 
trical pressure. The contrary course has, however, 
been adopted, and the effect of the Barometer on the 
ocean has been investigated by the direct application 
of the Method of Means, classing the observed heights 
of the water according to the corresponding heights of 
the Barometer without any previous reduction. In 
this manner, the suspicion that the tide of the sea is 
affected by the pressure of the atmosphere, has been 
confirmed. This investigation must be looked upon 
as a remarkable instance of the efficacy of the Method 
of Means, since the amount of the barometrical effect 
is much smaller than the other changes from among 
which it was by this process extricated. But an appli- 
cation of the Method of Residues would still be desi- 
rable on a subject of such extent and difficulty. 

20. r Sir John Herschel, in his Discourse on the 
Study of Natural Philosophy (Articles 158 — 161), has 
pointed out the mode of making discoveries by study- 
ing Residual Phenomena ; and has given several illus- 
trations of the process. In some of these, he has also 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. 219 


considered this method in a wider sense than we have 
done; treating it as not applicable to quantity only, 
but to properties and relations of different kinds. 

We likewise shall proceed to offer a few remarks on 
Methods of Induction applicable to other relations than 
those of quantity. 



CHAPTER VIII. 


Methods of Induction depending on 
Resemblance. 


Aphorism XLIX. 

'fhe Law of Continuity is this: — that a quantity cannot 
pass from one amount to another by any change of condi- 
tions , without passing through all intermediate magnitudes 
according to the intermediate conditions. This Law may 
often be employed to disprove distinctions which have no real 
foundation. 

Aphorism L. 

The Method of Gradation consists in taking a number of 
stages of a property in question , intermediate between two 
extreme cases which appear to be different. This Method is 
employed to determine whether the extreme cases are re-ally 
distinct or not. 


Aphorism LI. 

The Method of Gradation , applied to decide the question , 
whether the existing geological phenomena arise from existing 
causes , leads to this result: — That the phenomena do appear 
to arise from Existing Causes, hut that the action of existing 
causes may , in past tim.es, have transgressed , to any extent , 
their recorded limits of intensity. 

Aphorism LII. 

The Method of Natural Classification consists in classing 
cases , not according to' any assumed Definition, but according 
to the connexion of the facts themselves , so as to make them 
the means of asserting general truths. 



METHODS OF INDUCTION. 


221 


• Sect. I . — The Law of Continuity . 

i. rTlHE LaW of Continuity is applicable to quantity 
X primarily, and therefore might be associated 
with the methods treated of in the last chapter: but 
, inasmuch as its inferences are made by a transition from 
one degree to another among contiguous cases, it will 
be found to belong more properly to the Methods of 
Induction of which we have now to speak. 

The Law of Continuity consists in this proposition, 
— That a quantity cannot pass from one amount to 
another by any change of conditions, without passing 
through all intermediate degrees of magnitude accord- 
ing to the intermediate conditions. And this law may 
often be employed to correcf inaccurate inductions, 
and to reject distinctions which have no real founda- 
tion in nature. For example, the Aristotelians made 
a distinction between motions according to nature, (as 
that of a body falling vertically downwards,) and mo- 
tions contrary to nature, (as that of a body moving 
along a horizontal plane :) the former, they held, became 
naturally quicker and quicker, the latter naturally 
slower and slower. But to this it might be replied, 
that a horizontal line may pass, by gradual motion, 
through various inclined positions, to a vertical posi- 
tion : and thus the retarded motion may pass into the- 
accelerated; and hence there must Be some inclined 
plane on which the motion downwards is naturally 
uniform: which is false, and therefore the distinction 
of such kinds of motion is unfounded. Again, the 
proof of the First Law of Motion depends upon the 
Law of Continuity : for since, by diminishing the re- 
sistance to a body moving «n a horizontal plane, we 
diminish the retardation, and this without limit, the 
law of continuity will bring us at the same time to 
the case of no resistance and to the case oflio re- 
tardation. 

The Law of Continuity is asserted by Galileo 
in* a particular application; and the assertion which it 



222 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


suggests is by him referred to Plato; — namely 1 2 , that a 
moveable body cannot pass from rest to a determinate 
degree of velocity without passing through all smaller 
degrees of velocity. # This law, however, was first as- 
serted in a more general and abstract form by Leib- 
nitz* : and was employed by him to show that the laws 
of motion propounded by Descartes must be false. The 
Third Cartesian Law of Motion was this 8 : that when 
one moving body meets another, if the first body have 
a less momentum than the second, it will be reflected 
with its whole motion : but if the first have a greater 
momentum than the second, it will lose a part of its 
motion, which it will transfer to the second. Now 
each of these cases 'leads, by the Law of Continuity, to 
the case in which the two bodies have equal momen- 
tums : but in this case, by the first part of the law the 
body would retain all its motion ; and by the second 
part of the law it would lose a portion of it : hence the 
Cartesian Law is false. 

3. I shall take another example of the application 
of this Law from Professor Playfair’s Dissertation on 
the History of Mathematical and Physical Science 4 . 
‘The Academy of Sciences at Paris having (in 1724) 
proposed, as a Prize Question, the Investigation of the 
Laws of the Communication of Motion, John Bernoulli 
presented an Essay on the subject very ingenious and 
profound ; in which, however, he denied the existence 
of hard bodies, because in the collision of such bodies, 
a finite change of motion must take place in an instant : 
an event which, on the principle just explained, he 
maintained to be impossible.’ And this reasoning 
was justifiable : for we can form a continuous transi- 
tion from cases in which the impact manifestly occu- 
pies a finite time, (as when we strike a large soft 
body) to cases in which it* is apparently instantaneous. 
Maclaurin and others are disposed, in order to avoid 
the conclusion of Bernoulli, to reject the Law of Con- 


1 Dialog. iiL 15a iv. 32. 

2 Opera, i 366. 3 Cartes, Prin. p. 35. 

4 In «>he Encyc. Brit. p. 537. 



METHODS OF INDUCTION. 223 

tinuity. This, however, would no*t only be, as Playfair 
says, to deprive ourselves of an auxiliary, commonly 
useful thoiigh sometimes deceptive: but what is much 
worse, to acquiesce in false propositions, from the want 
of clear and patient thinking. For the Law of Con- 
tinuity, when rightly interpreted, is never violated in 
actual fact. There are not really any such bodies as 
,liave been termed 'perfectly hard : and if we approach 
towards such cases, we must learn the laws of motion 
which rule them by attending to the Law of Con- 
tinuity, not by rejecting it. 

4. Newton used the Law of Continuity to suggest, 
but not to prove, the doctrine of universal gravitation. 
Let, he said, a terrestrial body be Carried as high as 
the moon: will it not still fall to tlie dErth? and does 
not the moon fall by the same force 5 % Again : if any 
one says that iftere is a material ether which does not 
gravitate 6 , this kind of matter, by condensation, may 
be gradually transmuted to the density of the most 
intensely gravitating bodies : and these gravitating 
bodies, by taking the internal texture of the condensed 
ether, may cease to gravitate ; and thus the weight of 
bodies depends, not on their quantity of matter, but 
on their texture; which doctrine Newton conceived he 
had disproved by experiment. 

5. The evidence of the Law of Continuity resides 
in t’ne universality of those Ideas, which enter into 
our apprehension of Laws of Nature. When, of two. 
quantities, one depends upon the other, the Law of 
Continuity necessarily governs this dependence. Every 
philosopher lias the power of applying this law, in pro- 
portion as he has the faculty of apprehending the Ideas 
which he employs in his induction, with the same 
clearness and steadiness which belong to the funda- 
mental ideas of Quantity, Space and Number. To those 
who possess this faculty, the Law is a Ttule of very wide 
and decisive application. Its use, as has appeared in the 
above examples, is seen rather in the disproof of eProne- 
ous views, and in the correction of lalse propositions, 


6 Principia, lib. iii. prop. 6. 


6 lb. cor. 2 . 



224 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

than in the invention of new truths. It is a test of 
truth, rather than an instrument of discovery. 

Methods, however, approaching very ne&r to the 
Law of Continuity may be employed as positive means 
of obtaining new truths ; and these I shall now de- 
scribe. 

Sect. II. — The Method of Gradation. 

6. To gather together the cases which resemble 
each other, and to separate those Which are essentially 
distinct, has often been described as the main business 
of science; and may, in a certain loose and vague 
manner of speaking, pass for a description of some of 
the leading procedures in the acquirement of know- 
ledge. The selection of instances which agree, and of 
instances which differ, in some prominent point or 
property, are important steps in th* formation of 
science. But when classes of things and properties 
have been established in virtue of such comparisons, it 
may still be doubtful whether these classes are sepa- 
rated by distinctions of opposites, or by differences of 
degree. And to settle such questions, the Method of 
Gradation is employed; which consists in taking inter- 
mediate stages of the properties in question, so as to 
ascertain by experiment whether, in the transition 
from One class to another, we have to leap over ( a 
manifest gap, or to follow a continuous road. 

7. Thus for instance, one of the early Divisions 
established by electrical philosophers was that of Elec - 
tries and Conductors. But this division Dr. Faraday 
has overturned as an essential opposition. He takes 7 a 
Gradation which carries him from Conductors to Non- 
conductors. Sulphur, or Lac, he says, are held to be 
non-conductors, but are not rigorously, so. Spermaceti 
is a bad conductor : ice or water better than sperma- 
ceti: metals so much better that they are put in a 
different class. But even in metals the transit of the 
electricity is not instantaneous : we have in them proof 
of a retardation df the electric current: ‘and what 


7 Researches, 12th series, art. 1328. 




METHODS OF INDUCTION, 


225 

reason,” Mr. Faraday asks, w wliy this retardation 
should not be of the same kind as that in spermaceti, 
or in lac, at sulphur? But as, in them, retardation is 
insulation, [and insulation is induction 8 ] why should 
we refuse the same relation to the same exhibitions of 
force in the metals?” 

The process employed by the same sagacious philo- 
sopher to show the identity of Voltaic and Franklinic 
electricity, is another example of the same kind 9 . Ma- 
chine [Franklinic] electricity was made to exhibit the 
same phenomena as Voltaic electricity, by causing the 
discharge to pass through a bad conductor, into a very 
extensive discharging train : and thus it was clearly 
shown that Franklinic electricity, nbt so conducted, 
differs from the other kinds, only in being in a state 
of successive t^ion and explosion instead of a state 
of continued ctSrent. 

Again ; to show that the decomposition of bodies in 
the Voltaic circuit was not due to the Attraction of the 
Poles 10 , Mr. Faraday devised a beautiful series of expe- 
riments, in which these supposed Poles were made to 
assume all possible electrical conditions : — in some cases 
the decomposition took place against air, which accord- 
ing to common language is not a conductor, nor is de- 
composed ; — in others, against the metallic poles, which 
are # excellent conductors but un decomposable ; — and so 
on : and hence he infers that the decomposition cannot 
justly be considered as due to the Attraction, or At- 
tractive Powers, of the Poles. 

8. The reader of the Novum Organon may perhaps, 
in looking at such examples of the Buie, be reminded 
of some of Bacon’s Classes of Instances, as his in - 
stantice absentice in •proximo , and his instantice mi - 
grantes. But we may remark that Instances classed 
and treated as Bacon recommends in those parts of 
his work, could hardly lead to scientific truth. His 


8 These words refer to another proposition, also established by the Method 
of Gradation. 

9 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. xiv. c. ix. sect. 2. 
i° fbid. Researches , art. 497. 

NOV. OBG.* 


15 



22 6 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


processes are vitiated by his proposing to himself the 
form or cause of the property before him, as the object 
of his inquiry ; instead of being content towobtain, in 
the first place, the f law of phenomena . Thus his ex- 
ample 11 of a Migrating Instance is thus given. “ Let 
the Nature inquired into be that of Whiteness; an In- 
stance Migrating to the production of this property is 
glass, first whole, and then pulverized ; or plain water, 
and water agitated into a foam ; for glass and water 
are transparent, and not white ; but glass powder and 
foam are white, and not transparent. Hence we must 
inquire what has happened to the glass or water in 
that Migration. For it is plain that the Form of 
Whiteness is conveyed and induced by the # crushing 
of the glass and shaking of the water.” No real 
knowledge has resulted from this line^“ reasoning : — 
from taking the Natures and Forms W things and of 
their qualities for the primaiy subject of our re- 
searches. 

9. We may easily give examples from other sub- 
jects in which the Method of Gradation has been used 
to establish, or to endeavour to establish, very exten- 
sive propositions. Thus Laplace’s Nebular Hypothe- 
sis, — that systems like our solar system are formed by 
gradual condensation from diffused masses, such as the 
nebulae among the stars, — is founded by him upon an 
application of this Method of Gradation. We see, he 
conceives, among these nebulae, instances of all degrees 
of condensation, from the most loosely diffused fluid, 
to that separation and solidification of parts by which 
suns, and satellites, and planets are formed : and thus 
we have before us instances of systems in all their 
stages ; as in a forest we see trees in every period of 
growth. How far the examples in this case satisfy the 
demands of the Method of Gradation, it remains for 
astronomers and philosophers to examine. 

Again; this method was used with great success by 
Mact-ulloch and others to refute the opinion, put in 
currency by the W ernerian school of geologists, that 


11 Nov. Org. lib. ii. Aph. 28. 


METHODS OF INDUCTION. 


227 


the rocks called trap rocks must be classed with those 
to which a sedimentary origin is ascribed. For it was 
shown that a gradual transition might be traced from 
those examples in which trap rocks most resembled 
stratified rocks, to the lavas which have been recently 
ejected from volcanoes : and that it was impossible to 
assign a different origin to one portion, and to the 
•other, of this kind of mineral masses; and as the 
volcanic rocks were certainly not sedimentary, it fol- 
lowed, that the trap rocks were not of that nature. 

Again; we have an attempt of a still larger kind 
made by Sir C. Lyell, to apply this Method of Gradation 
so as to disprove all distinction between the causes by 
which geological phenomena have befen produced, and 
the causes which are now acting at the earth’s surface. 
He has collected a very remarkable series of changes 
which have fallen place, and are still taking place, by 
the action of water, volcanoes, earthquakes, and other 
terrestrial operations; and he conceives he has shown 
in these a gradation which leads, with no wide chasm 
or violent leap, to the state of things of which geologi- 
cal researches have supplied the evidence. 

1 o. Of the value of this Method in geological specu- 
lations, no doubt can be entertained. Yet it must still 
require a grave and profound consideration, in so vast 
ai^ application of the Method as that attempted by 
Sir 0. Lyell, to determine what extent we may allow to 
the steps of our gradation ; and to decide how far the 
changes which have taken place in distant parts of the 
series may exceed those of which we have historical 
knowledge, without ceasing to be of the same kind. 
Those who, dwelling in a city, see, from time to time, 
one house built and another pulled down, may say that 
such existing causes , operating through past time, suffi- 
ciently explain the existing condition of the city. Yet 
we arrive at important political and historical truths, 
by considering the origin of a city as an event of a dif- 
ferent order from those daily changes. ’The Causes 
which are now working to produce^ ^geological results, 
may be supposed to have been, at some former epoch, 
so Tar exaggerated in their operation, that the changes 

15 — 2 



228 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


should be paroxysms, not degrees ; — that they should 
violate, not continue, the gradual series. And we 
have no kind of evidence whether the duration of our 
historical times is sufficient to give usj a just measure 
of the limits of such degrees; — whether the terms 
which we have under our notice enable us to ascertain 
the average rate of progression. 

1 1. The result of such considerations seems to be 
this : — that we may apply the Method of Gradation in 
the investigation of geological causes, provided we 
leave the Limits of the Gradation undefined. But, 
then, this is equivalent to the admission of the opposite 
hypothesis: for a continuity of which the successive 
intervals are not limited, is not distinguishable from 
discontinuity. The geological sects of recent times 
have been distinguished as uniformitcyrians and cata- 
strophists : the Methodbf Gradation seems to prove the 
doctrine of the uniformitarians ; but then, at the same 
time that it does this, it breaks down the distinction 
between them and the catastrophists. 

There are other exemplifications of the use of grada- 
tions in Science which well deserve notice : but some 
of them are of a kind somewhat different, and may be 
considered under a separate head. 

Sect. III. The Method of Natural Classification, 

12. The Method of Natural Classification consists, as 
we have seen, in' grouping together objects, not accord- 
ing to any selected properties, but according to their 
most important resemblances ; and in combining such 
grouping with the assignation of certain marks of the 
classes thus formed. The examples of the successful 
application of this method are to be found in the 
Classificatory Sciences through their whole extent ; as, 
for example, in framing the Genera of plants and ani- 
mals. The same method, however, may often be ex- 
tended to other sciences. Thus the classification of 
Crystalline Forms; according to their Degree of Sym- 
metry, (which is really an important distinction,) as in- 
troduced by Mohs and Weiss, was a great improvement 



METHODS OF INDUCTION. 


229 

upon Haiiy’s arbitrary division according to certain 
assumed primary forms. Sir David Brewster was led 
to the safhe distinction of crystals by the study of 
their optical properties ; and the scientific value of the 
classification was thus strongly exhibited. Mr. How- 
ard^ classification of Clouds appears to be founded in 
their real nature, since it enables him to express the 
daws of their changes A successions. As we have 
elsewhere said, the criterron of a true classification is, 
that it makes general propositions possible. One of 
the most prominent examples of the beneficial influ- 
ence of a right classification, is to be seen in the 
impulse given to geology by the distinction of strata 
according to the organic fossils which they contain 12 : 
which, ever since its general adoption, has been a lead- 
ing principle in the speculation^ of geologists. 

13. The mode in which, in this and in other cases, 
the Method of Natural Classification directs the re- 
searches of the philosopher, is this : — his arrangement 
being adopted, at least as an instrument of inquiry and 
trial, he follows the course of the different members of 
the classification, according to the guidance which Na- 
ture herself offers; not prescribing beforehand the 
marks of each part, but distributing the facts accord- 
ing to the total resemblances, or according to those 
resemblances which I10 finds to be most important. 
Thus, in tracing the course of a series of strata from 
place to place, we identify each stratum, not by any 
single character, but by all taken together; — texture, 
colour, fossils, position, and any other circumstances 
which offer themselves. And if, by this means, we 
come to ambiguous cases, where different indications 
appear to point different ways, we decide so as best to 
preserve undamaged those general relations and truths 
which constitute the value of our system. Thus 
although we consider the organic fossils in each stra- 
tum as its most important characteristic, we are not 
prevented, by the disappearance of some fossils, or the 
addition of others, or by the total Absence of fossils, 


w Hist Ind. Sc. b. xviiL c. ii. sect 3. 



230 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


from identifying 9trata in distant countries, if the posi- 
tion and other circumstances authorize us to do so. 
And by this Method of Classification, the cfoctrine of 
Geological Equivalents 13 has been applied to a great 
part of Europe. 

14. We may further observe, that the same method 
of natural classification whidithus enables us to iden- 
tify strata in remote situatmm, notwithstanding thnif 
there may he great differences in their material and 
contents, also forbids us to assume the identity of the 
series of rocks which occur in different countries, when 
this identity has not been verified by such a continu- 
ous exploration ^)f the component members of the 
series. It w<*uld be in the highest degree unphiloso- 
phical to apply the special names of the English or 
German strata to the jocks of India, or America, or 
even of southern Europe, till it lias appeared that in 
those countries the geological series of northern Europe 
really exists. In each separate country, the divisions 
of the formations which compose the crust of the 
earth must be made out, by applying the Method of 
Natural Arrangement to that particular case, and not 
by arbitrarily extending to it the nomenclature belong- 
ing to another case. It is only by such precautions, 
that we can ever succeed in obtaining geological propo- 
sitions, at the same time true and comprehensive;; «or 
can obtain any sound general views respecting the 
physical history ( of the earth. 

15. The Method of Natural Classification, which 
we thus recommend, falls in with those mental habits 
which we formerly described as resulting from the 
study of Natural History . The method ^as then termed 
the Method of Type , and was put in opposition to the 
Method of Definition. 

The Method of Natural Classification is directly 
opposed to the process in. which, we assume and apply 
arbitrary definitions; for in the former Method, we 
find our classes in^ nature, and do not make them by 
marks of our own imposition. Nor can any advantage 


1 3 Hist Ind. Sc. b. xviii c. ill. sect. 4. 



METHODS OF INDUCTION, 


231 


to the progress of knowledge be procured, by laying 
down our characters when our arrangements are as yet 
quite loosl and unformed. Nothing was gained' by 
the attempts tq define Metals by their weight, their 
hardness, their ductility, their colour ; for to all these 
marks, as fast as they were proposed, exceptions were 
found, among bodies which still could not be ex- 
cluded from the list of Metals. It was only when 
elementary substances were divided into Natural 
Classes ^ of which classes Metals were one, that a true 
view of their distinctive characters was obtained. Defi- 
nitions in the outset of our examination of nature are 
almost always, not only useless, but prejudicial. 

16. When we obtain a Law of Nature by induction 
from phenomena, it commonly happens, as we have 
already soon, that we introduce at the same time, a 
Proposition and a Definition. In this case, the two 
are correlative, each giving a real value to the other. 
In- such caseg, also, the Definition, as well as the Pro- 
position, may become the basis of rigorous reasoning, 
and may lead to a series of deductive truths. We have 
examples of such Definitions and Propositions in the 
Laws of Motion, and in many other cases. 

17. When we have established Natural Classes of 
objects, we seek for Characters of our classes; and 
these Characters may, to a certain extent, be called the 
Definitions of our classes. This is to be understood, 
however, only in a limited sense : for these Definitions 
are * not absolute and permanent. Tfiey are liable to 
be modified and superseded. If we find a case which 
manifestly belongs to our Natural Class, though vio- 
lating our Definition, we do not shut out the case, but 
alter our definition. Thus, when we have made it 
part of our Definition of the Rose family, that they 
have alternate stipulate leaves , we do not, therefore, 
exclude from the family the genus Lowcea , which has 
no stipulce. In Natural Classifications, # our Defini- 
tions are to be considered as temporary and "provi- 
sional only. When Sir C. Lyell established the distinc- 
tions of the tertiary strata, which he termed Eocene , 
Miocene, and Pliocene } he took s? numerical criterion 



,232 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

(the proportion of recent species of shells contained in 
those strata) as the basis of his division. But now 
that those kinds of strata have become, by their appli- 
cation to a great variety of cases, a series of Natural 
Classes, we must, in our researches, keep in view the 
natural connexion of the formations themselves in dif- 
ferent places; and must by no means allow ourselves 
to be governed by the numerical proportions which 
were originally contemplated ; or even by any amended 
numerical criterion equally arbitrary; for however 
amended, Definitions in natural history are never im- 
mortal. The etymologies of Pliocene and Miocene 
may, hereafter, come to have merely an historical inte- 
rest ; and such a state of things will be no more incon- 
venient, provided the natural connexions of each class 
are retained, than it is to call a rock oolite or por- 
phyry , when it has no roelike structure and no fiery 
spots. 

The Methods of Induction which are .treated of in 
this and the preceding chapter, and which are specially 
applicable to causes governed by relations of Quantity 
or of Resemblance, commonly lead us to Laws of Phe- 
nomena only. Inductions founded upon other ideas, 
those of Substance and Cause for example, appear to 
conduct us somewhat further into a knowledge of the 
essential nature and real connexions of things. ,Bnt 
before we speak of these, we shall say a few words 
respecting the way in which inductive propositions, 
once obtained, may be verified and carried into effect 
by their application. 



CHAPTER IX. 

Of the Application of Inductive Truths. 


Aphorism LIII. 

When the theory of any subject is established , the obser- 
vations and experiments which are made in applying the 
science to use and to instruction , supply a perpetual verifi- 
cation of the theory. 

Aphorism *LIY. 

Such observations and experiments , when numerous and 
accurate , supply also corrections of the constants involved 
in the theory; and sometimes , (by the Method of Residues ,) 
additions to the theory. 

Aphorism LY. 

It is worth considering , whether a continued and con- 
nected system of observation and calculation , like that of 
astronomy , might not be employed with advantage in im- 
proving our knowledge of other subjects; as Tides , Currents , 
Winds, Clouds , Rain , Terrestrial Magfietism , Aurora Bo- 
realis, Composition of Crystals , and many oifar subjects. 

Aphorism LYI. 

An extension of a well- established theory to the explanation 
of new facts excites admiration as a discovery; but it is a 
discovery of a lower order than the theory itself. 

Aphorism LYIL 

The practical inventions which ore most important in 
Art may be either unimportant parts of Science f or results 
itot explained by Science . 



FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


%64 


Aphorism LVIIL 

In modern times, in many departments, Art is constantly 
guided, governed and advanced by Science. 

Aphorism LI3t 

Recently several New Arts have been invented, which may 
be regarded as notable verifications of the anticipations of 
material benefits to be derived to man from the progress of 
Science. 

i. T)Y the application of inductive truths, we here 

JD mean, according to *the arrangement given in 
chap. I. of this book, those steps, which in the natural 
order of science, follow the discovery of each truth. 
These steps are, the verification of the discovery by ad- 
ditional experiments and reasonings, and its extension 
to new cases, not contemplated by the original dis- 
coverer. These processes occupy that period, which, 
in the history of each great discovery, we have termed 
the Sequel of the epoch ; as the collection of facts, and 
the elucidation of conceptions, form its Prelude. 

2 . It is not necessary to dweli at length on the 
processes of the Verification of Discoveries. When the 
Law of Nature is once stated, it is far easier to devise 
and execute experiments which prove it, than it was 
to discern the evidence before. The truth becomes 
one of the standard doctrines of the science to which it 
belongs, and is verified by all who study or who teach 
the science experimentally. The leading doctrines of 
Chemistry are constantly exemplified by each chemist 
in his Laboratory; and an amount of verification is 
thus obtained of which books give no adequate concep- 
tion. In Astronomy, we have a still stronger example 
of the process of verifying discoveries. Ever since the 
science assumed a systematic form, there have been 
Observatories, in which the consequences of the theory 
were habitually compared with the results of observa- 
tion. And to facilitate this comparison, Tables of 
great extent have been calculated, with immense la- 
bour, from each theoiy, showing the place which the 



APPLICATION 0 ? INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 235 

theory assigned to the heavenly* bodies at successive 
times; and thus, as it were, challenging nature to 
deny the •truth of the discovery. In this way, as I 
have elsewhere, stated, the continued prevalence of an 
eiTOur in the systematic parts of astronomy is impos- 
sible 1 . An errour, if it arise, makes its* way into the 
tables, into the ephemeris, into the observer’s nightly 
list, or his sheet of reductions ; the evidence of sense 
flies in its face in a thousand Observatories; the dis- 
crepancy is traced to its source, and soon disappears 
for ever. 

3. In these last expressions, we suppose the theory, 
not only to be tested, but also to be corrected when it 
is found to be imperfect. And this* also is part of the 
business of the observing astronomer. *From his accu- 
mulated observations, he deduces more exact values than 
had previously been obtained* of the Constants or Co- 
efficients of these Inequalities of which the Argument is 
already known. This he is enabled to do by the methods 
explained in the fifth chapter of this book; the Method 
of Means, and especially the Method of Least Squares. 
In other cases, he finds, by the Method of Residues, 
some new Inequality; for if no change of the Coeffi- 
cients will bring the Tables and the observation to a 
coincidence, he knows that a new Term is wanting in 
bis formula. He obtains, as far as he can, the law of 
this unknown Term; and when its existence and its 
law have been fully established, there remains the 
task of tracing it to its cause. 

4. The condition of the science of Astronomy, with 
regard to its security and prospect of progress, is one of 
singular felicity. It is a question well worth our con- 
sideration, as regarding the interests of science, whe- 
ther, in other branches of knowledge also, a continued 
and connected system of observation and calculation , 
imitating the system employed by astronomers, might 
not be adopted. Wt the discussion of this question 
would involve us in a digression too wide for the pre- 
sent occasion. 


1 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. vii. c. vi. sect. 6. 



FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


%$4 


Aphorism LYIII. 

In modem times , in many departments, Art is constantly 
guided , governed and advanced by Science. 

Aphorism LI3t 

Recently several New Arts have been invented, which may 
be regarded as notable verifications of the anticipations of ¦ 
material benefits to be derived to man from the progress of 
Science. 

i. T> Y the application of inductive truths, we here 

JD mean, according to ‘the arrangement given in 
chap. I. of this book, those steps, which in the natural 
order of science, follow the discovery of each truth. 
These steps are, the verification of the discovery by ad- 
ditional experiments and reasonings, and its extension 
to new cases, not contemplated by the original dis- 
coverer. These processes occupy that period, which, 
in the history of each great discovery, we have termed 
the Sequel of the epoch ; as the collection of facts, and 
the elucidation of conceptions, form its Prelude. 

2 . It is not necessary to dwell at length on the 
processes of the Verification of Discoveries. When the 
Law of Nature is once stated, it is far easier to devise 
and execute experiments which prove it, than it yras 
to discern the evidence before. The truth becomes 
one of the standard doctrines of the science to which it 
belongs, and is verified by all who study or who teach 
the science experimentally. The leading doctrines of 
Chemistry are constantly exemplified by each chemist 
in his Laboratory ; and an amount of verification is 
thus obtained of which books give no adequate concep- 
tion. In Astronomy, we have a still stronger example 
of the process of verifying discoveries. Ever since the 
science assumed a systematic form, there have been 
Observatories , in which the consequences of the theory 
were habitually compared with the results of observa- 
tion. And to facilitate this comparison, Tables of 
great extent have been calculated, with immense la- 
bour, from each theory, showing the place which the 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 235 

theory assigned to the heavenly* bodies at successive 
times; and thus, as it were, challenging nature to 
deny the *t ruth of the discovery. In this way, as I 
have elsewhere, stated, the continued prevalence of an 
errour in the systematic parts of astronomy is impos- 
sible 1 . An errour, if it arise, makes its*way into the 
tables, into the ephemeris, into the observer’s nightly 
list, or his sheet of reductions ; the evidence of sense 
flies in its face in a thousand Observatories; the dis- 
crepancy is traced to its source, and soon disappears 
for ever. 

3. In these last expressions, we suppose the theory, 
not only to be tested, but also to be corrected when it 
is found to be imperfect. And this* also is part of the 
business of the observing astronomer. *From his accu- 
mulated observations, lie deduces more exact values than 
had previously been obtained, of the Constants or Co- 
efficients of these Inequalities of which tli e Argument is 
already known. This he is enabled to do by the methods 
explained in the fifth chapter of this book ; the Method 
of Means, and especially the Method of Least Squares. 
In other cases, he finds, by the Method of [Residues, 
some new Inequality; for if no change of the Coeffi- 
cients will bring the Tables and the observation to a 
coincidence, he knows that a new Term is wanting in 
his formula. He obtains, as far as he can, the law of 
this unknown Term; and when its existence and its 
law have been fully established, there remains the 
task of tracing it to its cause. 

4. The condition of the science of Astronomy, with 
regard to its security and prospect of progress, is one of 
singular felicity. It is a question well worth our con- 
sideration, as regarding the interests of science, whe- 
ther, in other branches of knowledge also, a continued 
and connected system of observation and calculation , 
imitating the system employed by astronomers, might 
not be adopted. Mt the discussion of this question 
would involve us in a digression too wide for the pre- 
sent occasion. 


* Hist Ind. Sc. b. vii. c. vi. sect 6. 



%&4 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


I 

Aphorism LVIII. 

In modern times , in many departments , Art is constantly 
guided, governed and advanced by Science. 

Aphorism LI3* 

Recently several New Arts have been invented , which may 
be regarded as notable verifications of the anticipations of ( 
material benefits to be derived to man from the progress of 
Science. 

i. T> Y the application of inductive truths, we here 

X) mean, according to *the arrangement given in 
chap. I. of this book, those steps, which in the natural 
order of science, follow the discovery of each truth. 
These steps are, the verification of the discovery by ad- 
ditional experiments and reasonings, and its extension 
to new case.Sy not contemplated by the original dis- 
coverer. These processes occupy that period, which, 
in the history of each great discovery, we have termed 
the Sequel of the epoch ; as the collection of facts, and 
the elucidation of conceptions, form its Prelude. 

2 . It is not necessary to dwell at length on the 
processes of the Verification of Discoveries. When the 
Law of Nature is once stated, it is far easier to devise 
and execute experiments which prove it, than it was 
to discern the evidence before. The truth becomes 
one of the standard doctrines of the science to which it 
belongs, and is verified by all who study or who teach 
the science experimentally. The leading doctrines of 
Chemistry are constantly exemplified by each chemist 
in his Laboratory ; and an amount of verification is 
thus obtained of which books give no adequate concep- 
tion. In Astronomy, we have a still stronger example 
of the process of verifying discoveries. Ever since the 
science assumed a systematic form, there have been 
Observatories , in which the consequences of the theory 
were habitually compared with the results of observa- 
tion. And to facfiitate this comparison, Tables of 
great extent have been calculated, with immense la- 
bour, from each theoiy, showing the place which the 



APPLICATION OP INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 235 

theory assigned to the heavenly* bodies at successive 
times; and thus, as it were, challenging nature to 
deny the *t ruth of the discovery. In this way, as I 
have elsewhere stated, the continued prevalence of an 
errour in the systematic parts of astronomy is impos- 
sible \ An errour, if it arise, makes its* way into the 
tables, into the ephemeris, into the observer’s nightly 
list, or his sheet of reductions; the evidence of sense 
flies in its face in a thousand Observatories; the dis- 
crepancy is traced to its source, and soon disappears 
for ever. 

3. In these last expressions, we suppose the theory, 
not only to be tested, but also to be corrected when it 
is found to be imperfect. And this* also is part of the 
business of the observing astronomer. *From his accu- 
mulated observations, he deduces more exact values than 
had previously been obtained* of the Constants or Co- 
efficients of these Inequalities of which the Argument is 
already known. This he is enabled to do by the methods 
explained in the fifth chapter of this book ; the Method 
of Means, and especially the Method of Least Squares. 
In other cases, he finds, by the Method of Residues, 
some new Inequality; for if no change of the Coeffi- 
cients will bring the Tables and the observation to a 
coincidence, he knows that a new Term is wanting in 
his formula. He obtains, as far as he can, the law of 
this unknown Term; and when its existence and its 
law have been fully established, there remains the 
task of tracing it to its cause. 

4. The condition of the science of Astronomy, with 
regard to its security and prospect of progress, is one of 
singular felicity. It is a question well worth our con- 
sideration, as regarding the interests of science, whe- 
ther, in other branches of knowledge also, a continued 
and connected system of observation and calculation, 
imitating the system employed by astronomers, might 
not be adopted. Hit the discussion of this question 
would involve us in a digression too wide for the pre- 
sent occasion. 


1 Hut Ind. Sc. b. vll c. vi. sect. 6. 



%g4 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

I 

Aphorism LYIII. 

In modem times , in many departments , Art is constantly 
guided , governed and advanced by Science. 

Aphorism LI3t 

Recently several New Arts have been invented , which may 
be regarded as notable verifications of the anticipations of « 
material benefits to be derived to man from the progress of 
Science. 

i. T) Y the application of inductive truths, we here 

JD mean, according to ‘the arrangement given in 
chap. I. of this book, those steps, which in the natural 
order of science, follow the discovery of each truth. 
These steps are, the verification of the discovery by ad- 
ditional experiments and reasonings, and its extension 
to new cases, not contemplated by the original dis- 
coverer. These processes occupy that period, which, 
in the history of each great discovery, we have termed 
the Sequel of the epoch ; as the collection of facts, and 
the elucidation of conceptions, form its Prelude. 

2. It is not necessary to dweU at length on the 
processes of the Verification of Discoveries. When the 
Law of Nature is once stated, it is far easier to devise 
and execute experiments which prove it, than it vras 
to discern the evidence before. The truth becomes 
one of the standard doctrines of the science to which it 
belongs, and is verified by all who study or who teach 
the science experimentally. The leading doctrines of 
Chemistry are constantly exemplified by each chemist 
in his Laboratory ; and an amount of verification is 
thus obtained of which books give no adequate concep- 
tion. In Astronomy, we have a still stronger example 
of the process of verifying discoveries. Ever since the 
science assumed a systematic form, there have been 
Observatories , in which the consequences of the theory 
were habitually compared with the results of observa- 
tion. And to facfiitate this comparison, Tables of 
great extent have been calculated, with immense la- 
bour, from each theory, showing the place which the 



APPLICATION OP INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 235 

theory assigned to the heavenly* bodies at successive 
times; and thus, as it were, challenging nature to 
deny the •truth of the discovery. In this way, as I 
have elsewhere stated, the continued prevalence of an 
eiTOur in the systematic parts of astronomy is impos- 
sible \ An errour, if it arise, makes its ’way into the 
tables, into the ephemeris, into the observer’s nightly 
list, or his sheet of reductions; the evidence of sense 
flies in its face in a thousand Observatories; the dis- 
crepancy is traced to its source, and soon disappears 
for ever. 

3. In these last expressions, we suppose the theory, 
not only to be tested, but also to bo corrected when it 
is found to be imperfect. And thi^ also is part of the 
business of the observing astronomer. *From his accu- 
mulated observations, lie deduces more exact values than 
had previously been obtained* of the Constants or Co- 
efficients of these Inequalities of which the Argument is 
already known. This he is enabled to do by the methods 
explained in the fifth chapter of this book ; the Method 
of Means, and especially the Method of Least Squares. 
In other cases, he finds, by the Method of Residues, 
some new Inequality; for if no change of the Coeffi- 
cients will bring the Tables and the observation to a 
coincidence, he knows that a new Term is wanting in 
his formula. He obtains, as far as he can, the law of 
this unknown Term; and when its existence and its 
law have been fully established, there remains the 
task of tracing it to its cause. 

4. The condition of the science of Astronomy, with 
regard to its security and prospect of progress, is one of 
singular felicity. It is a question well worth our con- 
sideration, as regarding the interests of science, whe- 
ther, in other branches of knowledge also, a continued 
and connected system of observation and calculation , 
imitating the system employed by astronomers, might 
not be adopted. Jit the discussion of this question 
would involve us in a digression too wide for the pre- 
sent occasion. 


1 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. vii. c. vi. sect. 6. 



FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


%&4 


Aphorism LVIIL 

In modern times , in many departments , Art is constantly 
guided , governed and advanced by Science , 

Aphorism LI* 

Recently several New Arts have been invented , which may 
be regarded as notable verifications of the anticipations of { 
material benefits to be derived to man from the progress of 
Science, 

i. T> Y the application of inductive truths, we here 
mean, according to ’the arrangement given in 
chap. I. of this boot, those steps, which in the natural 
order of science, follow the discovery of each truth. 
These steps are, the verification of the discovery by ad- 
ditional experiments and reasonings, and its extension 
to new cases, not contemplated by the original dis- 
coverer. These processes occupy that period, which, 
in the history of each great discovery, we have termed 
the Sequel of the epoch ; as the collection of facts, and 
the elucidation of conceptions, form its Prelude. 

2. It is not necessary to dwell at length on the 
processes of the Verification of Discoveries. When the 
Law of Nature is once stated, it is far easier to devise 
and execute experiments which prove it, than it \fag 
to discern the evidence before. The truth becomes 
one of the standard doctrines of the science to which it 
belongs, and is verified by all who study or who teach 
the science experimentally. The leading doctrines of 
Chemistry are constantly exemplified by each chemist 
in his Laboratory; and an amount of verification is 
thus obtained of which books give no adequate concep- 
tion. In Astronomy, we have a still stronger example 
of the process of verifying discoveries. Ever since the 
science assumed a systematic form, there have been 
Observatories, in which the consequences of the theory 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 235 

theory assigned to the heavenly* bodies at successive 
times; and thus, as it were, challenging nature to 
deny the •truth of the discovery. In this way, as I 
have elsewhere stated, the continued prevalence of an 
errour in the systematic parts of astronomy is impos- 
sible 1 . An errour, if it arise, makes its* way into the 
tables, into the ephemeris, into the observer’s nightly 
* list, or his sheet of reductions ; the evidence of sense 
flies in its face in a thousand Observatories; the dis- 
crepancy is traced to its source, and soon disappears 
for ever. 

3. In these last expressions, we suppose the theory, 
not only to be tested, but also to be corrected when it 
is found to be imperfect. And this* also is part of the 
business of the observing astronomer. *From his accu- 
mulated observations, he deduces more exact values than 
had previously been obtained, of the Constants or Co- 
efficients of these Inequalities of which tYiv Argument is 
already known. This he is enabled to do by the methods 
explained in the fifth chapter of this book; the Method 
of Means, and especially the Method of Least .Squares. 
In other cases, he finds, by the Method of Residues, 
some new Inequality; for if no change of the Coeffi- 
cients will bring the Tables and the observation to a 
coincidence, he knows that a new Term is wanting in 
bi§ formula. He obtains, as far as he can, the law of 
this unknown Term; and when its existence and its 
law have been fully established, there remains the 
task of tracing it to its cause. 

4. The condition of the science of Astronomy, with 
regard to its security and prospect of progress, is one of 
singular felicity. It is a question well worth our con- 
sideration, as regarding the interests of science, whe- 
ther, in other branches of knowledge also, a continued 
and connected system of observation and calculation , 
imitating the system employed by astronomers, might 
not be adopted. Bit the discussion of this question 



%S4 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


Aphorism LVIII. 

In modem times , in many departments , is constantly 

guided, governed and advanced by Science . 

Aphorism LI3* 

Recently several New Arts have been invented , may 

regarded as notable verifications of the anticipations of * 
material benefits to be derived to man from the progress of 
Science . 

i. T)Y the application of inductive truths, we here 
JD mean, according to *the arrangement given in 
chap. I. of this boot, those steps, which in the natural 
order of science, follow the discovery of each truth. 
These steps are, the verification of the discovery by ad- 
ditional experiments and reasonings, and its extension 
to new cases, not contemplated by the original dis- 
coverer. These processes occupy that period, which, 
in the history of each great discovery, we have termed 
the Sequel of the epoch ; as the collection of facts, and 
the elucidation of conceptions, form its Prelude. 

2 . It is not necessary to dwell at length on the 
processes of the Verification of Discoveries. When the 
Law of Nature is once stated, it is far easier to devise 
and execute experiments which prove it, than it wag 
to discern the evidence before. The truth becomes 
one of the standard doctrines of the science to which it 
belongs, and is verified by all who study or who teach 
the science experimentally. The leading doctrines of 
Chemistry are constantly exemplified by each chemist 
in his Laboratory ; and an amount of verification is 
thus obtained of which books give no adequate concep- 
tion. In Astronomy, we have a still stronger example 
of the process of verifying discoveries. Ever since the 
science assumed a systematic form, there have been 
Observatories , in which the consequences of the theory 
were habitually compared with the results of observa- 
tion. And to facfiitate this comparison, Tables of 
great extent have been calculated, with immense la- 
bour, from each theory, showing the place which the 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 235 

theory assigned to the heavenly* bodies at successive 
times; and thus, as it were, challenging nature to 
deny the*truth of the discovery. In this way, as I 
have elsewhere stated, the continued prevalence of an 
errour in the systematic parts of astronomy is impos- 
sible 1 . An errour, if it arise, makes its* way into the 
tables, into the ephemeris, into the observer’s nightly 
list, or his sheet of reductions; the evidence of sense 
flies in its face in a thousand Observatories; the dis- 
crepancy is traced to its source, and soon disappears 
for ever. 

3. In these last expressions, we suppose the theory, 
not only to be tested, but also to be corrected when it 
is found to be imperfect. And this* also is part of the 
business of the observing astronomer. *From his accu- 
mulated observations, he deduces more exact values than 
had previously been obtained* of the Constants or Co- 
efficients of these Inequalities of which the Argument is 
already known. This he is enabled to do by the methods 
explained in the fifth chapter of this book ; the Method 
of Means, and especially the Method of Least Squares. 
In other cases, he finds, by the Method of Residues, 
some new Inequality; for if no change of the Coeffi- 
cients will bring the Tables and the observation to a 
coincidence, he knows that a new Term is wanting in 
bi$ formula. He obtains, as far as he can, the law of 
this unknown Term; and when its existence and its 
law have been fully established, there remains the 
task of tracing it to its cause. 

4. The condition of the science of Astronomy, with 
regard to its security and prospect of progress, is one of 
singular felicity. It is a question well worth our con- 
sideration, as regarding the interests of science, whe- 
ther, in other branches of knowledge also, a continued 
and connected system of observation and calculation , 
imitating the system employed by astronomers, might 
not be adopted. Jit the discussion of this question 
would involve us in a digression too wide for the pre- 
sent occasion. 


1 Hist Ind. Sc. b. vii. c. vi. sect. 6. 



236 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

5. There is another mode of application of true 
theories after their discovery, of which we must also 
speak ; I mean the process of showing that 'facts, not 
included in the original induction, and apparently of a 
different kind, are explained by # reasonings founded 
upon the theory : — extensions of the theory as we may 
call them. The history of physical astronomy is full 
of such events. Thus after Bradley and Wargentin 
had observed a certain cycle among the perturbations 
of J upiter’s satellites, Laplace explained this cycle by 
the doctrine of universal gravitation 2 . The long ine- 
quality of Jupiter and Saturn, the diminution of the 
obliquity of the ecliptic, the acceleration of the moon’s 
mean motion, were in like manner accounted for by 
Laplace. The coincidence of the nodes of the moon’s 
equator with those of her orbit was proved to result 
from mechanical principles by Lagrange. The motions 
of the recently-discovered planets, and of comets, shown 
by various mathematicians to be in exact accordance 
with the theory, are Y erificatjpns and Extensions still 
more obvious. 

6. In many of the cases just noticed, the consistency 
between the theory, and the consequences thus proved 
to result from it, is so far from being evident, that the 
most consummate command of .all the powers and aids 
of mathematical reasoning is needed, to enable the phi- 
losopher to arrive at the result. In consequence of 
this circumstance, the labours just referred to, of La- 
place, Lagrange, and others, have been the object of 
very great and very just admiration. Moreover, the 
necessary connexion of new facts, at first deemed inex- 
plicable, with principles already known to be true; — 
a connexion utterly invisible at the outset, and yet at 
last established with the certainty of demonstration ; — 
strikes us with the delight of a new discovery ; and at 
first sight appears no less admirable than an original 
induction. Accordingly, men some Ales appear tempted 
to consider Laplace and other great mathematicians as 
persons of a kindred/ genius to Newton. We must not 


2 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. vii. c. iv. sect. 3. 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 237 

forget, however, that there is a great and essential dif- 
ference between inductive and deductive processes of 
the mindt The discovery of a new theory, which is 
true, is a step widely distinct from any mere develop- 
ment of the consequences of a theory already invented 
and established. 

7. In the other sciences also, which have been 
.framed by a study of natural phenomena, we may find 
examples of the explanation of new phenomena by 
applying the principles of the science when once 
established. Thus, when the laws of the reflection 
and refraction of light had been established, a new 
and poignant exemplification of them was found in 
the explanation of the Rainbow by llie reflection and 
refraction of light in the spherical drops of a shower; 
and again, another, no less striking, when the inter- 
secting Luminous Circles and *Mock Suns, which are 
seen in cold seasons, were completely explained by the 
hexagonal crystals of ice which float in the upper 
regions of the atmosphere. The Darkness of the space 
between the primary and secondary rainbow is another 
appearance which optical theory completely explains. 
And when we further include in our optical theory 
the doctrine of interferences, w^e find the explanation 
of other phenomena; for instance, the Supernumerary 
ljainbows which accompany the primary rainbow on 
its inner side, and the small Halos which often sur- 
round the sun and moon. And when we come to 
optical experiments, we find many instances in which 
the doctrine of interferences and of undulations have 
been applied to explain the phenomena by calculations 
almost as complex as those which we have mentioned 
in speaking of astronomy : with results as little fore- 
seen at first and as entirely satisfactory in the end. 
Such are Scliwerdt’s explanation of the diffracted 
images of a triangular aperture by the doctrine of 
interferences, and the explanation Qf the coloured 
Lemniscates seen by polarized light in biaxal crystals, 
given by Young and by Hersche? : and still more 
marked is another case, in which the curves are unsym- 
mStrical, namely, the curves scen*by passing polarized 



238 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


liglit through plates of quartz, which agree in a won- 
derful manner with the calculations of Air y. To these 
we may add the curious phenomena, and equally 
curious mathematical explanation, of Conical Refrac- 
tion, as brought to view by Professor Lloyd and Sir 
W. Hamilton. Indeed, the whole history both of 
Physical Optics and of Physical Astronomy is a series 
of felicities of this kind, as we have elsewhere observed. 
Such applications of theory, and unforeseen explana- 
tions of new facts by complicated trains of reasoning 
necessarily flowing from the theory, are strong proofs 
of the truth of the theory, while it is in the course of 
being established^ but we are here rather speaking of 
them as applications of the theory after it has been 
established. 

Those who thus apply principles already discovered 
arc not, to be ranked in their intellectual achievements 
with those who discover new principles ; but still, 
when such applications are masked by the complex 
relations of space and number, it is impossible not to 
regard with admiration the clearness and activity of 
intellect which thus discerns in a remote region the 
rays of a central truth already unveiled by some great 
discoverer. 

8. As examples in other fields of the application 
of a scientific discovery to the explanation of natural 
phenomena, we may take the identification of Light- 
ning with electricity by Franklin, and the explanation 
of Dew Ly Wells. For Wells’s Inquiry into the 
Cause of Dew , though it has sometimes been praised 
as an original discovery, was, in fact, only resolving 
the phenomenon into principles already discovered. 
The atmologists of the last century were aware” that 
the vapour which exists in air in an invisible state 
maybe condensed into water by cold; and they had 
noticed that there is always a certain temperature, 
lower than that of the atmosphere, to which if we 
depress bodies, water forms upon them in fine drops. 
This temperature is the limit of that which is neces- 


3 Hist’Ind. Sc. b. x. c. iii. sect. 5. 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 239 

sary to constitute vapour, and is lienee called the con- 
stituent temperature. But these principles were not 
generally # familiar in England till Dr. Wells introduced 
them into his Essay on Dew, published in 1814; having 
indeed been ill a great measure led to them by his 
own experiments and reasonings. His explanation of 
Dew, — that it arises from the coldness of the bodies 
on which it settles, — was established with great inge- 
nuity; and is a very elegant confirmation of the Theory 
of Constituent Temperature. 

9. As other examples of such explanations of new 
phenomena by a theory, we may point out Ampere’s 
Theory that Magnetism is transverse voltaic currents, 
applied to explain the rotation of a voltaic wire round 
a magnet, and of a magnet round a voltaic wire. And 
again, in the same subject, when it had been proved 
that electricity might be converted into magnetism, it 
seemed certain that magnetism might be converted 
into electricity; and accordingly Faraday found under 
what conditions this may be done ; though indeed 
here, the theory rather suggested the experiment than 
explained it when it had been independently observed. 
The production of an electric spark by a magnet was 
a very striking exemplification of the theory of the 
identity of these different polar agencies. 

10. I11 Chemistry such applications of the princi- 
ples of the science are very fretjueut; for it is the 
chemist’s business to account for the innumerable 
changes which take place in material substances by 
the effects of mixture, licat, and the like. As a marked 
instance of such an application of the science, we 
may take the explanation of the explosive force of 
gunpowder 4 , from the conversion of its materials 
into gases. In Mineralogy also we have to apply the 


The explanation is, that the force times the hulk of the powder used, 
is due to the sudden development hut from the intense heat developed 
of a large volume of nitrogen and at the moment of the explosion, the 
carbonic acid gases, which at the dilatatioif amounts to at least 1500 
ordinary temperature of the air would times the volume of the gunpowder 
occupy a space equal to about 300 employed. 



240 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

principles of Chemistry to the analysis of bodies : and 
I may mention, as a case which at the time excited 
much notice, the analysis of a mineral called Heavy 
Spar. It was found that different specimens of this 
mineral differed in their crystalline angles about three 
degrees and a half ; a difference which was at variance 
with the mineralogical discovery then recently made, 
of the constancy of the angle of the same substance. 
Yauquelin solved this difficulty by discovering that 
the crystals with the different angles were really 
minerals chemically different ; the one kind being sul- 
phate of barytes, and the other, sulphate of strontian. 

11. In this way a scientific theory, when once esta- 
blished, is perpetually finding new applications in the 
phenomena of nature ; and those who make such 
applications, though, as we have said, they care not to 
be ranked with the gieat discoverers who establish 
theories new and true, often receive a more prompt 
and general applause than great discoverers do; be- 
cause they have not to struggle with the perplexity 
and aversencss which often encounter the promulga- 
tion of new truths. 

12. Along with the verification and extension of 
scientific truths, we are naturally led to consider the 
useful application of them. The example of all the 
best writers who have previously treated of the philo- 
sophy of sciences, from Bacon to Herschcl, draws our 
attention to those instances of the application of scien- 
tific truths, which are subservient to the uses of 
practical life; to the support, the safety, the pleasure 
of man. It is well known in how large a degree 
the furtherance of these objects constituted the merit 
of the Novum Organon in the eyes of its author; 
and the enthusiasm with which men regard these 
visible and tangible manifestations of the power and 
advantage which knowledge may bring, has gone on 
increasing up to our own day. And undoubtedly such 
applications of the discoveries of science to promote 
the preservation, comfort, power and dignity of man, 
must always be objects of great philosophical' as wdl 
as practical interest. , Yet we may observe that those 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 24I 

practical inventions which are of* most importance in 
the Arts, have not commonly, in the past ages of the 
world, been the results of theoretical knowledge, nor 
have they tended very, greatly to the promotion of such 
knowledge. The use of bread and of wine has existed 
from the first beginning of man’s social history; yet men 
have not had — wc may question whether they yet have 
_ — a satisfactory theory of the constitution and fabrica- 
tion of bread and of wine. From a very early period 
there have been workers in metal : yet who could tell 
upon what principles depended the purifying of gold 
and silver by the fire, or the difference between iron 
and steel ? In some cases, as in the story of the brass 
produced by the Corinthian conflagration, some parti- 
cular step in art is ascribed to a special accident; but 
hardly ever to «tlio thoughtful activity of a scientific 
speculator. The Dyeing of cloths, the fabrication and 
colouring of earthenware and glass vessels was carried 
to a very high degree of completeness; yet who had 
any sound theoretical knowledge respecting these pro- 
cesses? Are not all these arts still practised with 
a degree of skill which we can hardly or not at all 
surpass, by nations which have, properly speaking, 110 
science i Till lately, at least, if even now the case 
be different, the operations by which map’s comforts, 
luxuries, and instruments were produced, were either 
mcr£ practical processes, which the artist practises, but 
which the scientist cannot account for; or, as in astro- 
nomy and optics, they depended upon •a, small portion 
only of the theoretical sciences, and did not tend to 
illustrate, or lead to, any larger truths. Bacon men- 
tions as recent discoveries, which gave him courage 
and hope with regard to the future progress of human 
knowledge, the invention of gunpowder, glass, and 
printing, the introduction of silk, and the discovery of 
America. Yet which of these can he said to have been 
the results of a theoretical enlargement of human 
knowledge? except perhaps the discovery of the* New 
World, which was in some degree tlifc result of Colum- 
bus'^ oonViction of # the globular form of the earth. 
Thi% however, was not a recent, «but a very ancient 
NOV. oru% 1 G 



242 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

doctrine of all sound astronomers. And which of these 
discoveries has been the cause of a great enlargement 
of our theoretical knowledge? — except any one claims 
such a merit for the discovery of printing; in which 
sense the result is brought about in a very indirect 
manner, in the same way in which the progress of 
freedom and of religion may be ascribed as conse- 
quences to the same discovery. However great or 
striking, then, such discoveries have been, they have 
not, generally speaking, produced any marked advance 
of the Inductive Sciences in the sense in which we 
here speak of them. They have increased man’s 
power, it may be : that is, his power of adding to his 
comforts and communicating with his fellow-men. 
But they have not necessarily or generally increased 
his theoretical knowledge. And, therefore, with what- 
ever admiration we may look upon such discoveries as 
these, we are not to admire them as steps in Inductive 
Science. 

And on the other hand, we are not to ask of In- 
ductive Science, as a necessary result of her progress, 
such additions as these to man’s means of enjoyment 
and action. It is said, with a feeling of triumph, that 
Knowledge is Power : but in whatever sense this may 
truly be said, we value Knowledge, not because it is 
Power but because it is Knowledge; and we estimate 
wrongly both the nature and the dignity of that kind 
of science with which we are here concerned, if we 
expect that evbry new advance in theory will forth- 
with have a market value : — that science will mark 
the birth of a new Truth with some new birthday 
present, such as a softer stuff to wrap our limbs, a 
brighter vessel to grace oar table, a new mode of com- 
munication with our friends and the world, a new in- 
strument for the destruction of our enemies, or a new 
region which may be the source of wealth and interest. 

13 . Yet though, as we have said, many of the most 
renfarkable processes which we reckon as the triumphs 
of Art did not result from a previous progress of Sci- 
ence, we have, at many points of the history of Science, 
applications of new view T s, to enable man to do as Veil 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 243 

as to see . When Archimedes had obtained clear views 
of the theory of machines, he forthwith expressed them 
in his bold practical boast ; ‘ Give me whereon to stand, 
and I will move, the earth.’ And his machines with 
which he is said to have handled the Roman ships 
like toys, and his burning mirrors with which he is 
reported to have set them on fire, are at least possible 
^plications of theoretical principles. When he saw 
the waters rising in the bath as his body descended, 
and rushed* out crying, 4 1 have found the way;’ what 
he had found was the solution of the practical ques- 
tion of the quantity of silver mixed with the gold of 
Hiero’s crown. But the mechanical indentions of Hero 
of Alexandria, which moved by the forc$ of air or of 
steam, probably involved no exact theoretical notions 
of the properties of air or of steajn. He devised a toy 
which revolved by the action of steam; but by the force 
of steam exerted in issuing from an orifice, not by its 
pressure or condensation. And the Romans had no arts 
derived from science in addition to those which they 
inherited from the Greeks. They built aqueducts, not 
indeed through ignorance of the principles of hydrosta- 
tics, as has sometimes been said; for we, who know our 
hydrostatics, build aqueducts still; but their practice 
exemplified only Archimedean hydrostatics. Their 
clepsydras or water-clocks were adjusted by trial only. 
They used arches and vaults more copiously than the 
Greeks had done, but the principle of the arch appears, 
by the most recent researches, to have been known to 
the Greeks. Domes and groined arches, such as we have 
in the Pantheon and in the Baths of Oaracalla, per- 
haps they invented ; certainly they practised them 011 
a noble scale. Yet this was rather practical skill 
than theoretical knowledge; and it was pursued by 
their successors in the middle ages in the same man- 
ner, as practical skill rather than theoretical know- 
ledge. Thus were produced flying buttresses, intersect- 
ing pointed vaults, and the* other wonders of medkeval 
architecture. The engineers of the fifteenth century, 
as L^onaydo da Vinci, began to convert their practical 
into theoretical knowledge of Mechanics; but still 

16— 2 



244 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


clocks and watches, flying machines and printing 
presses involved no new mechanical principle. 

14. But from this time the advances 0 in Science 
generally produced, as their result, new inventions of 
a practical kind. Thus the doctrine of the weight of 
air led to such inventions as the barometer used as 
a Weather-glass, the Air-pump with its train of curi- 
ous experiments, the Diving-Bell, the Balloon. The 
telescope was perhaps in some degree a discovery due 
to accident, but its principles had been taught by 
Koger Bacon, and still more clearly by Descartes. 
Newton invented a steady thermometer by attending 
to steady laws of nature. And in the case of the im- 
provements of the steam engine made by Watt, we 
have an admirable example how superior the method 
of improving Art by ..Science is, to the blind gropings 
of mere practical habit. 

Of this truth, the history of most of the useful arts 
in our time offers abundant proofs and illustrations. 
All improvements and applications of the forces and 
agencies which man employs for his purposes are now 
commonly made, not by blind trial, but with the 
clearest theoretical as well as practical insight which 
he can obtain, into the properties of the agents which 
ho employs. In this way he lias constructed, (using 
theory and calculation at every step of his construc- 
tion,) steam engines, steam boats, screw-propellers, 
locomotive engines, railroads and bridges and struc- 
tures of all kinds. Lightning-conductors have been 
improved and applied to the preservation of buildings, 
and especially of ships, with admirable effect, by Sir 
Wm. Snow Harris, an experimenter who has studied 
with great care the theory of electricity. The mea- 
surement of the quantity of oxygen, that is, of vital 
] lower, in air, has been taught by Cavendish, and by 
Dr lire a skilful chemist of our time. Methods for 
measuring the bleaching power of a substance have 
been devised by eminent chemical philosophers, Gay 
Lussac and Mr Graham. Davy used hip discoyeries 
concerning the laws of flame in order to con^tru^t his 
Safety Lamp : — Ins discoveries concerning the galvanic 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 245 


battery in order to protect ships’ bottoms from corro- 
sion. The skilled geologist has repeatedly given to 
those who ^ere about to dig for coal where it could 
have no geological place, advice which has saved them 
from ruinous expence. Sir Roderick Murchison, from 
geological evidence, declared the likelihood of gold be- 
ing found abundantly in Australia, many years before 
tiie diggings began. 

Even the subtle properties of light as shewn in the 
recent discoveries of its interference and polarization, 
have been applied to useful purposes. Young invented 
an Eriometer , an instrument which should measure the 
fineness of the threads of wool by the ^coloured fringes 
which they produce; and substances whjch it is im- 
portant to distinguish in the manufacture of- sugar, 
are discriminated bv their effect jn rotating the plane 
of polarization of light. One substance has been termed 
Dextrin, from its impressing a right-liandod rotation 
on the plane of polarization. 

And in a great number of Arts and Manufactures, 
the necessity of a knowledge of theory to the right 
conduct of practice is familiarly acknowledged and 
assumed. In the testing and smelting of metals, in the 
fabrication of soap, of candles, of sugar ; in the dyeing 
and printing of woollen, linen, cotton and silken stuffs; 
thcjuaster manufacturer has always the scientific che- 
mist at his elbow; — either a ‘consulting chemist’ to 
whom he may apply on a special occasion, (for such is 
now a regular profession;) or a chemist who day by 
day superintends, controls, and improves the processes 
which his workmen daily carry on. In these cases, 
though Art long preceded Science, Science now guides, 
governs and advances Art. 

15. Other Arts and manufactures which have arisen 
in modem times have been new creations produced by 
Science, and requiring a complete acquaintance with 
scientific processes to conduct them effectually and 
securely. Such are the photographic Arts, now so 
various in their form ; beginning with those which, 
from their authors, are called Daguerrotype and Tal- 
botype. Such are the Arts of Electrotype modelling 



246 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

t 

and Electrotype plating. Such are the Arts of pre- 
paring fulminating substances ; gun-cotton ; fulminate 
of silver, and of mercury; and the application of those 
Arts to use, in the fabrication of percussion-caps for 
guns. Such is the Art of Electric Telegraphy, from its 
first beginning to its last great attempt, the electric 
cord which connects England and America. Such is 
the Art of imitating by the chemistry of the laboratory 
the vegetable chemistry of nature, and thus producing 
the flavour of the pear, the apple, the pine-apple, the 
melon, the quince. Such is the Art of producing in 
man a temporary insensibility to pain, which was 
effected first through the means of sulphuric ether by 
Dr Jackson of America, and afterwards through the 
use of chloroform by Dr Simpson of Edinburgh. In 
these cases and mapy others Science has endowed 
man with New Arts. And though even in these Arts, 
which are thus the last results of Science, there is 
much which Science cannot fully understand and ex- 
plain ; still, such cases cannot but be looked upon 4s 
notable verifications of the anticipations of those who 
in former times expected from the progress of* Science 
a harvest of material advantages to man. 

We must now conclude our task by a few words on 
the subject of inductions involving Ideas ulterior to 
those already considered. 



CHAPTER X. 

Of the Induction of Causes. 


Aphorism LX. 

In the Induction of Causes the principal Maxim is, that 
we must he careful to possess , and to hpply , with perfect 
clearness, the Fundamental Idea on which the Induction 
depends. 

Aphorism LXI. 

The Induction of Substance, of Force , of Polarity, go 
beyond mere laws of phenomena , and may be considered as 
the Induction of Causes . 

Aphorism LXII. 

The Cause of certain phenomena being inferred, we are 
led to inquire into the Cause of this Cause, which inquiry 
must be conducted in the same manner as the previous one ; 
and thus we have the Induction of Ulterior Causes. 

Aphorism LXIII. 

In contemplating the series of Causes which are themselves 
the effects of other causes , we are necessarily led to assume a 
Supreme Cause in the Order of Causation, as we assume a 
First Cause in Order of Succession. 

i. "YX7"E formerly 1 stated the objects of the researches 
V ? of Science to be Laws of Phenomena and 
Causes ; and showed the propriety and the necessity of 
not resting in the former object, \>ut extending our 


1 B. ii. c. Yii. 



248 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

inquiries to the latter also. Inductions, in which phe- 
nomena are connected by relations* of Space, Time, 
Number and Resemblance, belong to the forinei^lass ; 
and of the Methods applicable to such Inductions we 
have treated already. In proceeding to Inductions 
governed by any ulterior Ideas, we can no longer lay 
down any Special Methods by which our procedure 
may be directed. A few general remarks are all that? 
we shall offer. 

The principal Maxim in such cases of Induction is 
the obvious one : — that we must be careful to possess 
and to apply, with perfect clearness and precision, the 
Fundamental Idt^i on which the Induction depends. 

"We may illustrate this in a few cases. 

2. Induction of Substance. — The Idea of Substance “ 
involves this axiom, thgt the weight of the whole com- 
pound must be equal to the weights of the separate 
elements, whatever changes the composition or separa- 
tion of the elements may have occasioned. The appli- 
cation of this Maxim we may term the Method of the 
Balance. We have seen 3 elsewhere how the memor- 
able revolution in Chemistry, the overthrow of Phlo- 
giston, and the establishment of the Oxygen Theory, 
was produced by the application of this Method. We 
have seen too 4 that the same Idea leads us to this 
Maxim; — that Imponderable Fluids are not to be 
admitted as chemical elements of bodies. 

Whether those which have been termed Imponder- 
able Fluids , — the supposed fluids which produce the 
phenomena of Light, Heat, Electricity, Galvanism, 
Magnetism, — really exist or no, is a question, not 
merely of the Laws , but of the Causes of Phenomena. 
It is, as has already been shown, a question which we 
cannot help discussing, but which is at present involved 
in great obscurity. Nor does it appear at all likely that 
we shall obtain a true view of the cause of Light, 
Heat, and Electricity, till we have discovered precise 
and general laws connecting optical, tliermotical, and 


2 Hid. Sc. Ideas t Book vf c. iiL 


3 Ibid. b. vi. c. iv. 


4 Ibid. 



OF THE INDUCTION OF CAUSES. 249 

electrical phenomena with those chemical doctrines to 
which the Idea of Substance is necessarily applied. 

3. IMuction of Force. — The inference of Mecha- 
nical Forces figom phenomena has been so abundantly 
practised, that it is perfectly familiar among scientific 
inquirers. From the time of Newton, it has been the 
most common aim of mathematicians; and a persua- 
sion has grown up among them, that mechanical forces, 
— attraction and repulsion, — are the only modes of 
action of the particles of bodies which we shall ulti- 
mately have to consider. I have attempted to show 
that this mode of conception is inadequate to the pur- 
poses of sound philosophy ;• — that the Particles of 
crystals, and the Elements of chemical compounds, 
must be supposed to be combined in some other way 
than by mere mechanical attraction and repulsion. 
Dr. Faraday has gone further m shaking the usual con- 
ceptions of the force exerted, in well-known cases. 
Among the most noted and conspicuous instances of 
attraction and repulsion exerted at a distance, were 
those which take place between electrized bodies. But 
the eminent electrician just mentioned has endeavoured 
to establish, by experiments of which it is very diffi- 
cult to elude the weight, that the action in these cases 
docs not take place at a distance, but is the result of 
$ chain of intermediate particles connected at every 
point by forces of another kind. 

4. Induction of Polarity . — The forces to which 
Dr. Faraday ascribes the action ill these cases are 
Polar Forces \ We have already endeavoured to ex- 
plain the Idea of Polar Forces; which implies” that at 
every point forces exactly equal act in opposite direc- 
tions; and thus, in the greater part of their course, 
neutralize and conceal each other; while at the extre- 
mities of the line, being by some cause liberated, they 
are manifested, still equal and opposite. And the cri- 
terion by which this polar character, of forces is re- 
cognized, is implied in the reasoning of Faracfcay, on 
the question of one or two electi*icities, of which we 


6 Researches, 12th series. 6 B. v. c. i. 



250 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

formerly spoke 7 . T^he maxim is this: — that in the 
action of polar forces, along with every manifestation 
of force or property, there exists a corresponding and 
simultaneous manifestation of an equ^l and opposite 
force or property. 

5. As it was the habit of the last age to reduce all 
action to mechanical forces, the present race of physical 
speculators appears inclined to reduce all forces to « 
polar forces. Mosotti has endeavoured to show that the 
positive and negative electricities pervade all bodies, 
and that gravity is only an apparent excess of one of 
the kinds over the other. As we have seen, Faraday 
has given strong experimental grounds for believing 
that the supposed' remote actions of electrized bodies 
are really the effects of polar forces among contiguous 
particles. If this doctrine were established with re- 
gard to all electrical, magnetical, and chemical forces, 
we might ask, whether, while all other forces are 
polar, gravity really affords a single exception to the 
universal rule ? Is not the universe pervaded by an 
omnipresent antagonism, a fundamental conjunction of 
contraries, everywhere opposite, nowhere independent 1 
We are, as yet, far from the position in which Induc- 
tive Science can enable us to answer such inquiries. 

6. Induction of Ulterior Causes . — Tlitf first Induc- 
tion of a Cause does not close the business of scientific 
inquiry. Behind proximate causes, there are ulterior 
causes, perhaps a succession of such. Gravity is the 
cause of the motions of the planets ; but what is the 
cause of gravity 1 This is a question which has occu- 
pied men’s minds from the time of Newton to the pre- 
sent day. Earthquakes and volcanoes are the causes 
of many geological phenomena ; but what is the cause 
of those subterraneous operations ? This inquiry after 
ulterior causes is an inevitable result from the intellec- 
tual constitution of man. He discovers mechanical 
causes, but he cannot rest in them. He must needs 
ask, whence it is that matter has its universal power of 
attracting matter. He discovers polar forces : but even 


Book v. c. i. 



OF THE INDUCTION OF CAUSES. 25I 

if these be universal, he still desires a further insight 
into the cause of this polarity. He sees, in organic 
structures, convincing marks of adaptation to an end : 
whence, he asks, is this adaptation ? He traces in the 
history of the earth a chain of causes and effects ope- 
rating through time: but what, he inquires, is the 
power which holds the end of this chain? 

Thus we are referred back from step to step, in the 
order of causation, in the same manner as, in the palse- 
tiological sciences, we were referred back in the order 
of time. We make discovery after discovery in the 
various regions of science; each, it may be, satisfactory, 
and in itself complete, but none final. Something 
always remains undone. The last* question answered, 
the answer suggests still another question. The strain 
of music from the lyre of Science flows on, rich and 
sweet, full and harmonious, ttut never reaches a close : 
no cadence is heard with which the intellectual ear can 
feel satisfied. 

Of the Supreme Cause . — In the utterance of Science, 
no cadence is heard with which the human mind can 
feel satisfied. Yet we cannot but go on listening for 
and expecting a satisfactory close. The notion of a 
cadence appears to be essential to our relish of the 
music. The idea of some closing strain seems to lurk 
among our own thoughts, waiting to be articulated in 
the notes which flow from the knowledge of external 
nature. The idea of something ultimate in our philo- 
sophical researches, something in which the mind can 
acquiesce, and which will leave us no further questions 
to ask, of whence , and why , and by what power , seems 
as if it belonged to us ; — as if we could not have it 
withheld from us by any imperfection or incomplete- 
ness in the actual performances of science. What is 
the meaning of this conviction ? What is the reality 
thus anticipated ? Whither does the developement of 
this Idea conduct us ? 

We have already seen that a difficulty of the same 
kind, which arises in the contemplation of causes and 
effects Considered as forming an historical series, drives 
fls to the assumption of a First Cause, as an Axiom 



252 FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

to which our Idea of Causation in time necessarily 
leads. And as we were thus guided to a First Cause, 
in order of Succession, the same kind of necessity 
directs us to a Supreme Cause in order of Causation. 

On this most weighty subject it is difficult to speak 
fitly; and the present is not the proper occasion, even 
for most of that which may be said. But there are 
one or two remarks which flow from the general train 
of the contemplations we have been engaged in, and 
with which this Work must conclude. 

We have seen how different arc the kinds of cause 
to which we are led by scientific researches. Mecha- 
nical Forces are insufficient without Chemical Affini- 
ties ; Chemical Agencies fail us, and we are compelled 
to have recourse to Vital Powers; Vital Powers can- 
not be merely physical, and we must believe in some- 
thing hyperpliysical, something of the nature of a Soul. 
Not only do biological inquiries lead us to assume an 
animal soul, but they drive us much further; they 
bring before us Perception , and Will evoked by Per- 
ception. Still more, these inquiries disclose to us Ideas 
as the necessary forms of Perception, in the actions 
of which we ourselves arc conscious. We are aware, 
we cannot help being aware, of our Ideas and our 
Volitions as belonging to us, and thus we pass from 
things to ymrsous ; we have the idea of Personality 
awakened. And the idea of Design and Purpose , of 
which we are conscious in our own minds, we find 
reflected back to ue, with a distinctness which we can- 
not overlook, in all the arrangements which constitute 
the frame of organized beings. 

We cannot but reflect how widely diverse are the 
kinds of principles thus set before us ; — by what vast 
strides we mount from the lower to the higher, as we 
proceed through that series of causes which the range 
of the sciences thus brings under our notice. Yet 
we know how narrow is the range of these sciences 
when compared with the whole extent of human know- 
ledge. We cannot doubt that on many other subjects, 
besides those included in physical speculation, riiandias 
made out solid and satisfactory trains of connexion;— 



OP THE INDUCTION OF CAUSES. 253 


has discovered clear and indisputable evidence of caus- 
ation. It is manifest, therefore, that, if we are to 
attempt* to ascend to the Supreme Cause — if we are 
to try to frame an idea of the Cause of all these sub- 
ordinate causes; — we must conceive it as more dif- 
ferent from any of them, than the most diverse are 
from each other; — more elevated above the highest, 
than the highest is above the lowest. 

But further; — though the Supreme CiTuse must thus 
be inconceivably different from all subordinate causes, 
and immeasurably elevated above them all, it must 
still include in itself all that is essential to each of 
them, by virtue of that very circumstance that it is 
the Cause of their Causality. Time and Space, — In- 
finilfe Time and Infinite Space, — must be among its 
attributes; for we cannot but conceive Infinite Time 
and Space as attributes of tiie Infinite Cause of the 
Universe. Force and Matter must depend upon it 
for their efficacy ; for we cannot conceive the activity 
of Force, or the resistance of Matter, to be independent 
p>owers. But these are its lowef attributes. The Vital 
Powers, the Animal Soul, which are the Causes of the 
actions o%living things, are only the Effects of the 
Supreme Cause of Life. And this Cause, even in the 
lowest forms of organized bodies, and still more in 
.those which stand higher in the scale, involves a 
reference to Ends and Purposes, in short, to manifest 
Final Causes. Since this is so, and since, even when 
we contemplate ourselves in a vie^r studiously nar- 
rowed, we still find that we have Ideas, and Will and 
Personality, it would render our philosophy utterly 
incoherent and inconsistent with itself, to suppose that 
Personality, and Ideas, and Will, and Purpose, do not 
belong to the Supreme Cause from which we derive 
all that we have and all that we are. 

But we may go a step further; — though, in our 
present field of speculation, we confine ourselves to 
knowledge founded on the facts which the external 
world presents to us, we cannot ffirget, in speaking of 
such a ftieme as that to which we have thus been led, 
that these are but a small, and the least significant 



254 


FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


portion of the facts which bear upon it. We cannot 
fail to recollect that there are facts belonging to the 
world within us, which more readily and Strongly 
direct our thoughts to the Supreme, Cause of all 
things. We can plainly discern that we have Ideas 
elevated above the region of mechanical causation, of 
animal existence, even of mere choice and will, which 
still have a clear and definite significance, a permanent 
and indestructible validity. We perceive as a fact, 
that we have a Conscience, judging of Right and 
W rong ; that we have Ideas of Moral Good and Evil ; 
that wc arc compelled to conceive the organization 
of the moral world, as well as of the vital frame, to 
be directed to an end and governed by a purpose. 
And since the Supreme Cause is the cause of #iese 
facts, the Origin of these Ideas, we cannot refuse to 
recognize Him as not only the Maker, but the Gover- 
nor of the World ; as not only a Creative, but a Pro- 
vidential Power; as not only a Universal Father, but 
an Ultimate Judge. 

We have already passed beyond the boundary of 
those speculations which we proposed to ourselves as 
the basis of our conclusions. Yet we may#)e allowed 
to add one other reflection. If we find in ourselves 
Ideas of Good and Evil, manifestly bestowed upon us 
to be the guides of our conduct, which guides we yet 
find it impossible consistently to obey; — if we find our- 
selves directed, even by our natural light, to aim at a 
perfection of our fhoral nature from which we are con- 
stantly deviating through weakness and perverseness; 
if, when we thus lapse and err, we can find, in the 
region of human philosophy, no power which can efface 
our aberrations, or reconcile our actual with our ideal 
being, or give us any steady hope and trust with re- 
gard to our actions, after we have thus discovered their 
incongruity with their genuine standard ; — if we dis- 
cern that this is our condition, how can we fail to see 
that it* is in the highest degree consistent with all the 
indications supplied* by such a philosophy as that of 
which we have been attempting to lay the foundations, 
that the Supreme Cau^e, through whom man exists as 



OF THE INDUCTION OF CAUSES. 255 

a moral being of vast capacities* and infinite hopes, 
should have Himself provided a teaching for our igno- 
rance, a propitiation for our sin, a support for our 
weakness, a purification and sanctification of our 
nature ? 

And thus, in concluding our lon*f survey of the 
grounds and structure of science, and of the lessons 
which the study of it teaches us, we find ourselves 
brought to a point of view in which we can cordially 
sympathize, and more than sympathize, with all the 
loftiest expressions of admiration and reverence and 
hope and trust, which have been uttered by those who 
in former times have spoken of the elevated thoughts 
to which the contemplation of the n&ture and progress 
of human knowledge gives rise. We cafi not only hold 
with Galen, and Harvey, and all the great physio- 
logists, that the organs of anitnals give evidence of a 
purpose; — not only assert with Cuvier that this con- 
viction of a purpose can alone enable us to understand 
every part of every living thing ; — not only say with 
Newton that ‘every true step made in philosophy 
brings us nearer to the First Cause, and is on that 
account highly to be valued — and that ‘ the business 
of natural philosophy is to deduce causes from effects, 
till we come to the very First Cause, which certainly is 
not mechanical:’ — but we can go much further, and 
declare, still with Newton, that £ this beautiful system 
could have its origin no other way than by the pur- 
pose and command of an intelligent and powerful Being, 
who governs all things, not as the soul of the world, 
but as the Lord of the Universe; who is not oidy God, 
but Lord and Governor.’ 

When we have advanced so far, there yet remains 
one step. We may recollect the prayer of one, the 
master in this school of the philosophy of science : 
‘This also we humbly and earnestly beg; — that hu- 
man things may not prejudice such as. arc divine; — 
neither that from the unlocking of the gates of seilae, and 
the kindling of a greater natural light,* anything may 
arise af incredulity or intellectual night towards divine 
masteries; but rather that by our minds thoroughly 



FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 


256 

purged and cleansed from fancy and vanity, and yet 
subject and perfectly given up to the divine oracles, 
there may be given unto faith the things*, that are 
faith’s.’ When we are thus prepared for a higher 
teaching, we may be ready to listen to a greater than 
Bacon, when hT says to those who have sought their 
God in the material universe, ‘Whom ye ignorantly 
worship, him declare T unto you.’ And when we re- , 
collect how utterly inadequate all human language has 
been shown to be, to express the nature of that Su- 
preme Cause of the Natural, and Rational, and Moral, 
and Spiritual world, to which our Philosophy points 
with trembling finger and shaded eyes, we may receive, 
with the less wohder but with the more reverence, 
the declaration' which has been vouchsafed to us : 

EN APXH HN *0 AOPOS, KAI 'O A0P02 HN IIP02 
TON 0EON, KAI GEOS HN '0 AOrOS. 



NOVUM ORGANON RENOVATUM. 


BOOK IV. 

OF THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


Introduction. 

I T lias been shown in the History of the Sciences, 
and lias further appeared in the course of the 
History of Ideas , that almost every step in the pro- 
gress of science is marked by the formation or appro- 
priation of a technical term. Common language has, 
in most cases, a certain degree of looseness and ambi- 
guity; as common knowledge has usually something of 
vagueness and indistinctness. In common cases too, 
knowledge usually docs not occupy the intellect alone, 
but more or less interests some affection, or puts in 
action the fancy; and common language, accommo- 
dating itself to the office of expressing such know- 
ledge, contains, in every sentence, a tinge of emotion 
or of imagination. But when our knowledge becomes 
perfectly exact and purely intellectual, we require a 
language which shall &1 so be exact and intellectual; — 
which shall exclude alike vagueness and fancy, imper- 
fection and superfluity; — in which each term shall 
convey a meaning steadily fixed and rigorously limited. 
Such a language that of science becomes, • through the 
use of Technical Terms. And we must now endeavour 
to lay down some maxims and suggestions, by atten- 
tion f to which Technical Terms may be better fitted to 
answer their purpose. In order to tlo this, we shall in 
nov. Oita* 1 7 



258 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

the first place take a rapid survey of the manner in 
which Technical Terms have been employed from the 
earliest periods of scientific history. 

The progress of the use of technical scientific lan- 
guage offers to our notice two different and successive 
periods; in the first of which, technical terms were 
formed casually, as convenience in each case prompted ; 
while in the second period, technical language was coni 
structed intentionally, with set purpose, with a regard 
to its connexion, and with a view of constructing a 
system. Though the casual and the systematic formal 
tion of technical terms cannot be separated by any 
precise date of time, (for at all periods some terms in 
some sciences have been framed unsystematically,) we 
may, as a general description, call the former the An- 
cient and the latter the Modern Period. In illustrating 
the two following Aphorisms, I will give examples of 
the course followed in each of these periods. 


Aphorism I. 

In the Ancient Period of Sciences , Technical Terms were 
formed in three different ways : — by appropriating common 
words and fixing their meaning; — by constructing terms 
containing a description; — by constructing terms containing 
reference to a theory . 

The earliest* sciences offer the earliest examples of 
technical terms. These are Geometry, Arithmetic, and 
Astronomy; to which we have soon after to add Har- 
monics, Mechanics, and Optics. I11 these sciences, we 
may notice the above-men tipned •three different modes 
in which technical terms were formed. 

I. The simplest and first mode of acquiring techni- 
cal terms, is to take words current in common usage, 
and by rigorously defining or otherwise fixing their 
meaning, to fit them for the expression of scientific 
truths. In this 'manner almost all the fundamental 
technical terms of Geometry were formed. ' A' sphere , 
a cone 9 a cylinder) had among the Greeks, at farst, 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


259 

meanings less precise than those which geometers gave 
to these words, and besides the mere designation of 
fdhn, implied some use or application. A sphere 
(cr<f>aLpa) was a hand-ball used in games ; a cone (kwvos) 
was a boy’s spinning-top, or the crest of a helmet ; a 
cylinder (kv\lv$po<s) was a roller; a cube (kv/3os) was a 
die : till these words were adopted by the geometefs, 
£nd made to signify among them pure modilications of 
space. So an angle (ywvta) was only a corner ; a point 
(o-^/xciov) was a signal; a line (ypapprj) was a mark; a 
straight line (evOd.a) was marked by an adjective which 
at first meant only direct . A plane {hr'nv&ov) is the 
neuter form of an adjective, which hy its derivation 
means on the ground , and hence flat. JTn all these 
cases, the word adopted as a term of science has its 
sense rigorously fixed; and whe>*e the common use of 
the term is in any degree vague, its meaning may be 
modified at the same time that it is thus limited. 
Thus a rhombus (po'/x/3o?) by its derivation, might mean 
any figure which is twisted out of a regular form ; but 
it is confined by geometers to that figure which has 
four equal sides, its angles being oblique. In like 
manner, a trapezium (rpaTri&ov) originally signifies a 
table, and thus might denote any form ; but as the ta- 
bles of the Greeks had one side shorter than the oppo- 
site* cue, such a figure was at first called a trapezium. 
Afterwards the term was made to signify any figure . 
with four unequal sides; a name being more needful in 
geometry for this kind of figure than for the original 
form. 

This class of technical terms, namely, words adopted 
from common language, but rendered precise and de- 
terminate for purposes of science, may also be exem- 
plified in other sciences. Thus, as was observed in the 
early portion* of the history of astronomy 1 , a day, a 
month , a year, described at first portions of time marked 
by familiar changes, but afterwards portions determined 
by rigorous mathematical definitions. The conception 
of the heavens as a revolving sphere, is so obvioudj 

1 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. iiL c. i. 

17—2 



26 o 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


that we may consider the terms which involve this 
conception as parts of common language; as the pole 
(71-0X0$) ; the arctic circle , which includes th 4 e stars tliHt 
never set®; the horizon (6pt£wv) a boundary, applied 
technically to the circle bounding the visible earth 
and sky. The turnings of the sun {rpoiral vJeXioio), 
which are mentioned by Hesiod, gave occasion to the 
term tropics , the circles at which the sun in his annuli 
motion turns back from his northward or southward 
advance. The zones of the earth, (the torrid , tempe- 
rate, and frigid;) the gnomon of a dial ; the limb (or 
border) of the moon, or of a circular instrument, are 
terms of the same class. An eclipse (ocAtu/as) is origi- 
nally a deficiency or disappearance, and joined with 
the name of the luminary, an eclipse of the sun or of 
the moon , described the phenomenon; but when the 
term became technical, it sufficed, without addition, to 
designate the phenomenon. 

In Mechanics, the Greeks gave a scientific precision 
to very few words : we may mention weights (/3apea), 
the arms of a lever (p^ea), its fulcrum 'Ifmopio^Xiov), 
and the verb to balance (l(roppo7rcLv). Other terms 
which they used, as momentum (poirrj) and force (Svvapus), 
did not acquire a distinct and definite meaning till the 
time of Galileo, or later. We may observe that all 
abstract terms, though in their scientific application 
expressing mere conceptions, were probably at first 
derived from ^somc word describing external objects. 
Thus the Latin word for force, vis , seems to be con- 
nected with a Greek word, U, or Fm, which often has 
nearly the same meaning; but originally, as it would 
seem, signified a sinew or muscle, the obvious seat of 
animal strength. 

In later times, the limitation imposed upon a word 
by its appropriation to scientific purposes, is often 
more marked than in the cases above described. Thus 
thq : variation is made to mean, in astronomy, the se- 
cond inequality gf the moon’s motion; in magnetism, 
flie variation signifies the angular deviation of the 


2 Hist. Ast. b. iii. c. i. sect. 8. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


26l 


compass-needle from the north ; in *pure mathematics, 
the variation of a quantity is the formula which ex- 
presses th<* result of any small change of the most 
general kind. In like manner, 'parallax (irapa.Wa^i%) 
denotes a change in general, hut is used by astronomers 
to signify the change produced by the spectator’s being 
removed from the center of the earth, his theoretical 
place, to the surface. A llcali at first denoted the ashes 
of a particular plant, but afterwards, all bodies having 
a certain class of chemical properties ; and, in like 
manner, acid, the class opposed to alkali, was modified 
in signification by chemists, so as to refer no longer to 
the taste. 

Words thus borrowed from common language, and 
converted by scientific .writers into technical terms, 
have some advantages and some disadvantages. They 
possess this great convenience, %hat they are under- 
stood after a very short explanation, and retained in 
the memory without effort. On the other hand, they 
lead to some inconvenience ; for since they have a 
meaning in common language, a careless reader is 
prone to disregard the technical limitation of this 
meaning, and to attempt to collect their import in sci- 
entific books, in the same vague and conjectural man- 
ner in which he collects the purpose of words in com- 
mon cadis. Hence the language of science, when thus 
resliiibling common language, is liable to be employed 
with an absence of that scientific precision which alone 
gives it value. Popular writers and talkers, when they 
speak of force , momentum , action and reaction, and 
the like, often afford examples of the inaccuracy thus 
arising from the scientific appropriation of common 
terms. 

II. Another class of technical teitns, which we 
find occurring as soon as speculative science assumes a 
distinct shape, consists of those which are intentionally 
constructed by speculators, and which contain some 
description or indication distinctive of the conception 
to which they are applied. Such ar<a a parallelogram 
(TrapaXkrjX&ypaiApov), which denotes a plane figure 
bounded by two pairs of parallel lin^s; a parallelepiped 



262 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


(TrapaWrjXoTrLTreSov), which signifies a solid figure 
bounded by three pairs of parallel planes. A triangle 
(rprywvos, trigon) and a quadrangle (reTpor wo?, tetra- 
gon) were perhaps words invented independently of 
the mathematicians : but such words extended to other 
cases, pentagon , decagon , hecccedecagon , polygon , are 
inventions of scientific men. Such also are tetrahe- 
dron, hexahedron , dodecahedron , tesseracontaoctohedron , 
polyhedron, and the like. These words being con- 
structed by speculative writers, explain themselves, or 
at least require only some conventional limitation, 
easily adopted. Thus parallelogram might mean a 
figure bounded by any number of sets of parallel lines, 
but it is conventionally restricted to a figure o i four 
sides. So a great circle in a sphere means one which 
passes through the center of the sphere; and a small 
circle is any other. So in trigonometry, we have the 
1 hypotenuse (v7roT€vovcra), or subtending line, to desig- 
nate the line subtending an angle, and especially a 
right angle. In this branch of mathematics we have 
many invented technical terms; as complement , supple- 
ment, cosine, cotangent, a spherical angle, the pole of a 
circle, or of a sphere. The word sine itself appears to 
belong to the class of terms already described as sci- 
entific appropriations of common terms, . although its 
origin is somewhat obscure. 

Mathematicians were naturally led to construct 
these and many other terms by the progress of their 
speculations. In like manner, when astronomy took 
the form of a speculative science, words were invented 
to denote distinctly the conceptions thus introduced. 
Thus the sun’s annual path among the stars, in which 
not only solar, but also all lunar eclipses occur, was 
termed the ecliptic. The circle which the sun describes 
in his diurnal motion, when the days and nights are 
equal, the Greeks called the equidiurnal (lorjpepivos,) 
the Latin astronomers the equinoctial, and the corre- 
sponding circle on the earth was the equator. The 
ecliptic intersected the equinoctial in the equinoctial 
points. The solstices (in Greek, Tpoirai) wer*e the times 
when the sun arrested his motion north wards or south- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 263 

wards; and the solstitial points fra TpomKa cr^/xeia) 
were the places in the ecliptic where he then was. 
The name of meridians was given to circles passing 
through the poles of the equator; the solstitial colure 
(icoXovpos, curtailed), was one of these circles, which 
passes through the solstitial points, and is intercepted 
by the horizon. 

We have borrowed from the Arabians various astro- 
nomical terms, as Zenith, Nadir , Azimuth, Almachntar, 
And these words, which among the Arabians probably 
belonged to the first class, of appropriated scientific 
terms, are for us examples of the second class, invented 
scientific terms; .although they differ from most that 
we have mentioned, in not containing an etymology 
corresponding to their meaning in any ‘language with 
which European cultivators of science are generally 
familiar. Indeed, the distinction of our two classes, 
though convenient, is in a great measure, casual. Thus 
most of the words we formerly mentioned, as parallax, 
horizon, eclipse, though appropriated technical terms 
among the Greeks, are to us invented technical terms. 

In the construction of such terms as we are now con- 
sidering, those languages have a great advantage which 
possess a power of forming words by composition. This 
was eminently the case with the Greek language; and 
hence most of the ancient terms of science in that lan- 
guage, when their origin is once explained, are clearly 
understood and easily retained. Of modern European 
languages, the German possesses the greatest facility of 
composition; and hence scientific authors in that lan- 
guage are able to invent terms which it is impossible 
to imitate in the other languages of Europe. Thus 
Weiss distinguishes his various systems of crystals as 
zwei-und-zwei-gliedrig, ein-und-zwei-gliedrig, drey-und- 
drey-gliedrig , doc., (two-and-two-membered, one-and- 
two-membered, &c.) And Hessel, also a writer on 
crystallography, speaks of doubly-one-membered edges, 
four-and-three spaced rays, and the like% 

How far the composition of weirds, in such cases, 
may be practised in the English language, and the 
gefieral question, what are the byst rules and artifices 



264 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

in such cases, I shall afterwards consider. In the 
mean time, I may observe that this list of invented 
technical terms might easily be much enlarged. Thus 
in harmonics we have the various intervals, as a Fourth , 
a Fifth , an Octave , ( Diatessaron , Diapente, Diapason ,) a 
Comma, which is the difference of a Major and Minor 
Tone; we have the various Moods or Keys , and the 
notes of various lengths, as Minims, Breves, Semibreves, 
Quavers. In chemistry, Gas was at first a technical 
term invented by Van Helmont, though it has now 
been almost adopted into common language. I omit 
many words which will perhaps suggest themselves to 
the reader, because they belong rather to the next 
class, which I now proceed to notice. 

III. The third class of technical terms consists of 
such as are constructed by men of science, and involve 
some theoretical idea in the meaning which their deri- 
vation implies. They do not merely describe, like the 
class last spoken of, but describe with reference to 
some doctrine or hypothesis which is accepted as a 
portion of science. Thus latitude and longitude, ac- 
cording to their origin, signify breadth and length; 
they are used, however, to denote measures of the dis- 
tance of a place on the earth’s surface from the equator, 
and from the first meridian, of which distances, one 
cannot be called length more properly than the other. 
But this appropriation of these words may be explained 
by recollecting that the earth, as known to the ancient 
geographers, wa?, much further extended from east to 
west than from north to south. The Precession of the 
equinoxes is a term 'which implies that the stars are 
fixed, while the point which is the origin of the mea- 
sure of celestial longitude moves backward. The Bight 
Ascension of a star is a measure of its position corre- 
sponding to terrestrial longitude ; this quantity is iden- 
tical with the angular ascent of the equinoctial point, 
when the star is in the horizon in a right sphere ; that 
is, a sphere which supposes the spectator to be at the 
equator. The Oblique Ascension (a term now little 
used), is derived in like manner from an oblique sphere. 
The motion of a planet is direct or retrograde, in Ci>n- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 265 


sequentia ( signa), or in antecedentia , in reference to a 
certain assumed standard direction for celestial motions, 
namely, tjie direction opposite to that of the sun’s daily 
motion, and agreeing with his annual motion among 
the stars; or faith what is much more evident, the 
moon’s monthly motion. The equation of time is the 
quantity which must be added to or subtracted from 
the time marked by the sun, in order to reduce it to a 
theoretical condition of equable progress. Al like 
manner the equation of the center of the sun or of the 
moon is the angle which must be added to, or sub- 
tracted from, the actual advance of the luminary in 
the heavens, in order to make its motion equable. 
Besides the equation of the center c £ the moon, which 
represents the first and greatest of her deviations from 
equable motion, there are many other equations , by 
the application of which her motion is brought nearer 
and nearer to perfect uniformity. The second of these 
equations is called the erection , the third the variation , 
the fourth the annual equation. The motion of the 
sun as affected by its inequalities is called his anomaly , 
which term denotes inequalit}'. In the History of 
Astronomy, we find that the inequable motions of the 
sun, moon, and planets were, in a great measure, re- 
duced to rule and system by the Greeks, by the aid of 
an hypothesis of circles, revolving, and carrying in 
tfieir motion other circles which also revolved. This 
hypothesis introduced many technical terms, as de- 
ferent, epicycle , eccentric. In like planner, the theo- 
ries which have more recently taken the place of the 
theory of epicycles have introduced other technical 
terms, as the elliptical orbit , the radius vector, and the 
equable description of areas by this radius, which phrases 
express the true laws of the planetary motions. 

There is no subject on which theoretical views have 
been so long and so extensively prevalent as astronomy, 
and therefore no other science in which there are so 
many technical terms of the kind we are now consider- 
ing. But in other subjects also, so t far as theories have 
been* established, they have been accompanied by the 
iiftroduction or fixation of technical terms. Thus, as 



266 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


we have seen in the Examination of the'foundations of 
mechanics, the terms force and inertia derive their 
precise meaning from a recognition of the fy-st law of 
motion ; accelerating force and composition of motion 
involve the second law ; moving force , momentum, action 
and reaction , are expressions which imply the third law. 
The term vis viva was introduced to express a general 
property of moving bodies ; and other terms have been , 
intro Aced for like purposes, as impetus by Smeaton, 
and work done , by other engineers. In the recent 
writings of several French engineers, the term travail 
is much employed, to express the work done and the 
force which does it : this term has been rendered by 
labouring force . *Tlie proposition which was termed 
the hydrostatic paradox had this name in reference to 
its violating a supposed law of the action of forces. 
The verb to gravitate, and the abstract term gravita- 
tion, sealed the establishment of Newton’s theory of 
the solar system. 

In some of the sciences, opinions, either false, or 
disguised in very fantastical imagery, have prevailed ; 
and the terms which have been introduced during the 
reign of such opinions, bear the impress of the time. 
Thus in the days of alchemy, the substances with 
which the operator dealt were personified ; and a metal 
when exhibited pure and free from all admixture was 
considered as a little king, and was hence called a 
regulus, a term not yet quite obsolete. In like man- 
ner, a substance from which nothing more of any value 
could be extracted, was dead, and was called a capu^ 
mortuum. Quick silver, that is, live silver (< argentum 
vivum), was killed by certain admixtures, and was re- 
vived when restored to its pure state. 

• We find a great number of medical terms which 
bear the mark of opinions formerly prevalent among 
physicians ; and though these opinions hardly form a 
part of the progress of science, and were not presented 
in oui; History, we may notice some of these terms as 
examples of the mqde in which words involve in their 
derivation obsolete opinions. Such words as hysterics, 
hypochondriac, melancholy, cholera, colic, quinsey (sqiXi- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 2 67 

nantia , (rvvdyxq, a suffocation), rilegrim, migraine {he- 
micranium , the middle of the skull), rickets , {rachitis, 
from pa^is, the backbone), palsy, {paralysis, irapakv- 
<rt9,) apoplexy {diroTrXrj^ia, a stroke), emrods , {aipop- 
potSes, hemorrhoids, a flux of blood), imposthume, (cor- 
rupted from aposteme, aTrocrTrjpa, an abscess), phthisic 
(<£0i(ri9, consumption), tympany {tvijlttclvlcl, swelling), 
dropsy { hydropsy , vSpunf/,) sciatica, isciatica (to-via8i/o}, 
from Icr^iov, the hip), catarrh {Kardppovs, a lowing 
down), diarrhoea (81a ppoCa, a flowing through), diabetes 
(8taj8?/TT/9, a passing through), dysentery {Svaevrepia, a 
disprder of the entrails), arthritic pains (from apOpa, 
the joints), are names derived from the supposed or 
real seat and circumstances of the diseases. The word 
from which the first of the above names is derived 
{vcrrcpa, the last place,) signifies the womb, according 
to its order in a certain symptomatic enumeration of 
parts. The second word, hypochondriac, means some- 
thing affecting the viscera below the cartilage of the 
breastbone, which cartilage is called x° v &P ()< >> melan- 
choly and cholera derive their names from supposed 
affections of x°^Vi tbe bile. Colic is that which affects 
the colon (kw Aov), the largest member of the bowels. 
A disorder of the eye is called gutta serena (the c drop 
serene’ of Milton), in contradistinction to gutta tur- 
bida, in which the impediment to vision is perceptibly 
opake. Other terms also record the opinions of the 
ancient anatomists, as duodenum, a certain portion of 
the intestines, which they estimated as twelve inches 
long. We might add other allusions, as the tendon of 
Achilles. 

Astrology also supplied a number of words founded 
upon fanciful opinions; but thig study having been 
expelled from the list of sciences, such words now sur- 
vive only so far as they have found a place in common 
language. Thus men were termed mercurial, myrtial, 
jovial, or saturnine, accordingly as their characters 
were supposed to be determined by theunfluenee of the 
planets, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter , or Saturn. Other 
expressions, such as disastrous, ill-starred, exorbitant, 
ibrd of the ascendant, and lienge, ascendancy, influence, 



268 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


a sphere of action , *flnd the like, may serve to show 
how extensively astrological opinions have affected 
language, though the doctrine is no longer a recognized 
science. 

The preceding examples will make it* manifest that 
opinions, even of a recondite and complex kind, are 
often implied in the derivation of words ; and thus will 
show how scientific terms, framed by the cultivators 
of scierfce, may involve received hypotheses and theo- 
ries. When terms are thus constructed, they serve 
not only to convey with ease, but to preserve steadily 
and to diffuse widely, the opinions which they tipis 
assume. Moreover, they enable the speculator to em- 
ploy these complex conceptions, the creations of sci- 
ence, and the results of much labour and thought, as 
readily and familiarly as if they were convictions bor- 
rowed at once from the senses. They are thus power- 
ful instruments in enabling jriiilosophers to ascend 
from one stej> of induction and generalization to an- 
other ; and hereby contribute powerfully to the ad- 
vance of knowledge and truth. 

It should be noticed, before we proceed, that the 
names of natural objects, when they come to be con- 
sidered as the objects of a science, are selected accord- 
ing to the processes already enumerated. For the 
most part, the natural historian adopts the common 
names of animals, plants, minerals, gems, and the like,’ 
and only endeavours to secure their steady and consis- 
tent application. Put many of these names imply some 
peculiar, often fanciful, belief respecting the object. 

Various plants derive their names from their sup- 
posed virtues, as herniaria, rupture-wort ; or from le- 
gends, as herba Sancti Johannis , 8t. Johns wort. The 
same is the case with minerals: thus the to]>az was 
asserted to come from an island so shrouded in mists 
that navigators could only conjecture (roirdt^iv) where 
it was. In these latter cases, however, the legend is 
often not the true origin of the name, but is suggested 
by it. 

The privilege of constructing names where they-, are 
wanted, belongs to natural historians no less than tb 



THE LANGUAGE OP SCIENCE. 


269 

the cultivators of physical science ; yet in the ancient 
world, writers of the former class appear rarely to 
have exercised this privilege, even when they felt the 
imperfections pf the current language. Thus Aristotle 
repeatedly mentions classes of animals which have no 
name, as co-ordinate with classes that have names ; 
but he hardly ventures to propose names which may 
supply these defects 3 . The vast importance of nomen- 
clature in natural history was not recognized till the 
modern period.* 

We have, however, hitherto considered only the ‘ 
formation or appropriation of single terms in science ; 
except so far as several terms may in some instances 
be connected by reference to a common theory. But 
when the valuo of technical terms began to be fully 
appreciated, philosophers proceeded to introduce them 
into their sciences more copiously and in a more syste- 
matic manner. In this way, the modern history of 
technical language lias some features of a different 
aspect from the ancient ; and must give rise to a sepa- 
rate Aphorism. 

Aphorism II. 

In the Modern Period of Science, besides the three pro- 
cesses anciently employed in the formation of technical 
•tennis, there have been introduced Systematic Nomenclature, 
Systematic Terminology, and the Systematic Modification of 
Terms to express theoretical relations 1 . 

Writers upon science have gone on up to modern 
times forming such technical terms as they had occa- 
sion for, by the three processes above described; — 

3 In his History of Animals, (b. i. which lias since been adopted by Na- 
c. vi.), he says, that the great classes turalists. 

of animals are Quadrupeds, Birds, 1 On the subject of Terminology 
Fishes, Whales ( Cetaceans ), Oysters and Nomenclature, see also Aplio- 
(Testaceans), animals like crabs which risms LXXXVIII. and XQVII1. con- 
have no general name ( Crustaceans ), ccrnin^Ideas, and b. viii. c. iL of the 
Soft qtnimsls ( Mollusks and Insects). History of Scientific Ideas. In those 
tfe does, however, call the Crustaces places I have spoken of the distinction 
by a name ( Malacostraca , soft-slielled) of Itrminology and Nomenclature. , 



270 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

namely, appropriating and limiting words in common 
use ; — constructing for themselves words descriptive of 
the conception which they wished to con r ey; — or 
framing terms which by their signification imply the 
adoption of a theory. Thus among the terms intro- 
duced by the study of the -connexion between magnet- 
ism and electricity, the word pole is an example of the 
first kind; the name of the subject, electro-magnetism , 
of the second ; and the term current , involving an hy- 
pothesis of the motion of a fluid, is an* instance of the 
third class. In chemistry, the term salt was adopted 
from common language, and its meaning extended to 
denote any compound of a certain kind ; the term neu- 
tral salt implied the notion of a balanced opposition in 
the two elements of the compound ; and such words as 
subacid and super acid, invented on purpose, were in- 
troduced to indicate the cases in which this balance 
was not attained. Again, when the phlogistic theory 
of chemistry was established, the term phlogiston was 
introduced to express the theory, and from this such 
terms as phlogisticated and dephlogisticated were de- 
rived, exclusively words of science. But in such in- 
stances as have just been given, we approach towards 
a systematic modification of terms, jvhich is a peculiar 
process of modem times. Of this, modern chemistry 
forms a prominent example, which we shall soon con- 
sider, but we shall first notice the other processes men- 
tioned in the Aphorism. 

I. In ancient times, no attempt was made to invent 
or select a Nomenclature of the objects of Natural 
History which should be precise and permanent. The 
omission of this step by the ancient naturalists gave 
rise to enormous difficulty and loss of time when the 
sciences resumed their activity. We have seen in the 
history of the sciences of classification, and of botany 
in especial 2 , that the early cultivators of that study in 
modern times endeavoured to identify all the plants 
described by Greek and Iioman writers with those 
which grow in the north of Europe ; and were involved 


2 Hist. xnd. Sc. b. xvL c. ii 




THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


27I 


in endless confusion 3 , by the multiplication of names 
of plants, at the same time superfluous and ambiguous. 
The Synwymies which botanists (Bauhin and others) 
found it necessary to publish, were the evidences of 
these inconveniences. In consequence of the defective- 
ness of the ancient botanical nomenclature, we are 
even yet uncertain with respect to the identification of 
> some of the most common trees mentioned by classical 
writers 4 . The ignorance of botanists respecting the 
importance of nomenclature operated in another man- 
ner to impede the progress of science. As a good no- 
menclature presupposes a good system of classification, 
so, on the other hand, a system of classification cannot 
become permanent without a corresponding nomencla- 
ture. Csesalpinus, in the sixteenth cenfury 5 , published 
an excellent system of arrangement for plants ; but 
this, not being connected with any system of names, 
was never extensively accepted, and soon .fell into ob- 
livion. The business of framing a scientific botanical 
classification was in this way delayed for about a cen- 
tury. In the same manner, Willoughby’s classification 
Of fishes, though, as Cuvier says, far better than any 
which preceded it, was never extensively adopted, in 
consequence of having no nomenclature connected 
with it. 

# II. Probably one main cause which so long retarded 
the work of fixing at the same time the arrangement 
and the names of plants, was the great number of mi- 
nute and diversified particulars in th£ structure of each 
plant which such a process implied. The stalks, leaves, 
flowers, and fruits of vegetables, with their append- 
ages, may vary in so many ways, that common lan- 
guage is quite insufficient to express clearly and pre- 
cisely their resemblances and differences. Hence 
botany required not only a fixed system of names of 
plants, but also an artificial system of phrases fitted to 
describe their parts : not only a Nomenclature , but also 

s Hist. In$. Sc. b. xvi. c. iiL sect. 3. 

| For instance, whether the fagus of the Latins be the beech or the 
chestnut. * * lb. b. xvi. c. iii. sect. 2. 



272 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

C 

a Terminology . The Terminology was, in fact, an in- 
strument -indispensably requisite in giving “fixity to the 
Nomenclature. The recognition of the kinds' of plants 
must depend upon the exact comparison of their re- 
semblances and differences ; and to become a part of 
permanent science, this comparison must be recorded 
in words. 

The formation of an exact descriptive language for 
botany was thus the first step in that systematic con- 
struction of the technical language of science, which is 
one of the main features in the intellectual history of 
modern- times. The ancient botanists, as De Candolle 6 
says, did not make any attempt to select terms of 
which the sense was rigorously determined ; and each 
of them employed in his descriptions the words, meta- 
phors, or periphrases wfyicli his own genius suggested. 
In the History of Botany 7 , I have noticed some of the 
persons who contributed to this improvement. 4 Chi- 
sms,’ it is there stated, ‘first taught botanists to de- 
scribe well. He introduced exactitude, precision, neat- 
ness, elegance, method: he says nothing superfluous; 
he omits nothing necessary.’ This task was further 
carried on by Jung and Hay 8 . In these authors we 
see the importance which began to be attached to the 
exact definition of descriptive terms; for example, Bay 
quotes Jung’s definition of Caulis, a stalk. 

The improvement of descriptive language, and the 
formation of schemes of classification of plants, went 
on gradually for ^ome time, and was much advanced 
by Tournefort. But at last Linnaeus embodied and 
followed out the convictions which had gradually been 
accumulating in the breasts of botanists; and by re- 
modelling throughout both the terminology and the 
nomenclature of botany, produced one of the greatest 
reforms which ever took place in any science. He 
thus supplied a conspicuous example of such a reform, 
and a most admirable model of a language, from which 


t- 

0 Thcor. Elan, de Hot. p. 327. 

7 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. xvL c. iii. sect. 3. 

8 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. ^vi. c. iii. sect. 3 (about a.d. 1660). 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


273 


other sciences may gather great instruction. I shall 
not here give any account of the terms and words in- 
troduced by Linnaeus. They have been exemplified in 
the History of Science 9 ; and the principles which they 
involve I shall consider separately hereafter. I 'vyill 
only remin^ the reader that the great simplification in 
nomenclature which was the result of his labours, con- 
sisted in designating each kind of plant by a binary 
term consisting of the name of the genus combined 
with that of the species: an artifice seemingly obvious, 
but more convenient in its results than could possibly 
have been anticipated. 

? Since Linnaeus, the progress of Botanical Anatomy 
and of Descriptive Botany have led to t£e rejection of 
several inexact expressions, and to the adoption of 
several new terms, especially in describing the struc- 
ture of the fruit and the parts of cryptogamous plants. 
Hedwig, Medikus, Necker, Desvaux, Mirbel, and es- 
pecially Gsertner, Link, and Itichard, have proposed 
several useful innovations, in these as in other parts 
of the subject; but the general mass of the words 
now current consists still, and will probably continue 
to consist, of the terms established by the Swedish 
Botanist 10 . 

When it was seen that botany derived so great ad- 
vantages from a systematic improvement of its lan- 
guage, it was natural that other sciences, and especially 
classificatory sciences, should endeavour to follow its 
example. This attempt was made in* Mineralogy by 
Werner, and afterwards further pursued by Mohs. 
Werner’s innovations in the descriptive language of 
Mineralogy were the result of great acuteness, an inti- 
mate acquaintance with minerals, and a most methodi- 
cal spirit: and were in most respects great improve- 
ments upon previous practices. Yet the introduction 
of them into Mineralogy was far from regenerating 
that science, as Botany had been regenerated by the 
Limuean reform. It would seem that the perpetual 


0 lb. c. iv. sect. 1—3. 

10 De Candolle, Th. Ekm. p. 307. 


NOV. OBG\ 


18 



274 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


scrupulous attention to most minute differences, (as of 
lustre, colour, fracture,) the greater part of which are 
not really important, fetters the mind, rather than 
disciplines it or arms it for generalization. Cuvier has 
remarked 11 that Werner, after his first Essay on the 
Characters of Minerals , wrote little,; as if Jie had been 
afraid of using the system which he had created, and 
desirous of escaping from the chains which he had 
imposed upon others. And he justly adds, that Werner 
dwelt least, in his descriptions, upon that which is 
really the most important feature of all, the crystalline 
structure. This, which is truly a definite character, 
like those of Botany, does, when it can be clearly dis- 
cerned, determine the place of the mineral in a system. 
This, therefore, is the character which, of all others, 
ought to be most carefully expressed by an appropriate 
language. This task, hardly begun by Werner, has 
since been fully executed by others, especially by Rom6 
de l’lsle, Haiiy, and Mohs. All the forms of crystals 
can be described in the most precise manner by the 
aid of the labours of these writers and their successors. 
But there is one circumstance well worthy our notice 
in these descriptions. It is found that the language 
in which they can best be conveyed is not that of 
words, but of symbols. The relations of space which 
are involved in the forms of crystalline bodies, though 
perfectly definite, are so complex and numerous, that 
they cannot be expressed, except in the language of 
mathematics: and thus we have an extensive and 
recondite branch of mathematical science, which is, in 
fact, only a part of the Terminology of the minera- 
logist. 

The Terminology of Mineralogy being thus reformed, 
an attempt was made to improve its Nomenclature also, 
by following the example of Botany. Professor Mohs 
was the proposer of this innovation. The names framed 
by him were, however, not composed of two but of 
three elements, designating respectively the Species, 
the Genus, and tfie Order 12 : thus he has such species as 

11 Eloges, ii. 314. ' 


i 2 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. xv. c. ix. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


275 


Rhombohedral Lime Ilaloide , Octahedral Fluor Ilaloide , 
Prismatic Hal Baryte . These names have not been 
generally adopted; nor is it likely that any names 
constructed on *such a scheme will find acceptance 
among mineralogists, till the higher divisions of the 
system are found to have some definite character. We 
see no real mineralogical significance in Mohs’s Genera 
find Orders, and hence we do not expect them to retain 
a permanent place in the science. 

The only systematic names which have hitherto 
been generally admitted in Mineralogy, are those ex- 
pressing the chemical constitution of the substance ; 
and these belong to a systdbi of technical terms dif- 
ferent from any we have yet spoken of* namely to 
terms formed by systematic modification. 

III. The language of Chemistry was already, as we 
have seen, tending to assume a systematic character, 
even under the reign of the phlogiston theory. But 
when oxygen succeeded to the throne, it very fortu- 
nately happened that its supporters had the courage 
and the foresight to undertake a completely new and 
systematic recoinage of the terms belonging to the sci- 
ence. The new nomenclature was constructed upon a 
principle hitherto hardly applied in science, but emi- 
nently commodious and fertile ; namely, the principle 
of indicating a modification of relations of elements, 
by a change in the termination of the word. Thus 
the new chemical school spoke of sul picric and sulph- 
urous acids; of sulphates and sulphites of bases; and 
of sulphwrete of metals ; and in like manner, of phos- 
2>horic and phosphorous acids, of phosphates, phosphites, 
phos phurets. In this manner a nomenclature was pro- 
duced, in which the very name of a substance indicated 
at once its constitution and place in the system. 

The introduction of this chemical language can never 
cease to be considered one of the most important steps 
ever made in the improvement of technical terms;. §nd 
as a signal instance of the advantage^ which may re- 
sult from artifices apparently trivial, if employed in a 
manner conformable to the laws of phenomena, and 
systematically pursued. It was, however, proved that 
* 18—2 



2 j 6 aphorisms concerning 

this language, with all its merits, had some defects. 
The relations of elements in composition were dis- 
covered to be more numerous than the** modes of 
expression which the terminations supplied. Besides 
the sulphurous and sulphuric acids, it appeared there 
were others; these were called the hyposulphurous and 
liyj>o sulphuric : but these names, though convenient, 
no longer implied, by their form, any definite relation! 
The compounds of Nitrogen and Oxygen are, in order, 
the Protoxide , the Deutoxide or Binoxide; Hypo- 
nitrous Acid, Nitrous Acid, and Nitric Acid. The 
nomenclature here ceases to be systematic. We have 
three oxides of Iron, of which we may call the first the 
Protoxide , but we cannot call the others the Deutoxide 
and Tritoxide , for by doing so we should convey a 
perfectly erroneous notion of the proportions of the 
elements. They are called the Protoxide , the Black 
Oxide, and the Peroxide. We are here thrown back 
upon terms quite unconnected with the system. 

Other defects in the nomenclature arose from errours 
in the theory; as for example the names of the muri- 
atic, oxy muriatic, and hyperoxymuriatic acids*; which, 
after the establishment of the new theory of chlorine, 
were changed to hydrochloric acid, chlorine , and chloric 
acid. 

Thus the chemical system of nomenclature, founded 
upon the oxygen theory, while it shows how much may 
be effected by a good and consistent scheme of terms, 
framed according to the real relations of objects, proves 
also that such a scheme can hardly be permanent in 
its original form, bat will almost inevitably become 
imperfect and anomalous, in consequence of the accu- 
mulation of new facts, and the introduction of new 
generalizations. Still, we may venture to say that 
such a scheme does not, on this account, become worth- 
less ; Tor it not only answers its purpose in the stage of 
scientific progress to which it belongs : — so far as it is 
not erroneous, or merely conventional, but really sys- 
tematic and significant of truth, its terms qin be trans- 
lated at once into the language of any higher generali- 
zation which is afterwards arrived at. If terms express 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 2JJ 

relations really ascertained to be tfme, they can never 
lose their value by any change of the received theory. 
They are Jike coins of pure metal, which, even when 
carried into a country which does not recognize the 
sovereign whose* impress they bear, are. still gladly re- 
ceived, and may, by the addition of an explanatory 
mark, continue part of the common currency of the 
^country. 

These two great instances of the reform of scientific 
language, in Botany and in Chemistry, are much the 
most important and instructive events of this kind 
which the history of science offers. It is not necessary 
to pursue our historical survey further. Our remain- 
ing Aphorisms respecting the Language of Science 
will be collected and illustrated indiscriminately, from 
the precepts and the examples of preceding philoso- 
phers of all periods 13 . 

We may, however, remark that Aphorisms III., IV., 
V., VI., VII., respect peculiarly the Formation of 
Technical Terms by the Appropriation of Common 
Words, while the remaining ones apply to the Forma- 
tion of New Terms. 

It does not appear possible to lay down a system of 
rules which may determine and regulate the construc- 
tion of all technical terms, on all the occasions on 
which the progress of science makes them necessary or 
convenient. But if we can collect a few maxims such 
as have already offered themselves to the minds of .phi- 
losophers, or such as may be justified #by the instances 
by which we shall illustrate them, these maxim? may 
avail to guide us in doubtful cases, and to prevent our 
aiming at advantages which are unattainable, or being 
disturbed by seeming imperfections which are really 
no evils. I shall therefore state such maxims of this 
kind as seem most sound and useful. 


13 See at the end of these Aplior- from the recent history of CJpmpara- 
isms, further illustrations of them tivc Anatomy and Chemistry. 



2j8 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


Aphorism III. 

In framing scientific terms , the appropriafion of old 
words is preferable to the invention of nefl) ones. 

This maxim is stated by Bacon in his usual striking 
manner. After mentioning Metaphysic, as one of the 
divisions of Natural Philosophy, lie adds 1 : ‘ Wherein* 
I desire it may be conceived that I use the word meta- 
2)hysic in a different sense from that that is received : 
and in like manner I doubt not but it will easily 
appear to men of judgment that in this and other par- 
ticulars, wheresoever my conception and notion may 
differ from the ancient, yet I am studious to keep the 
ancient terms. For, hoping well to deliver myself from 
mistaking by the orde^, and perspicuous expressing of 
that I do propound ; I am otherwise zealous and affec- 
tionate to recede as little from antiquity, either in 
terms or opinions, as may stand with truth, and the 
proficience of knowledge, ... To mo, that do desire, 
as much as lieth in my pen, to ground a sociable inter- 
course between antiquity and proficience, it seemetli 
best to keep a way with antiquity usque ad aras ; and 
therefore to retain the ancient terms, though I some- 
times alter the uses and definitions ; according to the 
moderate proceeding in civil governments, when^qj- 
though there be some alteration, yet that holdeth 
whidh Tacitus wisely noteth, eadem magistratuum 
vocahyfia? ' 

We have had before us a sufficient number of ex- 
amples of scientific terms thus framed ; for they formed 
the first of three classes which we described in the 
First Aphorism. And we may again remark, that 
science, when she thus adopts terms which are in com- 
mon use, always limits and fixes their meaning in 
a technical manner. We may also repeat here the 
warning already given respecting terms of this kind, 
that *chey are peculiarly liable to mislead readers who 


1 H'i Augm. lib. iii. c. iv. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 279 

do not take care to understand thefn in their technical 
instead of their common signification. Force, momen- 
tum, inertia, impetus , vis viva , are terms which are 
very useful, if we rigorously bear in mind the import 
which belongs to each of them in the best treatises on 
Mechanics; but if the reader content himself with 
conjecturing their meaning from the context, his 
knowledge will be confused and worthless. 

In the application of this Third Aphorism, other 
rules are to be attended to, which I add. 


Aphotusm: IY. 

When common words are appropriated a?,technical terms , 
their meaning and relations in common use should be retained 
as far as can conveniently be don& 

I wtll state an example in which this rule seems to 
be applicable. Mr Davies. Gilbert 1 has recently pro- 
posed the term efficiency to designate the work which 
a macHine, according to the force exerted upon it, is 
capable of doing; the work being measured by the 
weight raised, and the space through which it is raised, 
jointly. The usual term employed among engineers 
for the work which a machine actually does, measured 
itf the way just stated, is duty. But as there appears 
to be a little incongruity in calling that work efficiency 
which the machine ought to do, when we call that 
work duty which it really does, I liave proposed to 
term these two quantities theoretical efficiency and 
practical efficiency , or theoretical duty and practical 
duty 2 . 

Since common words are often vague in their mean- 
ing, 1 add as a necessary accompaniment to the Third 
Aphorism the following : — 


1 Phil. Trans. 1827, p. 25. retical dSy. This term lias been 

2 The term travail is used by French rendered in English by labouring 
engineers, to express efficiency or theo - force. • 



28 o 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


Aphorism V. 

When common words are appropriated as technical terms , 
their meaning may he modified , and must bq rigorously fixed. 

This is stated by Bacon in the above extract : ‘ to 
retain the ancient terms, though I sometimes alter the 
uses and definitions' The scientific use of the term is # 
in all cases much more precise than the common use. 
The loose notions of velocity and force for instance, 
which are sufficient for the usual purposes of language, 
require to be fixed by exact measures when these are 
made terms in the science of Mechanics. 

This scientific fixation of the meaning of words is to 
be looked upoii as a matter of convention, although it 
is in reality often an inevitable result of the progress 
of science. Momentum is conventionally defined to be 
the product of the numbers expressing the weight and 
the velocity; but then, it could be of no use in ex- 
pressing the laws of motion if it were defined otherwise. 

Hence it is no valid objection to a scientific term 
that the word in common language does not mean 
exactly the same as in its common use. It is no 
sufficient reason against the use of the term acid for a 
class of bodies, that all the substances belonging to 
this class are not sour. We have seen that a trape- 
zium is used in geometry for any four-sided figtirfe, 
though originally it meant a figure with two opposite 
sides parallel and the two others equal. A certain 
stratum which lies below the chalk is termed by 
English geologists the green sand. It has sometimes 
been objected to this denomination that the stratum 
has very frequently no tinge of green, and that it is 
often composed of lime with little or no sand. Yet 
the term is a good technical term in spite of these 
apparent improprieties; so long as it is carefully ap- 
plied to that stratum which is geologically equivalent 
to thfv greenish sandy bed to which the appellation was 
originally applied. , 

When it appeared that geometry would have « to -be 
employed as much a,t least about the heavens as the 
earth, Plato exclaimed against the folly of calling the 



THE LANGUAGE OP SCIENCE* 


28l 


science by such a name ; since the word signifies 
‘earth-measuring;’ yet the word geometry has retained 
its place ^nd answered its purpose perfectly well up to 
the present day. 

But though the meaning of the term may be modi- 
fied or ext^ided, it must be rigorously fixed when it is 
appropriated to science. This process is most abun- 
dantly exemplified by the terminology of Natural His- 
tory, and especially of Botany, in which each term has 
a most precise meaning assigned to it. Thus Linnaeus 
established exact distinctions between fasciculus, capi- 
tulum , racemus , thyrsus, paniculus, spica, amentum, 
corymbus, umbella , cyma, verticillus; or, in the lan- 
guage of English Botanists, a tuft, a head, a cluster, a 
bunch, a panicle, a spike, a catkin, a corymb, an umbel, 
a cyme, a whorl. And it has since been laid down as 
a rule 1 , that each organ ought? to have a separate and 
appropriate name ; so that the term leaf, for instance, 
shall never be applied to a leaflet, a bractea, or a sepal 
of the calyx. 

Botanists have not been content with fixing the 
meaning of their terms by verbal definition, but have 
also illustrated them by figures, which address the eye. 
Of these, as excellent modem examples, may be men- 
tioned those which occur in the works of Mirbel 2 , and 
Lindley 3 . 

Aphorism YI. 

When common words are appropriated as technical terms, 
this must be done so that they are not ambiguous in their 
application. 

An example will explain this maxim. The condi- 
tions of a body, as a solid, a liquid, and an air, have 
been distinguished as different forms of the body. But 
the word form, as applied to bodies, has other mean- 
ings ; so that if we were to inquire in what form 
water exists in a snow-cloud, it might be doubted 
whether the forms of crystallization were meant, or 

1 De Candolle, Theor. El. 328. & El&mens de Botaniquc. 

3 Elements of Botany. 



282 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


the different forms oi' ice, water, and vapour. Hence 
I have proposed 1 to reject the term form in such cases, 
and to speak of the different consistence of jy body in 
these conditions. The term consistence^ is usually ap- 
plied to conditions between solid and fluid ; and may 
without effort be extended to those limiting conditions. 
And though it may appear more harsh to^xtend the 
term consistence to the state of air, it may be justified 
by what has been said in speaking of Aphorism V. 

I .may notice another example of the necessity of 
avoiding ambiguous words. A philosopher who makes 
method his study, would naturally be termed a method- 
ist; but unluckily this word is already appropriated 
to a religious sect \ and hence we could hardly venture 
to speak of Cae^alpinus, Ray, Morison, Rivintis, Tour- 
nefort, Linnaeus, and their successors, as botanical me- 
thodhts . Again, by thife maxim, we are almost debar- 
red from using the term physician for a cultivator of 
the science of physics, because it already signifies a 
practiser of physic. We might, perhaps, still use phy- 
sician as the equivalent of the French physicien , in 
virtue of Aphorism Y. ; but probably -it would be bet- 
ter to form a new word. Thus we may say, that while 
the Naturalist employs principally the ideas of resem- 
blance and life, the Physicist proceeds upon the ideas 
of force, matter, and the properties of matter. 

Whatever may be thought of this proposal, the 
maxim which it implies is frequently useful. It is 
this. 


Aphorism YII. 

It is better to form new words as technical terms , than to 
employ old ones in which the last three Aphorisms cannot be 
complied with. 

The principal inconvenience attending the employ- 
ment of new words constructed expressly for the use 
of science, is the difficulty of effectually introducing 
them.* Readers will not readily take the trouble to 
learn the meaning of a word, in which the njempry js 


1 Hist. Ind. Sc. b. x. c. ii. sect..-?. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 283 

not assisted by some obvious suggestion connected with 
the common use of language. *When this difficulty is 
overcome, the new word is better than one merely ap- 
propriated; since it is more secure from vagueness and 
confusion. And in cases where the inconveniences 
belonging to a scientific use of common words become 
great and inevitable, a new word must be framed and 
introduced. 

The Maxims which belong to the construction of 
such words will be stated hereafter ; but I may notice 
an instance or two tending to show the necessity of 
the Maxim now before us. 

The word Force has been appropriated in the science 
of Mechanics in two senses : as indicating the cause of 
motion; and again, as expressing certain measures of 
the effects of this cause, in the phrases accelerating 
force and moving force. Heilce we might have occa- 
sion to speak of the accelerating or moving force of a 
certain force; for instance, if we were to say that the 
force which governs the motions of tlio planets resides 
in the sun ; and that the accelerating force o/this force 
varies only with the distance, but its moving force 
varies as the product of the mass of the sun and the 
planet. This is a harsh and incongruous mode of ex- 
pression; and might have been avoided, if, instead of 
accelerating force and moving force , single abstract 
fterms had been introduced by Newton : if, for in- 
stance, he had said* that the velocity generated in a 
second measures the accelerativity o£ the force which 
produces it, and the momentum produced in a second 
measures the motivity of the force. 

The science which treats of heat has hitherto had no 
special designation : treatises upon it have generally 
been termed treatises On Heat. But this practice of 
employing the same term to denote the property and 
the science which treats of it, is awkward, and often 
ambiguous. And it is further attended with this in- 
convenience, that we have no adjective derived from 
the name of the science, as we have in other cases, 
when wo speak of acoustical experiments and optical 
tlJ3ories. This inconvenience lu^ led various persons 
to suggest names # for the Science of Heat. M. Comte 



284 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

terms it Thermolog y { : In the History of the Sciences , 
I have named it Thermotics , which appears to me to 
agree better with the analogy of the names of other 
corresponding sciences, Acoustics and Optics . * 

Electricity is in the »ame condition as Heat ; having 
only one word to express the property and the science. 
M. Le Comte proposes Electrology : for the same reason 
as b#fore, I should conceive Electrics more agreeable to 
analogy. The coincidence of the word with the plural 
of Electric would not give rise to ambiguity ; for Elec- 
trics, taken as the name of a science, would be singular, 
like Optics and Mechanics. But a term offers itself to. 
express common or machine Electrics , which appears 
worthy of admission, though involving a theoretical 
view. The received doctrine of the difference between 
Voltaic and Common Electricity is, that in the former 
case the fluid must be.ctnsidered as in motion, in the 
latter as at rest. The science which treats of the for- 
mer class of subjects is cominonfy termed Electrody- 
namics, which obviously suggests the name Electro- 
statics for the latter. 

The subject of the Tides is, in like manner, destitute 
of any name which designates the science concerned 
about it. 1 have ventured to employ tlie term Tido- 
logy , having been much engaged in tidological re- 
searches. 

Many persons possess a peculiarity o£ vision, which 
disables them from distinguishing ’certain colours. On 
examining many ( sucli cases, we find that in all such 
persons the peculiarities are the same ; all of them 
confounding scarlet with green, and pink with blue. 
Hence they form a class, which, for the convenience of 
physiologists and others, ought to have a fixed desig- 
nation. Instead of calling them, as has usually been 
done, i persons having a peculiarity of vision/ we might 
take a Greek term implying this meaning, and term 
them Idiopts. 

But *my business at present is not to speak of the 
selection of new terms when they are introduced, but 
to illustrate the maxim that the necessity for®thecr in- 
troduction* often arisen The construction of new terfiis 
will be treated of subsequently. 



THE LANGUAGE OE SCIENCE. 285 

Aphorism VIII. 

Terms *m us t be constructed and appropriated so as to be 
fitted to enunciate simply and clearly true general pro- 
positions. 

Tms Aphorism may be considered as the fundamen- 
tal principle and supreme rule of all scientific termi- 
nology. It is asserted by Cuvier, speaking of a par- 
ticular case. Thus he says 1 of Gmelin, that by placing 
the larnantin in the genus of morses, and the siren in 
the genus of eels, he had rendered every general pro- 
position respecting the organization of those genera 
impossible. 

The maxim is true of words appropriated as well 
as invented, and applies equally to the mathematical, 
chemical, and classificatory sciences. With regard to 
most of these, and especially the two former classes, it 
has been abundantly exemplified already, in what has 
previously been said, and in the History of the Sciences. 
For we have there had to notice many technical terms, 
with the occasions of their introduction ; and all these 
occasions have involved the intention of expressing in 
a convenient manner |pme truth or supposed truth. 
The terms of Astronomy were adopted for the purpose 
of stating and reasoning upon the relations of the ce- 
lestial motions, according to the doctrine of the sphere, 
and the other laws which were discovered by astrono- 
mers. The few technical terms which belong to Me- 
chanics, force, velocity, momentum, inertia, &c., were 
employed from the first with a view to the expression 
of the laws \}f motion and of rest ; and were, in the 
end, limited so as truly and simply to express those 
laws when they were fully ascertained. In Chemistry, 
the term phlogiston was useful, as has been shown in 
the History, in classing together processes which really 
are of the same nature ; and the nomenclature of the 
oxygen theory was still preferable, because it 'enabled 
the chemist to express a still greater number of gene- 
ral Itt-utils. 


1 idgne Animal , Introd. viii. 



286 


APHORISMS CONCERNING- 


• 

To the connexion here asserted, of theory and no- 
menclature, we have the testimony of the author of 
the oxygen theory. In the Preface to his Chemistry, 
Lavoisier says: — ‘Thus while I thought myself em- 
ployed only in forming a Nomenclature, and while I 
proposed to myself nothing more than to improve the 
chemical language, my work transformed itself by de- 
grees, without my being able to prevent it, into a 
Treatise on the Elements of Chemistry.’ And he then 
proceeds to show how this happened. 

It is, however, mainly through the progress of Na- 
tural History in modern times, that philosophers have 
been led to see tl^e importance and necessity of new 
terms in expressing new truths. Thus Harvey, in the 
Preface to his work on Generation, says : — ‘ Be not 
offended if in setting opt the History of the Egg I 
make use of a new method, and sometimes of unusual 
terms. For as they which find out a new plantation 
and new shores call them by names of their own coin- 
ing, which posterity afterwards accepts and receives, 
so those that find out new secrets have good title to 
tlieir compellation. And here, metkinks, I hear Galen 
advising : If we consent in the things, contend not 
about the words.’ 

The Nomenclature which answers the purposes of 
Natural History is a. Systematic Nomenclature, apef 
will be further considered under the next Aphorism. 
But we may remark, that the Aphorism now before 
us governs the use'* of words, not in science only, but 
in common language also. Are we to apply the name 
Jlsh to animals of the whale kind ? The answer is de- 
termined by our present rule : we are to do so, or not, 
accordingly as we can best express true propositions. 
If we are speaking of the internal structure and phy- 
siology of the animal, we must not call them fish ; for 
in these respects they deviate widely from fishes : they 
have warm blood, and produce and suckle their young 
as land quadrupeds do. But this would not prevent 
our speaking of the iuhale-fishery , and calling such ani- 
mals fish on all occasions connected with this employ- 
ment ; for the relation?* thus arising depend upon the 
animal’s living in the water, and being caught in a 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 28 J 

manner similar to other fishes. *A plea that human 
laws which mention fish do not apply to whales, would 
be rejected at once by an intelligent judge. 

[A bituminiferous deposit which occurs amongst the 
coal measures in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh was 
used as coal, and called ‘ Boghead Cannel Coal.’ But 
a lawsuit arose upon the question whether this, which 
, geologically was not the coal, should be regarded in 
law as coal. The opinions of chemists and geologists, 
as well as of lawyers, were discrepant, and a direct 
decision of the case was evaded 2 .] 


Aphorism IX. 

• 

In the Classijicatory Sciences , a Systematic Nomencla- 
ture is necessary; and the System and the Nomenclature are 
each essential to the utility of the other . 

The inconveniences arising from the want of a good 
Nomenclature were long felt in Botany, and are still 
felt in Mineralogy. The attempts to remedy them by 
Synonymies are very ineffective, for such comparisons of 
synonyms do not supply a systematic nomenclature; 
and such a one alone can enable us to state general 
truths respecting the objects of which the classificatory 
sciences treat. The System and the Names ought to 
be introduced together; for the former is a collec- 
tion of asserted analogies and resemblances, for which 
the latter provide simple and permanent expressions. 
Hence it has repeatedly occurred in the progress of 
Natural History, that good Systems did not take root, 
or produce any lasting effect among naturalists, because 
they were not accompanied by a corresponding No- 
menclature. In this way, as we have already noticed, 
the excellent botanical System of Csesalpinus was 
without immediate effect upon the science. The work 
of Willughby, as Cuvier says 1 , forms* an epoch, and 


2 Miller’s Chemistry, iii. 98. 


1 Hist, dcs P&issons, Prcf. 



288 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

a happy epoch in Ichthyology ; yet because Willughby 
had no Nomenclature of his own, and no fixed names 
for his genera, his immediate influence was pot great. 
Again, in speaking of Schlotheim’s work containing 
representations of fossil vegetables, M. Adolphe Bron- 
gniart observes 2 that the figures and descriptions are 
so good, that if the author had established a nomen- 
clature for the objects he describes, his work would 
have become the basis of all succeeding labours on 
the subject. 

As additional examples of cases in which the im- 
provement of classification, in recent times, has led 
philosophers to propose new names, I may mention 
the term Pcecilitel proposed by Mr. Conybeare to de- 
signate the group of strata which lies below the oolites 
and lias* including the new red or variegated sand- 
stone, with the keuper dbove, and the magnesian lime- 
stone below it. Again, the transition districts of our 
island have recently been reduced to system by Pro- 
fessor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison; and this step has 
been marked by the terms Cambrian system, and 
Silurian system, applied to the two great groups of 
formations which they have respectively examined, 
and by several other names of the subordinate mem- 
bers of these formations. 

Thus System and Nomenclature are each essential 
to the other. Without Nomenclature, the system is 
not permanently incorporated into the general body of 
knowledge, and made an instrumept of future progress. 
Without System, the names cannot Express general 
truths, and contain no reason why they should be em- 
ployed in preference to any other names. 

This has been generally acknowledged by the most 
philosophical naturalists of modern times. Thus Lin- 
naeus begins that part of his Botanical Philosophy in 
which names are treated of, by stating that the founda- 
tion of botany is twofold, Disposition and Denomina- 
tion; 'and he adds this Latin line, 

Nomina si fiescis perit et cognitio rerum. 


2 Prodrom. Veg. Foss. p. 3. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 289 

And Cuvier, in the Preface to his Animal Kingdom , 
explains, in a very striking manner, how the attempt 
to connect zoology with anatomy led him, at the same 
time, to reform .the classifications, and to correct the 
. nomenclature of preceding zoologists. 

I have stated that in Mineralogy we are still desti- 
tute of a good nomenclature generally current. From 
•what has now been said, it will be seen that it may 
be very far from easy to supply this defect, since wo 
have, as yet, no generally received system of mineralo- 
gical classification. Till we know what are really 
different species of minerals, and in what larger 
groups these species can be arrange^, so as to have 
common properties, we shall never obtaiij a permanent 
mineralogical nomenclature. Thus Leucoc/yclite and 
Tesselite are minerals previously confounded with 
Apophyllite, which Sir John Herschel and Sir David 
Brewster distinguished by those names, in consequence 
of certain optical properties which they exhibit. But 
are these properties definite distinctions? and are 
there any external differences corresponding to them? 
If not, can we consider them as separate species? and 
if not separate species, ought they to have separate 
names? In like manner, we might ask if Augite and 
Hornblende are really the same species, as Gustavus 
Ito§e has maintained? if Dialing c and Hyper Athene are 
not definitely distinguished, which has been asserted 
by Kobell ? Till such questions are settled, we can- 
not have a fixed nomenclature in mineralogy. What 
appears the best, course to follow in the present state 
of* the science, I shall consider when we come to speak 
of the form of technical terms. 

I may, however, notice here that the main Forms 
of systematic nomenclature are two : — terms which 
are produced by combining words of higher and lower 
generality, as the binary names, consisting of the name 
of the genus and the species, generally praployed by 
natural historians since the time of Linnams; — and 
terms in which some relation of things is indicated by 
a change in the form of the word, for example, an 
alteration of its termination, of whifch kind of nomen- 
nov. obg/ 19 



29O APHORISMS CONCERNING 

clature we have a conspicuous example in the modern 
chemistry. 


Aphorism X. 

New terms and changes of terms , which are not needed in 
order to express truth, are to be avoided . 

As the Seventh Aphorism asserted that novelties 
in language may be and ought to be introduced, when 
they aid the enunciation of truths, w$ now declare 
that they are not admissible in any other case. New 
terms and new systems of terms are not to be intro- 
duced, for example, in virtue of their own neatness or 
symmetry, or other merits, if there is no occasion for 
their use. 

I may mention, as'&n old example of a superfluous 
attempt of this kind, an occurrence in the history of 
Astronomy. In 1628 John Bayer and Julius Schiller 
devised a Ccelum Christianum , in which the common 
names of the planets, &c., were replaced by those of 
Adam, Moses, and the Patriarchs. The twelve Signs 
became the twelve Apostles, and the constellations 
became sacred places and things. Peireskius, who had 
to pronounce upon the value of this proposal, praised 
the piety of the inventors, but did not approve, he 
said 1 , the design of perverting and confounding what- 
ever of celestial information from the period of the 
earliest memory is found in books. 

Nor are slight anomalies in the existing language of 
science sufficient ground for a change', if they do not 
seriously interfere with the expression of our know- 
ledge. Thus Linnaeus says 2 that a fair generic name 
is not to be exchanged for another though apter one : 
and 3 if wo separate an old genus into several, we 
must try to find names for them among the synonyms 
which describe the old genus. This maxim excludes 
the- restoration of ancient names long disused, no less 
than the needless invention of new ones. Linnaeus 


1 Gassendi, Vita rciresUi, 300. 


2 Phil. Pot. 246. 


Ib. 247. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


29I 

lays down this rule 4 ; and adds, that the botanists of 
the sixteenth century well nigh ruined botany by their 
anxiety tc^ recover the ancient names of plants. In 
like manner Cuvier 5 laments it as a misfortune, that 
he has had to introduce many new names ; and declares 
earnestly that he has taken great pains to preserve 
those of his predecessors. 

• The great bulk which the Synonymy of botany and 
of mineralogy have attained, shows us that this maxim 
has not been universally attended to. In these cases, 
however, the multiplication of different names for the 
same kind of object has arisen in general from ignor- 
ance of the identity of it under different circumstances, 
or from the want of a system which might assign to 
it its proper place. But there are other instances, in 
which the multiplication of names has arisen not from 
defect, but from excess, of the spirit of system. The 
love which speculative men bear towards symmetry 
and completeness is constantly at work, to make them 
create systems of classification more regular and more 
perfect than can be verified by the facts: and as good 
systems are closely connected with a good # nomencla- 
ture, systems thus erroneous and superfluous lead to 
a nomenclature which is prejudicial to science. For 
although such a nomenclature is finally expelled, when 
it is found not to aid us in expressing the true laws 
of nature, it may obtain some temporary sway, during 
which, and even afterwards, it may be a source of- 
much confusion. • 

We have a conspicuous example of such a result in 
the geological nomenclature of Werner and his school. 
Thus it was assumed, in Werner’s system, that his 
First , Second, and Third Flotz Limestone , his Old and 
New Red Sandstone, were universal formations; and 
geologists looked upon it as their business to detect 
these strata in other countries. Names were thus 
.assigned to the rocks of various parts of Europe, which 
created immense perplexity before they were ag&in 
ejected. The geological terms which *now prevail, for 


6 Keane Aniiti. Prof. p. xvi. 

19—2 


4 Phil. Bot. 248. 



2Q2 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

instance, those of* Smith, are for the most part not 
systematic, but are borrowed from accidents, as locali- 
ties, or popular names; as Oxford Clay f and Com - 
brash ; and hence they are not liable ,to be thrust out 
on a change of system. On the other hand we do not 
find sufficient reason to accept the system of names of 
strata proposed by Mr. Conybeare in the Introduction 
to the Geology of England, and Wales , according t<? 
which the Carboniferous Rocks are the Medial Order , 
— having above them the Super medial Order { New Red 
Sand , Oolites and, Chalk), and above these the Supe- 
rior Order {Tertiary Rocks) ; and again, — having 
below, the Submedial Order (the Transition Rocks), 
and the Inferior Order {Mica Slate, Gneiss, Granite). 
For though these names have long been proposed, it 
does not appear that they arc useful in enunciating 
geological truths. Wo may, it would seem, pronounce 
the same judgment respecting the system of geological 
names proposed by M. Alexander Brongniart, in his 
Tableau, des Terrains qui'eomposent Vecorce dn Globe. 
He divides these strata into nine classes, which he 
terms Terrains Alluvions, Lysiens, Pyrogenes, Clys- 
miens, Yzemiens, Ilemilysiens, Agalysiens, Plutoniques, 
V ulcaniques. These classes are again variously subdi- 
vided : thus the Terrains Yzemiens are Thalassiques, 
Pelagiqnes , and Abyssiques ; and the Abyssiques are 
subdivided into Lias , Keuper, Conchiliens, Poeciliens, 
Peneens, Rudimentaires, Entritiques, Ifouillers, Carbo- 
nifers and Greh Rouge Ancien. Scarcely any amount 
of new truths would induce geologists to burthen 
themselves at once with this enormous system of new 
names : but in fact, it is evident that any portion of 
truth, which any author can have brought to light, 
may be conveyed by means of a much simpler appara- 
tus. Such a nomenclature carries its condemnation 
on its own face. 

Nearly the same may be said of the systematic no- 
menclature proposed for mineralogy by Professor Mohs. 
Even if all his Oenera be really natural groups, (a doc- 
trine which we can have no confidence in till they are 
confirmed by the evidence of chemistry,) there is no 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 29 < 

necessity to make so great a cliange in the received 
names of minerals. His proceeding in this respect, so 
different frjpm the temperance of Linnams and Cuvier, 
has probably ensured a speedy oblivion to this part of 
his system. In crystallography, on the other hand, in 
which Mohs’s improvements have been very valuable, 
there are several terms introduced by him, as rhombo- 
itedron , scalenohedron, hemihedral , systems of crystalli- 
zation, which will probably be a permanent portion of 
the language of science. 

I may remark, in general, that the only persons who 
succeed in making great alterations in the language of 
science, are not those who make nairn^s arbitrarily and 
as an exercise of ingenuity, but those wljo have much 
new knowledge to communicate ; so that the vehicle is 
commended to general reception^ by the value of what 
it contains. It is only eminent discoverers to whom 
the authority is conceded of introducing a new system 
of names; just as it is only the highest authority in the 
state which has the power oT putting a new coinage in 
circulation. 

I will here quote some judicious remarks of Mi*. 
Howard, which fall partly under this Aphorism, and 
partly under some which follow. He had proposed, as 
names for the kinds of clouds, the following : Cirrus , 
Cirjrocumulus , Cirrostratus , Cumulostratus , Cumulus , 
Nimbus , Stratus. In an abridgment of his views, given 
in the Supplement to the Encydojwedia Britannica , En- 
glish names were proposed as the equivalents of these ; 
Curlcloud , Sondercloud , Wanecloud, Twaincloud , Stack - 
encloud , Raincloud , Fallcloud. Upon these Mr. How- 
ard observes : ‘ 1 mention these, in order to have the 
opportunity of saying that I do not adopt them. The 
names for the clouds which I deduced from the Latin, 
are but seven in number, and very easy to remember. 
They were intended as arbitrary terms for the structure 
of clouds, and the meaning of them was carefully fixed 
by a definition. The observer having once made him- 
self master of this, was able to apjfly the term with 
correctness, after a little experience, to the subject 
under all its varieties of form, coloifr, or position. The 



294 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


new names, if meant to be another set of arbitrary 
terms, are superfluous ; if intended to convey in them- 
selves an explanation in English, they fail <°n thi^ by 
applying to some part or circumstance only of the defi- 
nition; the whole of which must be kept in view to 
study the subject with success. To take for an ex- 
ample the first of the modifications. The term cirrus 
very readily takes an abstract meaning, equally applb 
cable to the rectilinear as to the flexuous forms of the 
subject. But the name of curl-cloud will not, without 
some violence to its obvious sense , acquire this more 
extensive one : and will therefore be apt to mislead the 
reader rather than further his progress. Others of 
these names are as devoid of a meaning obvious to the 
English reader, as the Latin terms themselves. But 
the principal objection to English or any other local 
terms, remains to be stated. They take away from 
the nomenclature its general advantage of constitut- 
ing, as far as it goes, an universal language, by means 
of which the intelligent of eveiy country may convey 
to each other their ideas without the necessity of 
translation.’ 

I here adduce these as examples of the arguments 
against changing an established nomenclature. As 
grounds of selecting a new one, they may be taken 
into account hereafter. 


Aphorism XI. 

Terms which imply theoretical views are admissible , as 
far as the theory is proved. 

It is not unfrequently stated that the circumstances 
from which the names employed in science borrow their 
meaning, ought to be facts and not theories. But such 
a recommendation implies a belief that facts are rigor- 
ously distinguished from theories and directly opposed 
to them; which belief, we have repeatedly seen, is un- 
founded. When 0 theories are firmly established, they 
become facts ; and names founded on such theoretical 
views are unexceptionable. If we speak of the minor 



THE LANGUAGE OE SCIENCE. 


295 

axis of Jupiter’s orbit , or of his density , or of the angle 
of refraction , or the length of an undulation of red 
liglgb, we assume certain theories ; but inasmuch as the 
theories are no’sy the inevitable interpretation of ascer- 
tained facts, we can have no better terms to designate 
the conceptions thus referred to. And hence the rule 
which wo must follow is, not that our terms must 
•involve no theory, but that they imply the theory only 
in that sense in which it is the interpretation of the 
facts. 

For example, the term 'polarization of light was ob- 
jected to, as involving a theory. Perhaps the term 
was at first suggested by conceiving light to consist of 
particles having poles turned in a particular manner. 
But among intelligent speculators, the notion of polar- 
ization soon reduced itself to the simple conception of 
opposite properties in opposite positions, which is a bare 
statement of the fact : and the term being understood 
to have this meaning, is a perfectly good term, and 
indeed the best which we can imagine for designating 
what is intended. 

I need hardly add the caution, that names involving 
theoretical views not in accordance with facts are to be 
rejected. The following instances exemplify both the 
positive and the negative application of this maxim. 

% The distinction of primary and secondary rocks in 
geology was founded upon a theory ; namely, that those 
which do not contain any organic remains were first 
deposited, and afterwards, those whifch contain plants 
and animals. But this theory was insecure from the 
first. The difficulty of making the separation which 
it implied, led to the introduction of a class of transition 
rocks. And the recent researches of geologists lead 
them to the conclusion, that those rocks which are 
termed primary , may be the newest, not the oldest, 
productions of nature. 

In order to avoid this incongruity, other terms have 
been proposed as substitutes for these.’ Sir C.* *Lyell 
remarks 1 , that granite, gneiss, and the like, form a class 


1 Princ. Gcol. iv. 3S6. 



296 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

which should be designated by a common name ; which 
name should not be of chronological import. He pro- 
poses hypogene , signifying ‘ n ether-formed r and jius 
he adopts the theory that they have not assumed their 
present form and structure at the surface, but deter- 
mines nothing of the period when they were produced. 

These hypogene rocks, again, he divides into unstra- 
tified or platonic, and altered stratified, or metamorpliic ; , 
the latter term implying the hypothesis that the strati- 
fied rocks to which it is applied have been altered, by 
the effect of fire or otherwise, since they were deposited. 
That fossiliferous strata, in some cases at least, have 
undergone such a change, is demonstrable from facts 2 . 

The modern nomenclature of chemistry implies the 
oxygen theory of chemistry. Hence it has sometimes 
been objected to. Thus Davy, in sj>eaking of the 
Lavoisierian nomenclature, makes the following re- 
marks, which, however plausible they may sound, will 
be found to be utterly erroneous 3 . ‘ Simplicity and preci- 
sion ought to be the characteristics of a scientific nomen- 
clature : words should signify things , or the analogies of 
things, and not opinions. ... A substance in one age sup- 
posed to be simple, in another is proved to be compound, 
and vice versd. A theoretical nomenclature is liable 
to continual alterations : oxygenated muriatic acid is 
as improper a term as dephlogisticated marine acid . 
Every school believes itself to be in the right: and if 
every school assumes to itself the liberty of altering 
the names of chemical substances in consequence of 
new ideas of their composition, there can be no perma- 
nency in the language of the science; it must always 
be confused and uncertain. Bodies which are similar 
to each other should always be classed together; and 
there is a presumption that their composition is ana- 
logous. Metals , earths , alkalis, are appropriate names 
for the bodies they represent, and independent of all 
speculation: whereas oxides, sulphurets , and muriates 
are telms founded upon opinions of the composition of 
bodies, some of wlmh have been already found erroneous. 


fl Elcm. Geol. p. 17. 4 


3 Elements of Chem. Phil. p. 46 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


297 


The least dangeroi^s mode of giving a systematic form 
to a language seems to be to signify the analogies of 
substances by some common sign affixed to the begin- 
ning or ^lie termination of the word. Thus as the 
metals have been distinguished by a termination in 
um , as aurum , so their calciform or oxidated state 
might have been denoted by a termination in a, as 
aura: and no progress, however great, in the science 
could render it necessary that such a mode of appella- 
tion should be changed.’ 

These remarks are founded upon distinctions which 
have no real existence. We -cannot separate things 
from their properties, nor can we consider their pro- 
perties and analogies in any other way than by having 
opinions about them. By contrasting* analogies with 
opinions , it might appear as if the author maintained 
that there were certain analogies about which there 
was no room for erroneous opinions. Yet the analo- 
gies of chemical compounds, are, in fact, those points 
which have been most the subject of difference of opi- 
nion, and on which the revolutions of theories have 
most changed men’s views. As an example of analo- 
gies which are still recognized under alterations of 
theory, the writer gives the relation of a metal to its 
oxide or calciform state. But this analogy of metallic 
oxides, as Bed Copper or Iron Ore, to Calx, or burnt 
liitie, is very far from being self-evident; — so far in- 
deed, that the recognition of the analogy was a great 
step in chemical theory. The term** which he quotes, 
oxygenated muriatic acid (and the same may be said of 
dephlogisticated marine acid,) if improper, are so not 
because they involve theory, but because they involve 
false theory; — not because those who framed them did 
not endeavour to express analogies, but because they 
expressed analogies about which they were mistaken. 
Unconnected names, as metals, earths, alkalis, are good 
as the basis of a systematic nomenclature, but they 
are not substitutes for such a nomenclature. » A sys- 
tematic nomenclature is an instrument of great utility 
and *power, as the modern history of chemistry has 
shown. It would be highly un philosophical to reject 



298 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

the use of such an instrument, because, in the course 
of the revolutions of science, we may have to modify, 
or even to remodel it altogether. Its utility is not # by 
that means destroyed. It has retained, transmitted, 
and enabled us to reason upon, the doctrines of thS 
earlier theory, so far as they are true ; and when this 
theory is absorbed into a more comprehensive one, (for 
this, and not its refutation, is the end of a theory so 
far as it is true,) the nomenclature is easily translated 
into that which the new theory introduces. We have 
seen, in the history of astronomy, how valuable the 
theory of epicycles was, in its time : the nomenclature 
of the relations of a planet’s orbit, which that theory 
introduced, was one of Keplers resources in discover- 
ing the elliptical theory ; and, though now superseded, 
is still readily intelligible to astronomers. 

This is not the place' fco discuss the reasons for the 
form of scientific terms ; otherwise we might ask, in 
reference to the objections to the Lavoisierian nomen- 
clature, if such forms as aurum and aura are good to 
represent the absence or presence of oxygen, why such 
forms as sulphite and sulphate are not equally good to 
represent the presence of what we may call a smaller 
or larger dose of oxygen, so long as the oxygen theory 
is admitted in its present form; and to indicate still 
the difference of the same substances, if under any 
change of theory it should come to be interpreted in 'a 
new manner. 

But I do not now dwell upon such arguments, my 
object in this place being to show that terms involving 
theory are not only allowable, if understood so far as 
the theory is proved, but of great value, and indeed of 
indispensable use, in science. The objection to them is 
inconsistent with the objects of science. If, after all 
that has been done in chemistry or any other science, 
we have arrived at no solid knowledge, no permanent 
truth ; — if all that we believe now may be proved to 
be false to-morrow; — then indeed our opinions and 
theories are corruptible elements, on which it would 
be unwise to rest any thing important, and which we 
might wish to exclude, even from our names. But 1 if 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 299 

our knowledge has no more secu&ty than this, we can 
find no reason why we should wish at all to have names 
of things, since the names are needed mainly that we 
may reason upon and increase our knowledge such as 
it is. If we are condemned to endless alternations of 
varying opinions, then, no doubt, our theoretical terms 
may be a source of confusion ; but then, where would 
be the advantage of their being otherwise? what would 
be the value of words which should express in a more 
precise manner opinions equally fleeting? It will per- 
haps be said, our terms must express facts, not theo- 
ries : but of this distinction so applied we have repeat- 
edly shown the futility. Theories firmly established 
are facts. Is it not a fact that the rusting of iron 
arises from the metal combining with the cscygen of 
the atmosphere? Is it not a fact that a combination 
of oxygen and hydrogen produces water? That our 
terms should express such facts, is precisely what we 
are here inculcating. 

Our examination of the history of science has led us 
to a view very different from that which represents it 
as consisting in the succession of hostile opinions. It 
is, on the contrary, a progress, in which each step is 
recognized and employed in the succeeding one. Every 
theory, so far as it is true, (and all that have prevailed 
extensively and long, contain a large portion of truth,) 
is token up into the theory which succeeds and seems 
to expel, it. All the narrower inductions of the first 
are included in the more comprehensive generalizations 
of the second. And this is performed mainly by means 
of such terms as we are now considering ; — terms in- 
volving the previous theory. It is by means of such 
terms, that the truths at first ascertained become so 
familiar and manageable, that they can be employed as 
elementary facts in the formation of higher inductions. 

These principles must be applied also, though with 
great caution, and in a temperate manner, even to de- 
scriptive language. Thus the mode of describing the 
forms of crystals adopted by W eroer and Rome de l’lsle 
was* to ’consider an original /orm, from which other 
lorms are derived by truncations of the edges and the 



300 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


angles. Haiiy’s metllod of describing tlie same forms, 
was to consider them as built up of rows of small 
solids, the angles being determined by the decrements 
of these rows. Both these methods of description in- 
volve hypothetical views; and the last was intended to 
rest on a true physical theory of the constitution of 
crystals. Both hypotheses are doubtful or false : yet 
both these methods are good as modes of description : 
nor is Haiiy’s terminology vitiated, if we suppose (as 
in fact we must suppose in many instances,) that crys- 
talline bodies are not really made up of such small 
solids. The mode of describing an octahedron of fiuor 
spar, as derived from the cube, by decrements of one 
row on all the edges, would still be proper and useful 
as a description, whatever judgment we should form of 
the material structure of the body. But then, we must 
consider the solids wliicli^are thus introduced into the 
description as merely hypothetical geometrical forms, 
serving to determine the angles of the faces. It is in 
this way alone that Haiiy’s nomenclature can now be 
retained. 

In like manner we may admit theoretical views into 
the descriptive phraseology of other parts of Natural 
History : and the theoretical terms will replace the 
obvious images, in proportion as the theory is gene- 
rally accepted and familiarly applied. For example, in 
speaking of the Honeysuckle, we may say that tlie' 
upper leaves are perfoliate, meaning that a single 
round leaf is perforated by the stalk, or threaded upon 
it. Here is an image which sufficiently conveys the 
notion of the form. But it is now generally recognized 
that this apparent single leaf is, in fact, two opposite 
leaves joined together at their bases. If this were doubt- 
ed, it may be proved by comparing the upper leaves 
with the lower, which are really separate and opposite. 
Hence the term connate is applied to these conjoined 
opposite leaves, implying that they grow together ; or 
they are called connato-perfoliate . Again; formerly 
the corolla was called monopetalous or polypetalous , as 
it consisted of one part # or of several : but it " is novf 
agreed among botanists that those corollas which ap- 



TIIE LANGUAGE OE SCIENCE. 


301 


pear to consist of « single part, jfre, in fact, composed 
of several soldered together; hence the term gamope- 
talous is^now employed (by De Candolle and his follow- 
ers) instead of monopetalons 4 . 

In this way the language of Natural History not 
only expresses, but inevitably implies, general laws of 
nature; and words are thus fitted to aid the progress 
of knowledge in this, as in other provinces of science. 

Aphorism XII. 

If terms are systematically goody they are not to be re - 

jected because they are etymologically inaccurate . 

» 

Terms belonging to a system are defined, not by the 
meaning of their radical words, but by their place in 
the system. That they should be appropriate in their 
signification, aids the processes of introducing and re- 
membering them, and should therefore be carefully 
attended to by those who invent and establish them; 
but this once done, no objections founded upon their 
etymological import are of any material weight. We 
find no inconvenience in the circumstance that geome- 
try means the measuring of the earth, that the name 
porphyry is applied to many rocks which have no fiery 
spots, as the word implies, and oolite to strata which 
•hive no roelike structure. I11 like manner, if the term 
paicilite were already generally received, as the name 
of a certain group of strata, it would be no valid 
ground for quarrelling with it, that this group was not 
always variegated in colour, or that other groups were 
equally variegated : although undoubtedly in intro- 
ducing such a term, care should be taken to make it 
as distinctive as possible. It often happens, as wc have 
seen, that by the natural progress of changes in lan- 
guage, a word is steadily confirmed in a sense quite 
different from its etymological import. But though 


4 On this subject, scellliger, Vcrsuch Pflanze'nrcich (1810). De Candolle, 
ciner Syatematischen Vollstilndiyen Tlu l oric Elcmentaire de la Botaui- 
Terminoloyie fur das Thicrreich und que.' 



302 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


we may accept such instances, we must not wantonly 
attempt to imitate them. I say, not wantonly : for if 
the progress of scientific identification compel us to 
follow any class of objects into circumstances where 
the derivation of the term is inapplicable, we may still 
consider the term as an unmeaning sound, or rather 
an historical symbol, expressing a certain member of 
our system. Thus if, in following the course of the 
mountain or carboniferous limestone, we find that in 
Ireland it does not form mountains nor contain coal, 
we should act unwisely in breaking down the nomen- 
clature in which our systematic relations are already 
expressed, in order to gain, in a particular case, a pro- 
priety of language Which has no scientific value. 

All attempts *to act upon the maxim opposite to 
this, and to make our scientific names properly de- 
scriptive of the objects, hhve failed and must fail. For 
the marks which really distinguish the natural classes 
of objects, are by no means obvious. The discovery of 
them is one of the most important steps in science; 
and when they are discovered, they are constantly 
liable to exceptions, because they do not contain the 
essential differences of the classes. The natural order 
Umbellatce , in order to be a natural order, must con- 
tain some plants which have not umbels, as Eryngium ' . 
‘In such cases,’ said Linnseus, ‘it is of small import 
what you call the order, if you take a proper series 
of plants, and give it some name which is clearly un- 
derstood to apply to the plants you have associated.’ 
‘I have,’ he adds, ‘followed the rule of borrowing the 
name a fortiori , from the principal feature.’ 

The distinction of crystals into systems according to 
the degree of symmetry which obtains in them, has 
been explained elsewhere. Two of these systems, of 
which the relation as to symmetry might be expressed 
by saying that one is square •pyramidal and the other 
oblong pyramidal, or the first square prismatic and the 
second oblong prismatic , are termed by Mohs, the first, 
Pyramidal , and the <- second Prismatic . And it may 


i See Hist. Jitd. Sc. b. xvi. c. iv. sect. 5. 



TIIE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


303 


be doubted whether it is wortli \tliile to invent other 
terms, though these are thus defective in characteristic 
significance. As an example of a needless rejection of 
old terrhl in virtue of a supposed impropriety in their 
meaning, I may mention the attempt made in the last 
edition of Haiiy’s Mineralogy, to substitute autopside 
and heteropside for metallic and unmetallic . It was 
supposed to be proved that all bodies have a metal for 
their basis ; and hence it was wished to avoid the term 
unmetallic . But the words metallic and unmetallic 
may mean that minerals seem metallic and unmetallic, 
just as well as if they contained the element opside to 
imply this seeming. The old names express all that 
the new express, and with more simplicity, and there- 
fore should nut be disturbed. 

The maxim on which we are now insisting, that we 
are not to be too scrupulous* about the etymology of 
scientific terms, may, at first sight, appear to be at 
variance with our Fourth Aphorism, that words used 
technically are to retain their common meaning as far 
as possible. But it must be recollected, that in the 
Fourth Aphorism we spoke of common words appro- 
priated as technical terms ; we here speak of words 
constructed for scientific purposes. And although it is, 
perhaps, impossible to draw a broad line between these 
two classes of terms, still the rule of propriety may be 
^thted thus: In technical terms, deviations from the 
usual meaning of words are bad in proportion as the 
words are more familiar in our owi language. Thus 
we may apply the term Cirrus to a cloud composed of 
filaments, even if these filaments are straight; but to 
call such a cloud a Curl cloud would be much more 
harsh. 

Since the names of tilings, and of classes of things, 
when constructed so as to involve a description, are 
constantly liable to become bad, the natural classes 
shifting away from the descriptive marks thus prema- 
turely and casually adopted, I venture to lay down 
the following maxim. 



304 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

Aphorism XIII. 

The fundamental terms of a system of Nomenclature mtiy 
he conveniently borrowed from casual or arbitrary circum- 
stances . 

For instance, the names of plants, of minerals, and 
of geological strata, may be taken from the places 
where they occur conspicuously or in a distinct form ; 
as Parietaria, Parnassia, Chalcedony , Arragonite, Si- 
lurian system, Purbeck limestone. These names may 
be considered as at first supplying standards of refer- 
ence; for in order to ascertain whether any rock be 
Purbeck limestone, we might compare it with the 
rocks in* the I she of Purbeck. But this reference to a 
local standard is of authority only till the place of the 
object in the system, and’ its distinctive marks, are as- 
certained. It would not vitiate the above names, if it 
were found that the Parnassia does not grow on Par- 
nassus; that Chalcedony is not found in Chalcedon; or 
even that Arragonite no longer occurs in Arragon ; for 
it is now firmly established as a mineral species. Even 
in geology such a reference is arbitrary, and may be 
superseded, or at least modified, by a more systematic 
determination. A lpine limestone is no longer accepted 
as a satisfactory designation of a rock, now that we 
know the limestone of the Alps to be of various ages. ' 

Again, names of persons, either casually connected 
with the object, or arbitrarily applied to it, may be 
employed as designations. This has been done most 
copiously in botany, as for example, Nicotiana , Dahlia , 
Fuchsia , J ungerjnannia, Lonicera. And Limneus has 
laid down rules for restricting this mode of perpetu- 
ating the memory of men, in the names of plants. 
Those generic names, he says 1 , which have been con- 
structed to preserve the memory of persons who have 
deserved well of botany, are to be religiously retained. 
This, ho* adds, is the sole and supreme reward of the 
botanist’s labours, and must be carefully guarded and 


Bot. 241 . 



THE LANGUAGE OP SCIENCE. 


305 


scrupulously bestowed, as an endburagement and an 
Honour. Still more arbitrary are the terms borrowed 
from thejiames of the gods and goddesses, heroes and 
heroines of antiquity, to designate new genera in those 
departments 0 / natural history in which so many have 
been discovered in recent times as to we&ry out all at- 
tempts at descriptive nomenclature. Cuvier has coun- 
tenanced this method. 6 1 have had to frame many 
new names of genera and sub-genera/ he says 2 , ‘for 
the sub-genera which I have established were so nu- 
merous and various, that the memory is not satisfied 
with numerical indications. These I have chosen 
^either so as to indicate some character, or among the 
usual denominations, which I have latinized, or finally, 
after the example of Linnseus, among the mmes of 
mythology, which are in general agreeable to the ear, 
and which are far from being Exhausted.’ 

This mode of framing names from the names of per- 
sons to whom it was intended to do honour, has been 
employed also in the mathematical tmd chemical sci- 
ences; but such names have rarely obtained any per- 
manence, except when they recorded an inventor or 
discoverer. Some of the constellations, indeed, have 
retained such appellations, as Berenice's Hair; and the 
new star which shone out in the time of Caesar, would 
probably have retained the name given to it, of the 
Julian Star, if it had not disappeared again soon after. 
In the map of the Moon, almost all the parts have 
had such names imposed upon them by those who 
have constructed such maps, and these names have 
very properly been retained. But the names of new 
planets and satellites thus suggested have not been 
generally accepted; as the Medicean stars, the name 
employed by Galileo for the satellites of J upiter ; the 
Georgium Sidus , the appellation proposed by Herschel 
for Uranus when first discovered 3 ; Ceres Ferdinandea , 


2 Rdgne An. p. t6. 

3 In this^case, the name Uranus, 
selected with a view to symmetry 
according to the mythological order 

NOV. CteG. 


of descent of the persons *(TJranus, 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars) was adopted 
by astronomers in general, though 
not proposed or sanctioned by the 

20 



306 aphorisms concerning 

the name which Piazzi wished to hnpose on the small 
planet Ceres. The names given to astronomical Tables 
by the astronomers who constructed them have been 
most steadily adhered to, being indeed names of books, 
and not of natural objects. Thus there were thei 
Ilchanic , the Alphomine , the Rudolphine , the Caro- 
linian Tables. Comets which have been ascertained 
to be periodical, have very properly had assigned to 
them the name of the person who established this 
point; and of these we have thus, Halleys , Ended s 
Comet , and Bielas or Gambart's Comet. 

In the case of discoveries in science or inventions of 
apparatus, the name of the inventor is very properly^ 
employed as the designation. Thus we have the Tor- 
ricellian Vacuum, the Voltaic Pile, Fahrenheit' 8 Ther- 
mometer. And in the same manner with regard to 
laws of nature, we have* Kepler's Laws, Boyle or Ma- 
riotte's law of the elasticity of air, Huyghens's law of 
double refraction, Newton's scale of colours. Descartes' 
law of refraction is an unjust appellation; for the dis- 
covery of the law of sines was made by Snell. In de- 
ductive mathematics, where the invention of a theorem 
is generally a more definite step than an induction, 
this mode of designation is more common, as Demoi - 
vre's Theorem, Maclaurin's Theorem, Lagrange s Theo- 
rem, Eulerian Integrals. 

In the History of Science 4 I have remarked that in 
the discovery of what is termed galvanism, Volta’s 

discoverer of the new planet. In the with the sanction of M. Le Verrier, 
cases of the smaller planets, Ceres, given the name of Neptune to the 
PaUaa, Juno, and Vesta, the names planet revolving beyond Uranus, and 
were given either by the discoverer, discovered in consequence of his an- 
or with his sanction. Following this nouncement of its probable existence, 
rule, Bessel gave the name of Astrcea which had been inferred by Mr. 
to a new planet discovered in the Adams and him (calculating in igno- 
same region by Mr. Hencke, as men- ranee of each other’ s purpose) from 
tioned in t^ie additions to book viL of the perturbations of Uranus; as I 
the History (2nd Ed.). Following the have stated in the Additions to the 
same rule, and adhering as much as Third Edition of the History. t 
possible to mythological connexion, 4 b. xiii. c. 1. t 

the astronomers of Europe 'have, 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


307 


office was of a higher and more philosophical kind 
• than that of Galvani ; and I have, on this account, 
urged tl^ propriety of employing the term voltaic , 
rather than galvanic electricity. I may add that the 
electricity of the common machine is often placed in 
contrast with this, and appears to require an express 
name. Mr. Faraday calls it common or machine elec- 
tricity ; but I think that franJclinic electricity would 
form a more natural correspondence with voltaic , and 
would be well justified by Franklin’s place in the his- 
tory of that part of the subject. 


Aphorism XIY. 

The, Binary Method of Nomenclature (Names by Genus 
and Species) is the most convenient hitherto employed in 
Classification. 

The number of species iii every province of Natural 
History is so vast that we cannot distinguish them 
and record the distinctions without some artifice. The 
known species of plants, for instance, were 10,000 in the 
time of Linnaeus, and are now probably 60,000. It 
would be useless to endeavour to frame and employ 
separate names for each of these species. 

The division of the objects into a subordinated sys- 
tem of classification enables us to introduce a Nomen- 
clature which does not require this %normous number 
of names. The artifice employed is, to name a specimen 
by means of two (or it might be more) steps of the suc- 
cessive division. Thus in Botany, each of the Genera 
has its name, and the species are marked by the addi- 
tion of some epithet to the name of the genus. In this 
manner about 1,700 Generic Names, with a moderate 
number of Specific Names, were found by Linnaeus 
sufficient to designate with precision all the species of 
vegetables known at his time. And this Binary Me- 
thod of {Nomenclature has been fcfund so convenient, 
tipt it has been universally adopted in every other de- 
partment of the Natural Historf of organized beings. 



APHORISMS CONCERNING 


308 

Many other modes of Nomenclature have been tried, 
hut no other has at all taken root. Linnseus himself 
appears at first to have intended marking eaqh species 
by the Generic Name, accompanied by & characteristic 
Descriptive Phrase ; and to have proposed the employ- 
ment of a Trivial Specific Name, as he termed it, only 
as a method of occasional convenience. The use of 
these trivial names , however, has become universal, as 
we have said ; and is by many persons considered the 
greatest improvement introduced at the Linnsean re- 
form. 


Aphorism XY. 

The Maxims qf Linnceus concerning the Names to be used 
in Botany, (Philosophia Botanica, Nomina. Sections 210 
to 255) are good examples < of Aphorisms on this subject. 

Both Linnaeus and other writers (as Adanson) have 
given many maxims with a view of regulating the 
selection of generic and specific names. The maxims 
of Linnaeus were intended as much as possible to ex- 
clude barbarism and confusion, and have, upon the 
whole, been generally adopted. • 

These canons, and the sagacious modesty of great 
botanists, like Bobert Brown, in conforming to them, 
have kept the majority of good botanists within salu- 
tary limits ; though many of these canons were ob- 
jected to by the contemporaries of Linnaeus (Adanson 
and others 1 ) as capricious and unnecessary restrictions. 

Many of the names introduced by Linnaeus certainly 
appear fanciful enough. Thus he gives the name Bau- 
hinia to a plant which has leaves in pairs, because the 
Bauhins were a pair of brothers. Banisteria is the 
name of a climbing plant in honour of Banister, who 
travelled among mountains. But such names once 
established by adequate authority lose all their incon- 
venience and easily become permanent, and hence the 
reasonableness of one of the Linnsean rules 2 : — 

That as such a perpetuation of the names of persons 


1 Pref. cxxix. clxxiL 


8 Ph/il. Bot. s. 239. 




THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 309 

by the names of plants is the onl$ honour that botan- 
ists have to bestow, it ought to be used with care and 
caution, ^nd religiously respected. 

[3rd ed. Jt may serve to show how sensitive bo- 
tanists are to the allusions contained in such names, 
that it has been charged against Linnaeus, as a proof 
of malignity towards Buffon, that he changed the name 
of the genus Buffonia, established by Sauvages, into 
Bwfonia , which suggested a derivation from Bufo, a 
toad. It appears to be proved that the spelling was not 
Linnaeus’s doing.] 

Another Linnoean maxim is (Art. 2 1 9), that the gene- 
ric name must be fixed before we attempt to form a 
specific name ; 4 the latter without*the former is like 
the clapper without the bell.’ 

The name of the genus being fixed, the species may 
be marked (Art. 257) by adding to it ‘a single word 
taken at will from any quarter;’ that is, it need not 
involve a description or any essential property of the 
plant, but may be a casual or arbitrary appellation. 
Thus the various species of Hwracium* are Hieradum 
Alpinum , II. Ilalleri , H. Pilosella, II. dubium, H. 
murorum, <fcc., where we see how different may be the 
kind of origin of the words. 

Attempts have been made at various times to form 
„ the names of species from those of genera in some more 
symmetrical manner. But these have not been suc- 
cessful, nor are t*hey likely to be so ; and we shall venture 
to propound an axiom in condemnation of such names. 

Aphorism XVI. 

Numerical names in Classification are bad; and the same 
may be said of other names of kinds , depending upon any 
fixed series of notes of order . 

With regard to numerical names of kinds, of species 
for instance, the objections are of this nature: Besides 
that such names offer nothing for the imagination to 
take hold of, new discoveries -v^ill probably alter the 


8 Hooker, FI. S9oL 228. 




APHORISMS CONCERNING 


310 

numeration, and male the names erroneous. Thus, if 
we call the species of a genus 1, 2, 3, a new species 
intermediate between 1 and 2, 2 and 3, <fcc. cannot be 
put in its place without damaging the lyimbers. 

The geological term Trias , lately introduced to de- 
signate the group consisting of the three members 
(Bunter Sandstein, Muschelkalk, and Keuper) becomes 
improper if, as some geologists hold, two of these mem- 
bers cannot be separated. 

Objections resembling those which apply to numeri- 
cal designations of species, apply to other cases of fixed 
series : for instance, when it has been proposed to mark 
the species by altering the termination of the genus. 
Thus Adanson 1 , demoting a genus by the name Forma 
( Lychnidea ), conceived he might mark five of its species 
by altering the last syllable, Forma , Fonna-e , Fonna-i , 
Fonna-o, Fonna-u; then f ' others by Fonna-ba, Fonna- 
ka, and so on. This would be liable to the same evils 
which have been noticed as belonging to the numerical 
method 2 * . 


Aphorism XYII. 

In any classificatory science names including more than 
two steps of the classification may be employed if it be found 
convenient. 

Linnjsus, in his canons for botanical nomenclature 4 
(Art. 212), says that the names of the class and the 
order a're to be mute, while the names of the Genus 
and Species are sonorous. And accordingly the names 


1 Pref. clxxvi. 

2 In like manner the names assigned 

by Mr. Rickman to the successive 

styles of Gothic architecture in Eng- 
land Early English , Decorated , and 
Perpendicular,— cannot be replaced 
by numerical designations, First 
Pointed, Second Pointed, Third Point- 
ed. For— besides that he who first 
distinctly establishes classes Has the 
right of naming them, and that Mr. 
Rickman’s names are really appro- 


priate and significant— these new 
names would confound all meaning 
of language. We should not be able 
to divide Early English, or Deco- 
rated, or Perpendicular into sub- 
styles for who could talk of First 
Second Pointed and Second Second 
Pointed ; and what should we call 
that pointed style— the Transition 
from the Norman— which, precedes 
the First Pointed ? 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


311 

of plants (and the same is true of Animals) have in com- 
mon practice been binary only, consisting of a generic 
and a specific name. The class and the order have not 
been admitted to form part of the appellation of the 
species. Indeed it is easy to see that a name, which 
must be identical in so many instances as that of an 
Order would be, would be felt as superfluous and bur- 
thensome. Accordingly, Linn reus makes it one of his 
maxims 1 , that the name of the Class and Order must not 
be expressed but understood, and hence, he says, Boyen, 
who took Lilium for the name of a Class, rightly re- 
jected this word as a generic name, and substituted 
Liriurn with the Greek termination. 

Yet we must not too peremptorily assume such 
maxims as these to be universal for all clas^ificatory 
sciences. It is very possible that it may be found ad- 
visable to use three terms, tlM of Order, Genus, and 
Species in designating minerals, as is done in Mohs’s 
nomenclature, for example, Ehombohedral Calc Halo - 
ide t Paratomous Hal Baryte. 

It is possible also that it may be found useful in the 
same science (Mineralogy) to mark some of the steps of 
classification by the termination. Thus it has been pro- 
posed to confine the termination ite to the Order fili- 
cides of JSTaumann, as ApopliylKte, Stilbifo, Leu cite, (fee., 
and to use names of different form in other orders, as 
Vale Spar for Brennerite, Pyramidal Titanium Oxide 
for Octahedrite. * Some such method appears to be the 
most likely to give us a tolerable mineralogical nomen- 
clature. 


Aphorism XYIII. 

In forming a Terminology , words may be invented when 
necessary , but they cannot be conveniently borrowed from 
casual or arbitrary circumstances 2 . 

It will be recollected that Terminology is a language 
employed for describing objects, Nomenclature, a body 


' 1 Phil. Bot. s. 215. b. viiL c. ii. sec. 2, for some remarks 

s I may also refer to Hist. Sc. Id. on Terminology. 



312 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


of names of the objects themselvas. The names , as 
was stated in the last maxim, may be arbitrary ; but 
the descriptive terms must be borrowed from f words of 
suitable meaning in the modern or the classical lan- 
guages. Thus the whole terminology which Linnaeus 
introduced into botany, is founded upon the received 
use of Latin words, although he defined their meaning 
so as to make it precise when it was not so, according 
to Aphorism V. But many of the terms were invent- 
ed by him and other botanists, as Perianth , Nectary , 
Pericarp; so many, indeed, as to form, along with the 
others, a considerable language. Many of the terms 
which are now become familiar were originally in- 
vented by writers*- on botany. Thus the word Petal , 
for one r. division of the corolla, was introduced by 
Fabius Columna. The term Sepal was devised by 
Neckar to express each* of the divisions of the calyx. 
And up to the most recent times, new denominations 
of parts and conditions of parts have been devised by 
botanists, when they found them necessary, in order to 
mark important differences or resemblances. Thus the 
general Receptacle of the flower, as it is termed by 
Linnaeus, or Torus by Salisbury, is continued into 
organs which carry the stamina and pistil, or the pistil 
alone, or the whole flower ; this organ has hence been 
termed 2 Gonophorc , Carpophore , and Anthophore , in 
these cases. 

In like manner when Cuvier had 'ascertained that 
the lower jaws of Saurians consisted always of six 
pieces having definite relations of form and position, 
he gave names to them, and termed them respectively 
the Dental , the Angular , the Coronoid , the Articular, 
the Complementary, and the Opercular Bones. 

In all these cases, the descriptive terms thus intro- 
duced have been significant in their derivation. An 
attempt to circulate a perfectly arbitrary word as a 
means of description would probably be unsuccessful. 
We have, indeed, some examples approaching to arbi- 
trary designations, iit the Wernerian names of colours, 


* De Cttndolle’s Th. El. 405. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


313 


which are a part *f the terminolbgy of Natural His- 
tory. Many of these names are borrowed from natural 
resemblances, as Auricula purple, Apple green , Straw 
yellow; but thp names of others are taken from casual 
occurrences, mostly, however, such as were already 
recognized in common language, . as Prussian blue, 
Dutch orange , King's yellow. 

The extension of arbitrary names in scientific termi- 
nology is by no means to be encouraged. I may men- 
tion a case in which it was very properly avoided. 
When Mr. Faraday’s researches on Voltaic electricity 
had led him to perceive the great impropriety of the 
term poles , as applied to the apparatus, since the pro- 
cesses have not reference to any opposed points, but to 
two opposite directions of a path, lie very, suitably 
wished to substitute for the phrases positive pole and 
negative pole , two words enfting in ode , from 0805, a 
way. A person who did not see the value of our pre- 
sent maxim, that descriptive terms should be descrip- 
tive in their origin, might have pfoposed words per- 
fectly arbitrary, as Alphode, and Betode: or, if he 
wished to pay a tribute of respect to the discoverers 
in this department of science, Galvanode and Voltaode. 
But such words would very justly have been rejected 
by Mr. Faraday, and would hardly have obtained any 
r general currency among men of science. Zincode and 
Platinode, terms derived from the metal which, in one 
modification of the apparatus, forms what was pre- 
viously termed the pole, are to be • avoided, because in 
their origin too much is casual; and they are not a 
good basis for derivative terms. The pole at which 
the zinc is, is the Anode or Cathode, according as it is 
associated with different metals. Either the Zincode 
must sometimes mean the pole at which the Zinc is, 
and at other times that at which the Zinc is not, or 
else we must have as many names for poles as there 
are metals. Anode and Cathode, the terms which Mr. 
Faraday adopted, were free from these objections; for 
they r^fer to a natural standard ©f the direction of the 
voltaic current, in a manner which, though perhaps 
not obvious at first sight, is easily understood and 



APHORISMS CONCERNING 


314 

retained. Auo&q and CWiodc, the rising and the setting 
way, are the directions which correspond to east and 
west in that voltaic current to which we mmt ascribe 
terrestrial magnetism. And with these words it was 
easy to connect Anion and Cattiion , to designate the 
opposite elements which are separated and liberated at 
the two Electrodes . 


Aphorism XIX. 

The meaning of Technical Terms must he fixed hy con - 
vention, not by casual reference to the ordinary meaning of 
words . 

In fixing the ’meaning of the Technical Terms which 
form the Terminology of any science, at least of the 
descriptive Terms, we necessarily fix, at the same time, 
the perceptions and notions which the Terms are to 
convey to a hearer. What do we mean by apple-green or 
French grey t If' might, perhaps, be supposed that, in 
the first example, the term apple , referring to so fami- 
liar an object, sufficiently suggests the colour intended. 
But it may easily be seen that this is not true; for 
apples are of many different hues of green, and it is 
only by a conventional selection that we can appro- 
priate the term to one special shade. When this appro » 
priation is once made, the term refers to the sensation, 
and not to the parts of this term ; for these enter into 
the compound merely as a help to the memory, whether 
the suggestion be a natural connexion as in ‘ apple- 
green,’ or a casual one as in c French grey/ In order 
to derive due advantage from technical terms of this 
land, they must be associated immediately with the per- 
ception to which they belong ; and not connected with 
it through the vague usages of common language. The 
memory must retain the sensation ; and the technical 
word must be understood as directly as the most fami- 
liar word, and more distinctly. When we find such 
terms as tin-white br pinchbeck-brown, the metallic 
colour so denoted ought to start up in our memory 
without delay or search. 



THE LANGUAGE OP SCIENCE. 315 

This, which it is* most important to recollect with 
respect to the simpler properties of bodies, as colour 
and form* is no less true with respect to more compound 
notions. In alj. cases the term is fixed to a peculiar 
meaning by convention ; and the student, in order to 
use the word, must be completely familiar with the con- 
vention, so that he has no need to frame conjectures 
from the word itself. Such conjectures would always 
he insecure, and often erroneous. Thus the term papi- 
lionaceous, applied to a flower, is employed to indicate, 
not only a resemblance to a butterfly, but a resemblance 
arising from five petals of a certain peculiar shape and 
arrangement ; and even if the resemblance to a butter- 
fly were much stronger than it is in sfuch cases, yet if it 
were produced in a different way, as, for example, by 
one petal, or two only, instead of a ‘standard,’ two 
‘wings,’ and a ‘keel’ consisting of two parts more or 
less united into one, we should no longer be justified in 
speaking of it as a ‘papilionaceous’ flower. 

The formation of an exact and extensive descriptive 
language for botany has been executed with a degree of 
skill and felicity, which, before it was attained, could 
hardly have been dreamt of as attainable. Every pai*t 
of a plant has been named ; and the form of every part, 
even the most minute, has had a large assemblage of de- 
scriptive terms appropriated to it, by means of which 
the botanist can convey and receive knowledge of form 
and structure, as exactly as if each minute part were 
presented to him vastly magnified.* This acquisition 
was part of the Linnsean llcform, of which we have 
spoken in the History, ‘ Tournefort,’ says De Candolle 1 , 

‘ appears to have been the first who really perceived the 
utility of fixing the sense of terms in such a way as al- 
ways to employ the same word in the same sense, and 
always to express the same idea by the same word ; but 
it was Linnaeus who really created and fixed this bota- 
nical language, and this is his fairest claim to glory, for 
by this fixation of language he has shed clearness and 
precision over all parts of the scieAce.’ 


¦ j. new. Aic'itu j>. 327. 



31 6 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

It is not necessary here to give &ny detailed account 
of the terms of botany. The fundamental ones have 
been gradually introduced, as the parts of piants were 
more carefully and minutely examined. Thus the 
flower was successively distinguished into the calyx , the 
corolla , the stamens , and the pistils; the sections of 
the corolla were termed petals by Columna ; those of 
the calyx were called sepals by Neckar 2 . Sometimes ’ 
terms of greater generality were devised; as perianth 
to include the calyx and corolla, whether one or both of 
these were present 3 ; pericarp for the part inclosing the 
grain, of whatever kind it be, fruit, nut, pod, &c. And 
it may easily be imagined that descriptive terms may, 
by definition and combination, become very numerous 
and distinct. Thus leaves may be called pinnatifid 4 , pin- 
nati partite, pinnatisect , ( pinnatilobate, palmatifid, pal- 
mati partite , &c., and each of these words designates 
different combinations of the modes and extent of the 
divisions of the leaf with the divisions of its outline. In 
some cases arbitrary numerical relations are introduced 
into the definition : thus a leaf is called bilobate 5 when 
it is divided into two parts by a notch ; but if the notch 
go to the middle of its length, it is bifid ; if it go near 
the base of the leaf, it is bipartite; if to the base, it is 
bisect. Thus, too, a pod of a cruciferous plant is a silica f 
if it be four times as long as it is broad, but if it be 
shorter than this it is a silicula. Such terms being 
established, the form of the very complex leaf or frond 
of a fern is exactly conveyed, for example, by the fol- 
lowing phrase : ‘ fronds rigid pinnate, pin me recurved 
subunilateral pinnatifid, the segments linear undivided 
or bifid spinuloso-serrateV 

Other characters, as well as form, are conveyed with 
the like precision : Colour by means of a classified scale 
of colours, as we have seen in speaking of the Measures 


2 Pe Candolle, 329. 

3 For this Erhart and Pe Candolle 
use Perigone. 

4 Pe Candolle, 318. 

* Ibid. 493. 


6 Ibid. 422. 

7 Hooker, Brit Flo. p. 450. Hy- 
mmophyUvM Wilsoni , Scottish filmy- 
fern, abundant in the highlands* of 
Scotland and about Killarney. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


317 


of Secondary Qualifies ; to” wlii^h,* however, we must 
add, that the naturalist employs arbitrary names, (such 
as we have already quoted,) and not mere numerical 
exponent?, to indicate a certain number of selected 
colours. This w'as done with most precision by Werner, 
and his scale of colours is still the most usual standard 
of naturalists. Werner also introduced a more exact 
terminology with regard to other characters which are 
important in mineralogy, as lustre, hardness. But 
Mohs improved upon this step by giving a numerical 
scale of hardness, in which talc is 1, gypsum 2, calc spar 
3, and so on, as we have already explained in the His- 
tory of Mineralogy. Some properties, as specific gra- 
vity, by their definition give at 4>nce a numerical 
measure ; and others, as crystalline form, require a 
very considerable array of mathematical calculation 
and reasoning, to point out tlteir relations and grada- 
tions. In all cases the features of likeness in the ob- 
jects must be rightly apprehended, in order to their 
being expressed by a distinct terminology. Thus no 
terms could describe crystals for any purpose of natural 
history, till it was discovered that in a class of minerals 
the proportion of the faces might vary, while the angle 
remained the same. Nor could crystals be described so 
as to distinguish species, till it was found that the de- 
rived and primitive forms are connected by very simple 
relations of space and number. The discovery of the 
mode in, which characters must be apprehended so that 
they may be considered as fixed foy a class, is an im- 
portant step in the progress of each branch of Natural 
History; and hence we have had, in the History of 
Mineralogy and Botany, to distinguish as important 
and eminent persons those who made such discoveries, 
Borne de Lisle and Haiiy, Cesalpinus and Gesner. 

By the continued progress of that knowledge of mi- 
nerals, plants, and other natural objects, in which such 
persons made the most distinct and marked steps, but 
which has been constantly advancing in a more gradual 
and imperceptible manner, the mpst important and es- 
sential features of similarity and dissimilarity in such 
Sbjects have been selected, arranged, and fitted with 



318 aphorisms concerning 

names ; and we havo tlms in such departments, systems 
of Terminology which fix our attention upon the resem- 
blances which it is proper to consider, and enable us to 
convey them in words. 

The following Aphorisms respect the Form of Tech- 
nical Terms. 

By the Form of terms, I mean their philological 
conditions ; as, for example, from what languages they 
may be borrowed, by what modes of inflexion they 
must be compounded, how their derivatives are to be 
formed, and the like. In this, as in other parts of the 
subject, I shall not lay down a system of rules, but 
shall propose a few maxims. 

AriiomsM XX. 

The two main conditioiis o f the Form of technical terms 
arc , that they must he generally intelligible , and susceptible 
of such grammatical relations as their scientific use requires . 

These conditions may at first appear somewhat 
vague, but it will be found that they are as definite as 
we could make them, without injuriously restricting 
ourselves. It will appear, moreover, that they have 
an important bearing upon most of the questions re- 
specting the form of the words which come before us • 
and that if we can succeed in any case in reconciling 
the two conditions, we obtain terms which are practi- 
cally good, whatever objections may be urged against 
them from other considerations. 

i. The former condition, for instance, bears upon 
the question whether scientific terms are to be taken 
from the learned languages, Greek and Latin, or from 
our own. And the latter condition very materially 
affects the same question, since in English we have 
scarcely any power of inflecting our words; and there* 
fore must have recourse to Greek or Latin in order to 
obtain terms which admit of grammatical modification. 
If we were content \^ith the term Heat , to express the 
science of heat, still it would be a bad technical tel’m^ 
for we cannot derive fr ( om it an adjective like thermo - 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 319 

tical. If bed or layer were an €$p&i]ly good term with 
stratum , we must still retain the latter, in order that 
we may use the derivative Stratification , for which the 
English words cannot produce an equivalent substi- 
tute. We may retain the words lime and flint , but 
their adjectives for scientific purposes are not limy 
and flinty , but calcareous and siliceous; and hence we 
are able to form a compound, as calcareo-siliceous , 
which we could not do with indigenous words. We 
might fix the phrases bent bach and broken to mean (of 
optical rays) that they are reflected and refracted; but 
then we should have no means of speaking of the 
angles of Reflection and Refraction , of the Refractive 
Indices, and the like. 

In like manner, so long as anatomist*; described cer- 
tain parts of a vertebra as vertebral laminae, , or verte- 
bral plates, they had no adjective whereby to signify 
the properties of these parts; the term Neur apophysis, 
given to them by Mr. Owen, supplies the correspond- 
ing expression neurapophysial. So* again, the term 
Rasisphenoid , employed by the same anatomist, is 
better than basilar or basial 'process of the sphenoid, 
because it gives us the adjective basisphenoidal. And 
the like remark applies to other changes recently 
proposed in the names of portions of the skeleton. 

Thus one of the advantages of going to the Greek 
and Latin languages for the origin of our scientific 
terms is> that ift this way we obtain words which 
admit of the formation of adjectives and abstract 
terms, and of composition, and of other inflexions. An- 
other advantage of such an origin is, that such terms, 
if well selected, are readily understood over the whole 
lettered world. For this reason, the descriptive lan- 
guage of science, of botany for instance, has been, for 
the most part, taken from the Latin; many of the 
tbrms of the mathematical and chemical sciences have 
been derived from the Greek; and .when occasion 
occurs to construct a new term, it is generally *to that 
language that recourse is had. The advantage of such 
ternts is* as has already been intimated, that they con- 
stitute an universal language,* by means of which 



320 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

cultivated persons <m ^ every country may convey to 
each other their ideas without the need of translation. 

On the other hand, the advantage of indigenous 
terms is, that so far as the language extends} they are 
intelligible much more clearly and vividly than those 
borrowed from any other source, as well as more easily 
manageable in the construction of sentences. In the 
descriptive language of botany, for example, in an 
English work, the terms drooping , nodding , one-sided , 
homing, straggling, appear better than cernuous , nu- 
tant, secund , volubile, divaricate. For though the 
latter terms may by habit become as intelligible as the 
former, they cannot become more so to any readers ; 
and to most English readers they will give a far less 
distinct .impression. 

2. Since the advantage of indigenous over learned 
terms, or the contrary, ^depends upon the balance of 
the capacity of inflexion and composition on the one 
hand, against a ready and clear significance on the 
other, it is evident that the employment of scientific 
terms of the one class or of the other may very pro- 
perly be extremely different in different languages. 
The German possesses in a very eminent degree that 
power of composition and derivation, which in English 
can hardly be exercised at all, in a formal manner. 
Hence German scientific writers use native terms to 
a far greater extent than do our own authors. The 
descriptive terminology of botany, and even .the sys- 
tematic nomenclature of chemistry, are represented 
by the Germans by means of German roots and in- 
flexions. Thus the description of Potentilla anserina, 
in English botanists, is that it has Leaves interruptedly 
pinnate, serrate , silky, stem creeping, stalks axillar, 
one-flowered. Here we have words of Saxon and 
Latin origin mingled pretty equally. But the German 
description is entirely Teutonic. Die Blume in Ached", 
die Blatter unterbrochen gefiedert, die Bldttchen scharf 
gesagt, die Stamms kriechend, die Bluthenstiele einblu - 
mig. We could imitate this in our own language, by 
saying brokenly-feathered, sharp-sawed ; by usirfg threed 
for ternate, as the Germans employ gedreit; by saying 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 


321 


fingered-feathered for digitato-fairtnate, and the like. 
But the habit which we have, in common as> well as 
scientific language, of borrowing words from the Latin 
for new cases, would make such usages seem very- 
harsh and pedantic. 

We may add that, in consequence of these different 
practices in the two languages, it is a common habit 
of the German reader to impose a scientific definite- 
ness upon a common word, such as our Fifth Aphorism 
requires; whereas the English reader expects rather 
that a word which is to have a technical sense shall be 
derived from the learned languages. Die Kelch and 
die Blame (the cup and the flower) easily assume the 
technical meaning of calyx and c&rolla ; die Griffel 
(the pencil) becomes the pistil; and a* name is easily 
found for the pollen, the anthers , and the stamens, by 
calling them the dust, the dhst-cases, and the dust- 
threads (der JStaub , die Staub-beutel, or Staubfacher , 
and die titaubfaden). This was formerly done in 
English to a greater extent than is nbw possible with- 
out confusion and pedantry. Thus, in Grew’s book on 
the Anatomy of Plants, the calyx is called the impale- 
ment, and the sepals the impalers ; the petals are called 
the leaves of the flower ; the stamens with their anthers 
are the seminiform attire. But the English language, 
as to such matters, is now less flexible than it was ; 
partly in consequence of its having adopted the Lin- 
lisean terminology almost entire, without any endea- 
vour to naturalize it. Any attempt at idiomatic de- 
scription would interfere with the scientific language 
now generally received in this country. In Germany, 
on the other hand, those who first wrote upon science 
in their own language imitated the Latin words which 
they found in foreign writers, instead of transferring 
new roots into their own language. Thus the Nume- 
rator and Denominator of a fraction they call the 
Namer and the Counter ( Nenner and Zahler). This 
course they pursued even where the expression was 
erroneous. Thus that portion of the intestines which 
ancient Anatomists called Duodenum , because they 
fa&ely estimated its length at twelve inches, the Ger- 
nov. okg. 21 



322 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

mans also term Zwil l finger darm , (twelve-inch-gut), 
though this intestine in a whale is twenty feet long, 
and in a frog not above twenty lines. As another 
example of this process in German, we may take the 
word Muttersaclcbauchblatte , the uterine peritonaeum. 

It is a remarkable evidence of this formative power 
of the German language, that it should have been 
able to produce an imitation of the systematic chemi- 
cal nomenclature of the French school, so comjDlete, 
that it is used in Germany as familiarly as the origi- 
nal system is in France and England. Thus Oxygen 
and Hydrogen are Sauer staff and Wafferstoff ; Azote is 
Stickstoff (suffocating matter); Sulphuric and Sulphu- 
rous Acid are Sdhwefel-sdure and Schwefelichte-sdure. 
The Sulphate foul Sulphite of Baryta, and Sulphuret 
of Baryum, are Schwefel-sdure Baryterde , Schwe/elichte- 
sdure Baryterde , , and Si'hwef el-bar yum. Carbonate of 
Iron is Kohlen-sdures Eisenoxydul ; and we may ob- 
serve that, in such cases, the German name is much 
more agreeable tb analogy than the English one; for 
the Protoxide of Iron, ( Eisenoxydul ,) and not the 
Iron itself, is the base of the salt. A nd the German 
language has not only thus imitated the established 
nomenclature of chemistry, but has shown itself capa- 
ble of supplying new forms to meet the demands 
which the progress of theory occasions. Thus the 
Hydracids are Wasserstoff-sduren; and of these, flic 
Hydriodic Acid is lodwasserstoff-sduW , and so of the 
rest. In like manner, the translator of Berzelius has 
found German names for the stilpho-salts of that 
chemist; thus he has Wasser staff schioefliges Scliewef el- 
lithium , which would be (if we >vero to adopt his 
theoretical view) hydro -sulplmret of sulphuret of 
lithium : and a like nomenclature for all other similar 
cases. 

3. In English we have no power of imitating this 
process, and must take our technical phrases from 
some more flexible language, and generally from the 
Latin or Greek. "We arc indeed so much accustomed 
to do this, that except a word has its origin in one 6f 
these languages, it hardly seems to us a technical 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 323 

term ; and thus by employing \n3igenous terms, even 
descriptive ones, we may, perhaps, lose in precision 
more thogi we gain in the vividness of the impression. 
Perhaps it may be better to say cuneate , lunate , has- 
tate, sagittate , reniform, than wedge-sharped, crescent- 
shaped , halbert-headed , arrow-headed, kidney-shaped . 
Ringent and personate are better than any English 
words which we could substitute for them; labiate is 
more precise than lipped would readily become. Ur- 
ceolate , trochlear , are more compact than pitcher-shaped, 
pulley-shaped; and infundibuliform, hypocrateriform, 
though long words, are not more inconvenient than 
funnel-shaped and salver-shaped. In the same way it 
is better to speak (with l)r. Pricharcl of repent and 
progressive animals, than of creeping and progressive : 
the two Latin terms make a better pair of correlatives. 

4 . But wherever we may draw the line between 
the proper use of English and Latin terms in descrip- 
tive phraseology, we shall find it advisable; to borrow 
almost all other technical terms from* the learned lan- 
guages. We have seen this in considering the new 
terms introduced into various sciences in virtue of our 
Ninth Maxim. We may add, as further examples, 
the names of the various animals of which a know- 
ledge has been acquired from the remains of them 
which exist in various strata, and which have been 
reconstructed by Cuvier and his successors. Such are 
the Palftotherium , the Anoplotlierium, the Megathe- 
rium, the Dinotherium, the Ghiroth&rium, the Megal- 
ichthys, the Mastodon, the Ichthyosaurus, the Plesio- 
saurus, the Pterodactylus. To these others are every 
year added ; as, for instance, very recently, the 
Toxodon, Zeuglodon, and Phascolotherium of Mr. Owen, 
and the Thylacotherium of M. Valenciennes. Still 
more recently the terms Glyptodon, Mylodon, ZHcyno- 
don, Paloplotherium, Phynchosaurus, have been added 
by Mr. Owen to designate fossil animals newly deter- 
mined by him. 


1 Researches, p. 


21—2 



324 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

The names of specie!, as well as of genera, are thus 
formed from the Greek : as the Plesiosaurus dolieho- 
deirus (long-necked), Ichthyosaurus platyodop, (broad- 
toothed), the Irish elk, termed Cervus megaceros 
(large-horned). But the descriptive specific names are 
also taken from the Latin, as Plesiosaurus brevirostris, 
longirostris , crassirostris ; besides which there are 
arbitrary specific names, which we do not here con- 
sider. 

These names being all constructed at a period when 
naturalists were familiar with an artificial system, the 
standard language of which is Latin, have not been 
taken from modern language. But the names of living 
animals, and even of their classes, long ago formed in 
the com'lnon language of men, have been in part adopted 
in the systems of naturalists, agreeably to Aphorism 
Third. Hence the language of systems in natural 
history is mixed of ancient and modern languages. 
Thus Cuvier’s divisions of the veftebrated animals are 
Mamm/i feres (Latin), Oiseaux, Reptiles , Poissons ; Bi- 
vnanes, Quadrumanes , Carnassieres , Rongeurs , Pachy- 
dernics (Greek), Ruminans (Latin), Ce taces (Latin). In 
the subordinate divisions the distribution being more 
novel, the names are less idiomatic : thus the kinds of 
Beptiles are Cheloniens , Sauriens , Ophidiens , Batra- 
cienSf all which are of Greek origin. In like maimer. 
Fish are divided into Ghondropterygiens , Malacoptery - 
giens , Acanthopterygiens . The unvertebrated animals 
are Mollusques , Afoimaux articules , .and Animaux ray - 
onnes; and the Mollnsques are divided into six classes, 
chiefly according to the position or form of their foot; 
namely, Cephalopodes , Pteropodes , G aster opodes, Ace - 
phales , Brachiopodes , Cirrkopodes. 

In transferring these terms into English, when the 
term is new in French as well as English, we have 
little difficulty; for wo may take nearly the same 
liberties in English which are taken in French; and 
hence we may sa.y rnammifers (rather mammals ), ceta- 
ceans or cetaces , baftucians (rather batrachians ), using 
the words as substantives. But in other cases vte 
must go back to the 'Latin : thus we say radiate aii- 



THE LANGUAGE OB* SCIENCE. 325 

mala, or radiata (rather radial^), fbr rayonnees. These 
changes, however, rather refer to another Aphorism. 

(Mr. ^Kirby has proposed radiary , radiaries , for 
radiata.) 

5. When new Mineral Species have been established 
in recent times, they have generally had arbitrary 
names assigned to them, derived from some person or 
places. In some instances, however, descriptive names 
have been selected ; and then these have been generally 
taken from the Greek, as Augite , Stilbite, Diaspore , 
Dichroite , JJiopiase. Several of these Greek names 
imposed by Haiiy, refer to some circumstances, often 
fancifully selected, in his view of the crystallization of 
the substance, as Epidote , Reridote, Eleonast. Similar 
terms of Greek origin have been introduced by others, 
as Orthite, Anorthite, Reriklin. Greek names founded 
on casual circumstances are “less to be commended. 
Berzelius has termed a mineral Eschynite, from a fo-- 
X VV V> shame , because it is, he conceives, a shame for 
chemists not to have separated its elements more dis- 
tinctly than they did at first. 

6. In Botany, the old names of genera of Greek ori- 
gin are very numerous, and many of them are descrip- 
tive, as Glyeyrhiza (yXvKvs and sweet root) liquor- 
ice, Rhododendron (rose-tree), Hcematoxylon (bloody 
wood), Chrysocoma (golden hair), Alopecurus (fox-tail), 
and many more. In like manner there are names 
which derive a descriptive significance from the Latin, 
either adjectives, as Impatiens, Ghriosa , Sagittaria , 
or substantives irregularly formed, as Tussilago (a 
tussis domatione), Urtica (ab urendo tactu), Salsola 
(a salsedine). But these, though good names when they 
ar 8" established by tradition, are hardly to be imitated 
in naming new plants. In most instances, when this 
is to be done, arbitrary or local names have been 
selected, as Strelitzia. 

7. In Chemistry, new substances have of late had 
names assigned them from Greek roots, as Ioditie , from 
its violet colour, Chlorine from its green colour. In 
like*mafiner fluorine has by the French chemists been 
called Fhthor, from its destructive properties. So the 



326 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

new metals, Chrome* Jthodium, Jric&um, Osmium, had 
names of Greek derivation descriptive of their proper- 
ties. Some such terms, however, were borrowed from 
localities, as Strontia , Yttria , the names of new earths. 
Others have a mixed origin, as Pyrogallic, Pyroacetic , 
and Pyroligneous Spirit. In some cases the derivation 
has been extravagantly capricious. Thus in the pro- 
cess for making Pyrogallic Acid, a certain substance is 
left behind, from which M. Braconnot extracted an 
acid which he called Ellagic A cid, framing the root of 
the name by reading the word Galle backwards. 

The new laws which the study of Electro-chemistry 
brought into view, required a new terminology to ex- 
press their conditions: and in this case, as we have 
observed in speaking of the Twelfth Maxim, arbitrary 
words are less suitable. Mr. Faraday very properly 
borrowed from the Grefik his terms Electrolyte , Elec - 
tr&de, Anode, Cathode, Anton, Gatliion, Dielectric. In 
the mechanico-chomical and mechanical sciences, how- 
ever, new terms are less copiously required than in the 
sciences of classification, and when they are needed, 
they are generally determined by analogy from existing 
terms. Thermo-electricity and Electro-dynamics were 
terms which very naturally offered themselves ; No- 
bili’s thermo-multiplier, Snow Harris’s unit-jar , were 
almost equally obvious names. In such cases, it is 
generally possible to construct terms both compendious 
and descriptive, without introducing* any new radical 
words. 

8. The subject of Crystallography has inevitably 
given rise to many new terms, since it brings under 
our notice a great number of new relations of a very 
definite but very complex form. Haiiy attempted 
to find names for all the leading varieties of crystals, 
and for this purpose introduced a great number of 
new terms, founded on various analogies and allusions. 
Thus the forms of calc-spar are termed by him primi- 
tive, eqUiaxe, inverse, metastatique, contrastante , imi- 
table , birhomboidale, prismatique, apophane, unitemaire y 
bisunitaire , dodecaedre, contractee, dilutee, seMuodeci- 
male } bisalterne, binoUrnaire , and many others. The 



THE LANGUAGE 0 if SCIENCE. 


327 


want of uniformity in. tli# orifJin»and scheme of these 
denominations would be no valid objection tc^ them, if 
any general truth could be expressed by means of 
them: Rut the fact is, that there is no definite dis- 
tinction of these forms. They pass into each other 
. by insensible gradations, and the optical and physical 
properties which they possess are common to all of 
them. And as a mere enunciation of laws of form, 
this terminology is insufficient. Thus it does not at 
all convey the relation between the bisalterne and the 
binoternaire , the former being a combination of the 
metastatique with the prismatique, the latter, of the 
metastatique with the co7itrastante : again, the contra- 
stante , the mixte , the cuboide, the •contractee, the di- 
lutee, all contain faces generated by a #ommoi\ law, the 
index being respectively altered so as to be in these 
cases, 3 , §, -f„ £, and thi$ which is the most im- 
portant geometrical relation of these forms, ^ no# at 
all recorded or indicated by the nomenclature. The 
fact is, that it is probably impossible, the subject of 
crystallography having become so complex as it now is, 
to devise a system of names which shall express the 
relations of form. Numerical symbols, such as those 
of Weiss or Naumann, or Professor Miller, are the 
proper ways of expressing these relations, and are the 
only good crystallographic terminology for cases in 
'detail. 

The icrms uSfed in expressing crystallographic laws 
have been for the most part taken from the Greek by 
all writers except some of the Germans. These, we 
have already stated, have constructed terms in their 
own language, as zwei-und-ein gliedrig, and the like. 

•In Optics we have some new terms connected with 
crystalline laws, as uniaxal and biaxal crystals, optical 
axes , which offered themselves without any effort on 
the part of the discoverers. In the whole history of 
the undulatory theory, very few innovations in lan- 
guage were found necessary, except to fix the* sense of 
a few phrases, as plane-polarized Jight in opposition to 
• cireulaHy-polarized , and the like. 

• This is still more the case in Mechanics, Astronomy, 



328 APHORfeMS CONCERNING 

and pure mathematics# In' these sciences, several of 
the priipary stages of generalization being already 
passed over, when any new steps are made, we have 
before us some analogy by which we may frame our 
new terms. Thus when the plane of maximum areas 
was discovered, it had not some new arbitrary denomi- 
nation assigned it, but the name which obviously de- 
scribed it was fixed as a technical name. 

The result of this survey of the scientific terms of 
recent formation seems to be this; — that indigenous 
terms may be employed in the descriptions of facts 
and phenomena as they at first present themselves; 
and in the first induction from these ; but that when 
we come to generalize and theorize, terms borrowed 
from tlip learned languages are more readily fixed and 
made definite, and are also more easily connected with 
derivatives. Our native 1 terms are more impressive, 
an4 athirst more intelligible; but they may wander 
from their scientific meaning, and are capable of little 
inflexion. Wordy of classical origin are precise to the 
careful student, and capable of expressing, by their 
inflexions, the relations of general ideas ; but they are 
unintelligible, even to the learned man, without ex- 
press definition, and convey instruction only through 
an artificial and rare habit of thought. 

Since in the balance between words of domestic and 
of foreign origin so much depends upon the possibility 
of inflexion and derivation, I shall consider a little 
more closely what are the limits and considerations 
which we have to take into account in reference to 
that subject. 


Afhorism XXI. 

In the composition and inflexion of technical terms, phi- 
lological analogies are to he preserved if possible , but modi- 
fied according to scientific convenience. 

In the language employed or proposed by writers 
upon subjects of science, many combinations and forms 
of derivation occur, which would be rejected a/id con- 
demned by those who, are careful of the purity and 



THE LANGUAGE Otf SCIENCE. 


329 


correctness of language. * Sue! anomalies are to be 
avoided as much as possible; but it is impcjssible to 
escape them altogether, if we are to have a scientific 
language which has any chance of being received into 
general use. It is better to admit compounds which 
are not philologically correct, than to invent many 
new words, all strange to the readers for whom they 
are intended: and in writing on science in our own 
language, it is not possible to avoid making additions 
to the vocabulary of common life; since science re- 
quires exact names for many things which common 
language has not named. And although these new 
names should, as much as possible, be constructed in 
conformity with the analogies of fflie language, such 
extensions of analogy can hardly souifd, to the gram- 
marian’s ear, otherwise than as solecisms. But, as our 
maxim indicates, the analogy of science is of more 
weight with us than the analogy of language '» and*al- 
tliough anomalies in our phraseology should be avoided 
as much as possible, innovations must be permitted 
wherever a scientific language, easy to acquire, and 
convenient to use, is unattainable without them. 

I shall proceed to mention some of the transgres- 
sions of strict philological rules, and some of the 
extensions of grammatical forms, which the above 
conditions appear to render necessary. 

** 1. The combination of different languages in the 
derivation of wol’ds, though to be avoided in genera], 
is in some cases admissible. 

Such words are condemned by Quintilian and other 
grammarians, under the name of hybrids , or things of a 
mixed race ; as bidinium , from bis and kXcvtj ; epitogium , 
ftofti eVt and toga. Nor are such terms to be un- 
necessarily introduced in science. Whenever a homo- 
geneous word can be formed and adopted with the 
same ease and convenience as a hybrid, it is to be pre- 
ferred. Hence we must have ichthyology, not piscology, 
entomology , not insectology , insectivorous , not* insect - 
ophagous. In like manner, it wo*ild be better to say 
Hnomlu% than monoculus, though the latter has the 
Sanction of Linnaeus, who was a jurist in such matters. 



330 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


Dr Turner, in his Chei. iistry\ speaks of •protoxides and 
binoxide#, which combination violates the rule for 
making the materials of our terms as homogeneous as 
possible; protoxide and deutoxide would be preferable, 
both on this and on other accounts. 

Yet this rule admits of exceptions. Mineralogy , 
with its Greek termination, has for its root minera , a 
medieval Latin word of Teutonic origin, and is prefer- 
able to Oryctology. Terminology appears to be better 
than Glossology : which according to its derivation 
would be rather the science of language in general 
than of technical terms; and Horology , from op9s> a 
term, would not be immediately intelligible, even to 
Greek scholars; and is already employed to indicate 
the science whijh treats of horologes, or time-pieces. 

Indeed, the English reader is become quite familiar 
with the termination ology , the names of a large num- 
ber of branches of science and learning having that 
form. This termination is at present rather appre- 
hended as a formative affix in our own language, indi- 
cating a science, than as an element borrowed from 
foreign language. Hence, when it is difficult or im- 
possible to find a Greek term which clearly designates 
the subject of a science, it is allowable to employ some 
other, as in Tidology , the doctrine of the Tides. 

The same remark applies to some other Greek ele- 
ments of scientific words: they are so familiar to us 
that in composition they are almost' used as* part of 
our own language. This naturalization has taken 
place very decidedly in the element arch, (dpxos, a 
leader,) as we see in archbishop, archduke . It is ef- 
fected in a great degree for the preposition anti: thus 
we speak of anti-slavery societies, anti-reformers, anti- 
bilious, or anti-acid medicines, without being conscious 
of any anomaly. The same is the case with the Latin 
preposition prce or pre, as appears from such words as 
pre-engage, pre-arrange, pre-judge, pre-paid ; and in 
some measure with pro, for in colloquial language we 
speak of pro-catholics and anti-catholics . Also the 
preposition ante is similarly usecl, as ante-nicenb fathers. 
The preposition co, abbreviated from con, and imply- 



THE LANGUAGE 0B< SCIENCE. 


331 


ing things to be simultaifeous lor® connected, is firmly 
established as part of the language, as we see ifi coexist , 
coheir , coordinate ; hence I have called those lines co- 
tidal lidfes which pass through places where the high 
water of the tide occurs simultaneously. 

2. * As in the course of the mixture by which our 
language has been formed, we have thus lost all habi- 
tual consciousness of the difference of its ingredients, 
(Greek, Latin, Norman-French, and Anglo-Saxon) : we 
have also ceased to confine to each ingredient the mode 
of grammatical inflexion which originally belonged to 
it. • Thus the termination ive belongs peculiarly to 
Latin adjectives, yet we say sportive , talkative . In 
like manner, able is added to wo*ds which are not 
Latin, as eatable , drinkable , pitiable , •enviably Also 
the termination al and ical are used with various roots, 
as loyal , royal, farcical, wfamsical ; hence we may 
make the adjective tidal from tide. This ending, al, 
is also added to abstract terms in ion, as occasional, 
provisional, intentional, national; hence we may, if 
necessary, use such words as educational, termina- 
tional . The ending ic appears to be suited to proper 
names, as Pindaric, Socratic , Platonic; hence it may 
be used when scientific words are derived from proper 
names, as Voltaic or Galvanic electricity : to which I 
have proposed to add Franklinic. 

•• In adopting scientific adjectives from the Latin, we 
have nqt much room for hesitation; for, in such cases, 
the habits of derivation from that* language into our 
own are very constant; ivus becomes ive, as decursive; 
inus becomes ine, as in ferine; atus becomes ate, as 
hastate; and us often becomes ous, as rufous ; aris be- 
comes ary, as axillary ; ens becomes ent, as ringent. 
And in adopting into our language, as scientific terms, 
words which in another language, the French for in- 
stance, have a Latin origin familiar to us, we cannot 
do better than form them as if they were derived 
directly from the Latin. Hence the French adjectives 
cetace, crustace, testace, may became either cetaceous, 
vruetacBous, testaceous, according to the analogy of 
farinaceous , predaceous, or el^p cetacean, crustacean, 



332 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


testacean , imitating *iht< form of patrician . Since, as 
I shall sgon have to notioe, we require substantives as 
well as adjectives from these words, we must, at least 
for that use, take the forms last suggested. 

In pursuance of the same remark, rongeur becomes 
rodent; and edente would become edentate , but that 
this*word is rejected on another account: the adjec- 
tives bimane and quadrumane are bimanous and quad- 
Yumanous . 

3. There is not much difficulty in thus forming 
adjectives : but the purposes of Natural History re- 
quire that we should have substantives corresponding 
to these adjectives; and these cannot be obtained with- 
out some extensictn of the analogies of our language. 
We cannot in general use adjectives or participles as 
singular substantives. The happy or the doomed would, 
according to good English usage, signify those who are 
happy and those who are doomed in the plural. Hence 
we could not speak of a particular scaled animal as the 
squamate , and still less could we call any such animal 
a squamate , or speak of squa? nates in the plural. Some 
of the forms of our adjectives, however, do admit of 
this substantive use. Thus we talk of Europeans , ple- 
beians, republicans ; of divines and masculine ^ of the 
ultramontanes ; of mordants and brilliants; of abster- 
gents and emollients; of mercenaries and tributaries; 
of animals , manuals , and officials; of dissuasives an’u 
motives. We cannot generally use in this way adjectives 
in ous, nor in ate (though reprobates is an exception), 
nor English participles, nor adjectives in which there 
is no termination imitating the Latin, as happy , good. 
Hence, if we have, for purposes of science, to convert 
adjectives into substantives, we ought to follow the 
form of examples like these, in which it has already 
appeared in fact, that such usage, though an innova- 
tion at first, may ultimately become a received part of 
the language. 

By attention to this rule we may judge what ex- 
pressions to select jn cases where substantives are 
needed. I will take as an example the division of 
the mammalian animals into Orders. These Orders, 



THE LANGUAGE o4 SCIENCE. 


333 


according to Cuvi<jr, are BimaAesf Quadrumanes, Car - 
nassiers , Rongeurs , Edentes , Ruminans, Pactydermes, 
Cetaces; and of these, Bimanes , Quadrumanes , Ro- 
dents , Ruminants , Pachyderms are admissible as En- 
glish substantives on the grounds just stated. Cetaceous 
could not be used substantively; but Cetacean in such 
a usage is sufficiently countenanced by such cases as 
we have mentioned, •patrician , &c. ; hence we adopt 
this form. We have no English word equivalent to 
the French Camassiers : the English translator of 
Cuvier has not provided English words for his tech- 
nical terms; but has formed a Latin word, Carnaria , 
to represent the French terms. From this we might 
readily form. Carnaries ; but it appears much better to 
take the Linnscan name Ferce as our i*)ot, from which 
we may take Ferine , substantive as well as adjective ; 
and hence we call this order* Ferines. The word for 
which it is most difficult to provide a proper represen- 
tation is Edente , Edentata: for, as we have said, it 
would be very harsh to speak of «fche order as the 
Edentates; and if we were to abbreviate the word 
into edent , we should suggest a false analogy with 
rodent , for as rodent is quod rodit, that which gnaws, 
edent would be quod edit , that which eats. And even 
if we were to take edent as a substantive, we could 
hardly use it as an adjective: we should still have to 
say, for example, the edentate form of head. For these 
reasons «it appeals best to alter the form of the word, 
and to call the Order the Edent&ls , which is quite 
allowable, both as adjective and substantive. 

[An objection might be made to this term, both in 
its Latin, French and English form : namely, that the 
natural group to which it is applied includes many 
species, both existing and extinct, well provided with 
teeth. Thus the armadillo is remarkable for the num- 
ber of its teeth; the megatherium, for their complex 
structure. But the analogy of scientific language 
readily permits us to fix, upon the word ed&ntata, a 
special meaning, implying the absence of one parti- 
cular kind of teeth, namely, incisive teeth. Linnseus 
Sailed the equivalent order Bruta. We could not 



334 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


apply in this case tHb term * ’Brutes ,i for common lan- 
guage hafi already attached to the word a wider mean- 
ing, too fixedly for scientific use to trifle with jt.] 

There are several other words in ate about which 
there is the same difficulty in providing substantive 
forms. Are we to speak of Vertebrates ? or would it 
not be better, in agreement with what has been said 
above, to call these Vertebrals , and the opposite class 
Invertebrals ? 

There are similar difficulties with regard to the 
names of subordinate portions of zoological classifica- 
tion- thus the Eerincs are divided by Cuvier into 
Cheiropteres , Insectivores , Carnivores ; and these latter 
into Plantigrades? Digitigrades, Amphibies , Marsupi - 
aux. There is hot any great harshness in naturalizing 
these substantives as Chiropters , Insectivores , Carni- 
vores, Plantigrades , Digitigrades , Amphibians , and 
Marsupials. These words Carnivores and Insectivores 
are better, because of more familiar origin, than Greek 
terms; otherwise 4, we might, if necessary, speak of 
Zoophagans and Entomophagans. 

It is only with certain familiar adjectival termina- 
tions, as ous and ate , that there is a difficulty in using 
the word as substantive. When this can be avoided, 
we readily accept the new word, as Pachyderms , and 
in like manner Mollnsks. 

If we examine the names of the Orders of Birds, we 
find that they are in Latin, Predator es or Acwipitres , 
Passeres , JScansoret, Rasores or Gallince , Gr ablator es, 
Palmipedes and Anseres : Cuvier’s Orders are, Oiseaux 
de Prole, Passercaux, Grimpeurs, Gallinaces, Echas - 
siers, Palmipedes. These may be englished conveni- 
ently as Predators, Passerines, Scansors, Gallinaceims, 
(rather than Rasors,) Grallators, Palndpedans, [or 
rather Palmipeds, like Ripeds]. Ecansors, Grallators, 
and Rasors, are better, as technical terms,, than Climb- 
ers, Waders, and & er ateliers. We might venture to 
angliciztf the terminations of the names which Cuvier 
gives to the divisions of these Orders: thus the Pre- 
dators are the JHurnals and the Nocturnals ; ‘the 
Passerines are the Dmtirostres , the Fissirostrcs, the 



THE LANGUAGE OE* SCIENCE. 


335 


Conirostres , the Tepuirostfes, ai4d <;he Syndactyls : the 
word lustre showing that the former termination is 
allowable. The Scansors are not sub-divided, nor are 
the Galtinaceans. The Grallators are Pressirostres , 
Cultrirostres , Macrodactyls. The Palmipeds are the 
Plungers , the Longipens , the Totipalmes and the 
Lamellirostres . 

The next class of Vertebral s is the Reptiles, and 
these are either Chelonians, Saurians, Ophidians , or 
Batrachians. Cuvier writes Batraciens, but we prefer 
the spelling to which the Greek word directs us. 

The last or lowest class is the Fishes , in which pro- 
vince Cuvier has himself been the great systematist, 
and has therefore had to devise many new terms. 
Many of these are of Greek or Latin origin, And can 
be anglicized by the analogies already pointed out, as 
Chondropterygians , Malacoplkrygians , Lophobranchs , 
Plectognaths , Gymnodonts , Scleroderms. Discoholes and 
Apodes may be English a>s well as French. There are 
other cases in which the author has formed the names 
of Families, either by forming a word in ides from the 
name of a genus, as Gadoides , Gobioides, or by galliciz- 
ing the Latin name of the genus, as Halmones from 
Salmo , Clupcs from Clupea , Fsoces from Fsox, Gyprius 
from Gyprinus. In these cases Agassiz’s favourite form 
of names for families of fishes has led English writers 
m use the words Gadoids , Gobioids , Salnwnoids , Clu- 
pcoids , lucioids (for Fsoces ), Gyprinoids , &c. There is 
a taint of hybridism in this termination, but it is at- 
tended with, this advantage, that it has begun to be 
characteristic of the nomenclature of family groups in 
the class Pisces. One of the orders of fishes, co-ordi- 
nate with the Chondropterygians and the Lopho- 
branchs, is termed Osseux by Cuvier. It appears 
hardly worth while to invent a substantive word for 
this, when Bony Fishes is so simple a phrase, and may 
readily be understood as a technical name of a system- 
atic order. 

The Mollusks are the next Glass; and these are 
divided* into Ceplialopod9, G aster op ods, and the like. 
The Gasteropods are Nndibranclm , Inferobranchs , Tecti- 



APHORISMS CONCERNING 


336 

branchs, Pectinibrant 7 is r S cutihranchs. and Cyclobranchs. 
In framing most of these terms Cuvier has made hy- 
brids by a combination of a Latin word with branchice , 
which is the Greek name for the gills of a fish / and has 
thus avoided loading the memory with words of an 
origin not obvious to most naturalists, as terms derived 
from the Greek would have been. Another division 
of the Gasteropods is Pulmones , which we must make 
Pulmonians . In like manner the subdivisions of the 
Pectinibranchs are the Trochoidans and Buccinoidans , 
( Trochdides , Buccinoides). The Acepliales , another order 
of Mollusks, may be Aceplials in English. 

After these comes the third grand division, Articu- 
lated Animals , and these are Annelidam , Crustaceans , 
Arachniffans , ard Insects. I shall not dwell upon the 
names of these, as the form of English words which is 
to be selected must be • sufficiently obvious from the 
preceding examples. 

Finally, we have the fourth grand division of animals, 
the Ray mines, or diadiata; which, for reasons already 
given, we may call Radials , or Radiaries. These are 
Echinoderms, Intestinals , (or rather Entozoans ,) Aca- 
lephes , and Polyps. The Polyps, which are composite 
.animals in which many gelatinous individuals are con- 
nected so as to have a common life, have, in many cases, 
a more solid framework belonging to the common part 
of the animal. This framework, of which coral is*a 
special example, is termed in French Polypipr ; the 
word has been anglicized by the word polypary, after 
the analogy of aviary and apiary. Thus Polyps are 
either Polyps with Polyparies or Naked Polyps. 

Any common kind of Polyps has usually in the 
English language been called Polypus, the Greek ter- 
mination being retained. This termination in us, 
however, whether Latin or Greek, is to be excluded 
from the English as much as possible, on account of 
the embarrassment which it occasions in the formation 
of the plural. For if we say Polypi the word ceases to 
be English, while Polypuses is harsh : and there is the 
additional inconvenience, thgifc both these forms would* 
indicate the plural of individuals rather than of classed. 



THE LANGUAGE OE* SCIENCE. 


337 


If we were to say, f The Cirallihesf are a Family of the 
Polypuses with Polyparies ,’ it would not at once occur 
to the r<jjider that the last three words formed a tech- 
nical phrase. 

This termination us, which must thus be exclude^ 
from the names of families, may be admitted in the 
designation of genera; of animals, as Nautilus , Echinus , 
Hippopotamus ; and of plants, as Crocus , Asparagus , 
Narcissus , Acanthus , Ranunculus, Fungus. The same 
form occurs in other technical words, as Fucus, Mucus , 
Oesophagus, Hydrocephalus, Callus, Calculus, Uterus , 
Foetus, Radius, Focus, Apparatus . It is, however, 
advisable to retain this form only in cases where it is 
already firmly established in the language; for a more 
genuine English form is preferable. *Hence *we say, 
with Mr. Lyell, Ichthyosaur, Plesiosaur , Pterodactyl. In 
like manner Mr. Owen anglicizes the termination erium, 
and speaks of the Anoplothere and PaleothereS 

Since the wants of science thus demand adjectives 
which can be used also as substantive names of classes, 
this consideration may sometimes serve to determine 
our selection of new terms. Thus Mr. Ly ell’s names 
for the subdivisions of the tertiary strata, Miocene, Plio- 
cene, can be used as substantives ; but if such words as 
Mioneous, Plioneous, had suggested themselves, they 
must have been rejected, though of equivalent significa- 
tion, as not fulfilling this condition. 

4. (a.) Abstract substantives can easily be formed 

from adjectives : from electric we have electricity; from 
galvanic, galvanism; from organic, organization ; velo- 
city, levity, gravity, arc borrowed from Latin adjectives. 
Caloric is familiarly used for the matter of heat, though 
the*form of the word is not supported by any obvious 
analogy. 

(b.) It is intolerable to have words regularly 
formed, in opposition to the analogy which their mean- 
ing offers; as when bodies are said to have conduct- 
ivity or conduc ability with regard to heat. The bodies 
are conductive, and their £>roperty*is conductive?/. 

(c*) the terminations ize (rather than ise), ism,, and 
iSt, are applied to words of all origins : thus we have to 
nov. oiiq. 22 



338 APHORISMS CONCERNING. 

pulverize, to colonize ” Witticism, Heathenism, Journal- 
istj Tobacconist. Hence we may make such words when 
they are wanted. As we cannot use physician for a 
cultivator of physics, I have called him a Physicist. 

need very much a name to describe a cultivator of 
science in general. I should incline to call him a 
Scientist. Thus we might say, that as an Artist is a 
Musician, Painter, or Poet, a Scientist is a Mathema- 
tician, Physicist, or Naturalist. 

(d.) Connected with verbs in ize, we have abstract 
nouns in ization, as polarization , crystallization. These 
it appears proper to spell in English with z rather than 
s; governing our practice by the Greek verbal termi- 
nation t£o> which 'we imitate. But we must observe 
that verbs and “substantives in yse, (analyse), belong 
to a different analogy, giving an abstract noun in ysis 
and an adjective ytic or ytical; (analysis, analytic , 
analytical). Hence electrolyse is more proper than 
electrolyze. 

(e.) The namfes of many sciences end in ics after 
the analogy of Mathematics , Metaphysics ; as Optics , 
Mechanics. But these, in most other languages, as in 
our own formerly, have the singular form Optice , V Op- 
tique , Optik , Opticlc : and though we now write Optics , 
we make such words of the singular number : ‘ New- 
ton’s Opticks is an example.’ As, however, this con- 
nexion in new words is startling, as when we say 
‘Thermo-electrics is now much cultivated,’ it r appears 
better to employ tile singular form, after the analogy 
of Loyic and Rhetoric . when we have words to con- 
struct. Hence we maj/ call the science of languages 
Linguistic , as it is called by the best German writers, 
for instance, William Yon Humboldt. 

5. In the derivation of English from Latin or Greek 
words, the changes of letters are to be governed by the 
rules which have generally prevailed in such cases. 
The Greek 01 and at, the Latin oe and ae , are all con- 
verted into a simple e, as in Economy, Geodesy, penal, 
Cesar. Hence, according to common usage, we should 
write phenomena, not phenomena, paleontology,* not 
palaeontology, miocenef not mioceene, pekilite not pee- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 339 

kilite. But in orcfer to keep more clearly in ^iew the 
origin of our terms, it may be allowable to deviate from 
these ruHiS of change, especially so long as the words 
are new and unfamiliar. Dr. Buekland speaks of the 
poikilitic , not pecilitic, group of strata: palaeontology 
is the spelling commonly adopted ; and in imitation of 
this I have written palcetiology. The diphthong ct was 
by the Latins changed into ?*, as in Aristides ; and 
hence this has been the usual form in English. Some 
recent authors indeed (Mr. Mitford for instance) write 
Aristeides ; but the former appears to be the more 
legitimate. Hence we write miocene, pliocene, not 
meiocene, pleiocene. The Greek v becomes y, and ov 
becomes u, in English as in Latin, as crystal, • cohere. 
The consonants k and \ become c and ch accord- 
ing to common, usage. Hc*ice we write crystal , 
not chrystal , batrac/dan, not batracian, cryolite, not 
c/uyolite. As, however, the letter c before e and i 
differs from k, which is the sound we assign to the 
Greek k, it may be allowable to use h in order to avoid 
this confusion. Thus, as we have seen, poi&ilite has 
been used, as well as pecilite. Even in common lan- 
guage some authors write sceptic, which appears to be 
better than sceptic with our pronunciation, and is pre- 
ferred by Dr. Johnson. For the same reason, namely, 
to "fi void confusion in the pronunciation, and also, in 
order to keep in view the connexion with cathode , the 
elements of an electrolyte which go Jo the anode and 
cathode respectively may be termed the anion and 
cat/don ; although the Greek would suggest cation, 
(kcltlov). 

6.9 The example of chemistry has shown that we 
have in the terminations of words a resource of which 
great use may be made in indicating the relations of 
certain classes of objects : as sulphured and sulphuric 
acids ; sulphates, sulphites, and sulpliwete. Since the 
introduction of the artifice by the Lavoisierian School, 
it has been extended to some new cg-ses. The Chlorine, 
F^ior^ne , • Bromme, Iodide, had their names put into 
tlufrt shape in consequence of their supposed analogy : 
and for the same reason have been termed Chlore, 

22 2 



340 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

Phlore, ^Brome, lode, by French Chemists. In like 
manner, "the names of metals in their Latin form have 
been made to end in urn, as Osmium, Palladium; 
and hence it is better to say Platinum, Molybden- 
ite , than Platina, Molybdena. It has been proposed 
to term the basis of Boracic acid Bor on; and those who 
conceive that the basis of Silica has an analogy with 
Boron have proposed to term it Silicon, while those 
who look upon it as a metal would name it Silicmm. 
Selenkm was so named when it was supposed to be a 
metal : as its analogies are now acknowledged to be of 
another kind, it would be desirable, if the change were 
not too startling, ito term it Seim, as it is in German. 
Pliosphpms in .hke manner might be Phosplmr, which 
would indicate its analogy with Sulphur. 

The resource which terminations offer has been ap- 
plied in other cases. The names of many species of 
minerals end in lite, or tie, as Stauroto, Augite. 
Hence Adolphe JBrongniart, j n order to form a name 
for a genus of fossil plants, has given this termination 
to the name of the recent genus which they nearly 
resemble, as Zam ites, from Zamia, Lvcopodites from 
Lycopodium. 

Names of different genera which differ in termina- 
tion only are properly condemned by Linnaeus 1 ; as 
Alsine , Alsinoides , Alsinella, Alsinastrum; for there 
is no definite relation marked by those terminations. 
Linnaeus gives to t such genera distinct names, Alsine , 
Bvfonia , Sagina , Elatine. 

Terminations are well adapted to express definite 
systematic relations, such as those of chemistry, but 
they must be employed with a due regard to alhthe 
bearings of the system. Davy proposed to denote the 
combinations of other substances with chlorine by 
peculiar terminations ; using ane for the smallest pro- 
portion of Chlorine, and anea for the larger, as Cup- 
r ane, Cupra^ea. In this nomenclature, common salt 
would be Sodane , 911 d Chloride of Nitrogen would be 
Azotane. This suggestion never found favour. It was 


1 VI Ml. Bot . 231 . 



THE LANGUAGE 0B> SCIENCE. 


341 


objected that it yas corftraryt t<J the Linnrean pre- 
cept, that a specific name must not be united to a 
generic termination. But this was not putting the 
matter exactly on its right ground ; for the rules of 
nomenclature of natural history do not apply to 
chemistry; and the Linnaean rule might with equal 
propriety have been adduced as a condemnation of 
such terms as Sulphurous, Sulphuric. But Davy’s 
terms were bad; for it does not appear that Chlorine 
enters, as Oxygen does, into so large a portion of 
chemical compounds, that its relations afford a key to 
their nature, and may properly be made an element 
in their names. 

This resource, of terminations, has been abused, 
wherever it has been used wantonly, oi» without a defi- 
nite significance in the variety. This is the case in 
M. Beudant’s Mineralogy. Among the names which 
he hfis given to new species, we find the fallowing 
(besides many in ite), Scolexcroso, Opsimose, Exan- 
thelose, &c. ; Diacrasc, Panabose, Neoplase; Neoclese; 
Khodoise, Stibiconisc, &c.; Marcelme, Wilhelmme, &c. ; 
ExiteZc, and many others. In addition to other objec- 
tions which might be made to these names, their 
variety is a material defect : for to make this variety 
depend 011 caprice alone, as in those cases it does, is to 
throw away a resource of which chemical nomenclature 
may teach us the value. 

Aphorism XXII. 

When alterations in technical terms become necessary , it 
is desirable that the new term should contain in its form 
some memorial of the old one. 

We have excellent examples of the advantageous 
use of this maxim in Linmeus’s reform of botanical 
nomenclature. His innovations were very extensive, 
but they were still moderated as much as possible, and 
connected in many ways with the pames of plants then 
hi u*e. * He has himself given several rules of nomen- 
clature, which tend to establish* this connexion of the 



342 


APHORISMS CONCERNING 


olgl and new in a ?reform, ‘ Thus t lie says, ‘ Generic 
names 'vyhicli are current, and are not accompanied 
with harm to botany, should be tolerated 1 .’ ‘A 
passable generic name is not to be changed for* another, 
though more apt 2 .’ ‘ New generic names are not to 
te framed so long as passable synonyms are at hand 3 .’ 
6 A generic name of one genus, « except it be super- 
fluous, is not to be transferred to another genus, though 
it suit the other better 4 .’ ‘If a received genus re- 
quires to be divided into several the name which 
before included the whole, shall be applied to the most 
common and familiar kind 5 .’ And though he rejects 
all generic names which have not a Greek or Latin 
root 0 , he is willing to make an exception in favour of 
those which from their form might be supposed to 
have such a root, though they are really borrowed from 
other languages, as Theh, which is the Greek for god- 
dess; C effect, which might seem to come from a Greek 
word denoting silence (kudo's) ; Cheiranthus, which ap- 
pears to mean lmnd-flower, but is really derived from 
the Arabic Keiri : and many others. 

As we have already said, the attempt at a reforma- 
tion of the nomenclature of Mineralogy made by Pro- 
fessor Mohs will probably not produce any permanent 
effect, on this account amongst others, that it has not 
been conducted in this temperate mode; the innova- 
tions bear too large a proportion to the whole of the 
names, and contain too little to remind up of the 
known appellations. Yet in some respects Professor 
Mohs has acted upon this maxim. Thus he has cajled 
one of his classes Spar, because Felspar belongs to it. 
I shall venture to offer a few suggestions on this sub- 
ject of Mineralogical Nomenclature. 

It has already been remarked that the confusion 
and complexity which prevail in this subject render a 
reform very desirable. But it will be seen, from the 
reasons assigned under the Ninth Aphorism, that no 
permanent system of names can be looked for, till a 


1 Plrilosophia Botanica , Art. 242. 2 Art . 246. 

3 Art. 247. 4 Art.’^g. * Art 249. 6 Art. 232. ' 



THE LANGUAGE Off SCIENCE. 


343 


sound system of classification bfc dfetablished. The best 
mineralogical systems recently published, however, ap- 
pear to converge to a common' point; and certain 
classes have been formed which have both a natural- 
historical and a chemical significance. # These Classes, 
according to Naumann, whose arrangement appears 
the best, are Hydro^tes, Haloids, Silicides, Oxides of 
Metals, Metals, Sulphurides (Pyrites, Glances, and 
Blendes), and Anthracides. Now we find; — that the 
Hydrolytes are all compounds, such as are commonly 
termed Salts ; — that the Haloids are, many of them, 
already called Spars , as Calc Spar , Heavy Spar , Iron 
Spar , Zinc Spar ; — that the Silicides, the most nume- 
rous and difficult class, are denoted* for the most part, 
by single words, many of which end hi ite;—* that the 
other classes, or subclasses, Oxides, Pyrites, Glances, 
and Blendes, have commonl/ been so termed ; as Red 
Iron Oxide , Iron Pyrites , Zinc Blende ; — vrtiile pure 
metals have usually had the adjective native prefixed, 
as Native Gold, Native Copper. These obvious fea- 
tures of the current names appear to afford us a basis 
for a systematic nomenclature. The Salts and Spars 
might all have the word salt or spar included in their 
name, as Natron Salt, Glauber Salt, Rock Salt; Calc 
Spar, Bitter Spar, (Carbonate of Lime and Magnesia), 
Fluor Spar, Phosphor Spar (Phosphate of Lime), 
Heavy Spar, Celestine Spar (Sulphate of Strontian), 
Chwmic* Lead Spar (Chromate of Lead) ; the Silicides 
might all have the name constructed so as to be a 
single word ending in ite, as Chabasite (Chabasie), 
Natrolite (Mesotype), Sommite (Nepheline), Pistacite 
(Epidote) ; from this rule might be excepted the Gems, 
as Topaz, Emerald, Corundum, which might retain 
their old names. The Oxides, Pyrites, Glances, and 
Blendes, might be so termed; thus we should have 
Tungstic Iron Oxide (usually called Tungstate of Iron), 
Arsenical Iron Pyrites (Mispickel), Tetrahedral Cop- 
per Glance (Fahlerz), Quicksilver Blende (Cirlnabar), 
and the metals might be termed native, as Native Cop- 
per, * N alive Silver . 

• Such a nomencla ture would* take in a very large 



^44 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

proportion, of comnfonty received appellations, especi- 
ally if Tye were to select among tlie synonyms, as is 
proposed above in the case of Glauber Salt , Bitter Spar , 
Sommite , Pistacite , Natrolite . Hence it might be 
adopted with(fiit serious inconvenience. It would make 
the name convey information respecting the place of 
the mineral in the system ; and % imposing this con- 
dition, would limit the extreme caprice, both as to 
origin and form, which has hitherto been indulged in 
imposing mineralogical names. 

The principle of a mineralogical nomenclature de- 
termined by the place of the species in the system, lias 
been recognized by Mr. Beudant as well as Mr. Mohs. 
The former writer has proposed that we should say 
Carbonate CaUaire , Carbonate Witherite , Sulphate 
Couperose , Silicate Stilbite , Silicate Chabasie , and so on. 
But these are names in which tlie part added for the 
sake of 'uhe system, is not incorporated with the com- 
mon name, and would hardly make its way into com- 
mon use. 

We have already noticed Mr. Mohs’s designations 
for two of the Systems of Crystallization, the Pyra- 
midal and the Prismatic , as not characteristic. If it 
were, thought advisable to reform such a defect, this 
might be done by calling them the Square Pyramidal 
and the Oblong Prismatic , which terms, while they ex- 
pressed the real distinction of the systems, would te 
intelligible at once to those acquainted with the Mohs- 
ian terminology. ° 

I will mention another suggestion respecting the 
introduction of an improvement in scientific language. 
The term Depolarization was introduced, because it 
was believed that the effect of certain crystals, when 
polarized light was incident upon them in certain posi- 
tions, was to destroy the peculiarity which polarization 
had produced. But it is now well known, that the 
effect of the second crystal in general is to divide the 
polarized ray of light into two rays, polarized in dif- 
ferent planes. StiH this effect is often spoken of as 
Depolarization , no better term having been yet devised. 
I have proposed and used the term Dipolarization , 



THE LANGUAGE QF SCIENCE. 3^5 

which well expresses whet ta^e% place, and so nearly 
resembles the elcter word, that it must sound fanflliar 
to those already acquainted with writings on this 
subject. 

I may mention one term in another department of 
literature which it appeal’s desirable to reform in the 
same manner. Tjje theory of the Fine Arts, or the 
philosophy which speculates concerning what is beau- 
tiful in painting, sculpture or architecture, and other 
arts, often requires to be spoken of in a single word. 
Baumgarten and other German writers have termed 
this province of speculation 2. Esthetics ; alaOdvccrOaL, to 
perceive , being a word which appeared to them fit to 
designate the perception of beauty»in particular. Since, 
however, (Esthetics would naturally denote the Doctrine 
of Perception in general ; since this Doctrine requires 
a name; since the term aesthetics has actually been 
applied to it by other German writers (as Kant) ; and 
since the essential point in the philosophy now spoken 
of is that it attends to Beauty;— it appears desirable 
to change this name. In pursuance of the maxim now 
before us, I should propose the term Callcesthetics , or 
rather (in agreement with what was said in page 338) 
CallwstJtetic , the science of the perception of beauty. 



FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE APHORISMS 
ON SCIENTIFIC LANGUAGE, FROM t6e 
RECENT COURSE OF SCIENCES. 


i. Botany. 

The nomenclature of Botany as rescued from confu- 
sion by Linnaeus, has in modern times been in some 
danger of relapsing into disorder or becoming intoler- 
ably extensive, in consequence of the multiplication of 
genera by the separation of one old genus into several 
new ones, find thejike subdivisions of the higher groups, 
as subclasses and classes. This inconvenience, and the 
origin of it, have been so ’ ^ell pointed out by Mr. G. 
Ben t ham ^ that I shall venture to adopt his judgment 
as an Aphorism, and give his reasons for it. 

Aphorism XXIII. 

It is of the greatest importance that the Groups which 
give their substantive names to every included species should 
remain large . 

It will be recollected that according to the Linnaean 
nomenclature, the genus is marked by a substantive, (as 
Rosa ), and the species designated by an adjective added 
to this substantive, (Us Rosa A Ipina ) ; while the natu- 
ral orders are described by adjectives taken substan- 
tively, (as llosacece). But this rule, though it has been 
universally assented to in theory, has often been devi-., 
ated from in practice. The number of known species 
having much increased, and the language of Linnaeus 
and the principles of Jussieu having much augmented 
the facilities for the study of affinities, botanists have 
become aware that the species of a genus and the genera 
of an order can be collected into intermediate groups 


i Linncean Society* Proceedings, voL ii. p. 30 (June, 1857). 




FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS, ETC. 


3^7 


as natural and as well defined a^the genera and orders 
themselves, and frames are required for these subordi- 
nate groups as much as for the genera and Orders. 

No^ two courses have been followed in providing 
names for these subordinate groups. 

1. The original genera (considering the case of genera 
in the first place) have been preserved, (if well founded) ; 
and the lower groups have been called subgenera , sec - 
tions, subsections , divisions, &c. : and the original names 
of the genera have been maintained for the purpose of 
nomenclature, in order to retain a convenient and stable 
language. But when these subordinate groups are so 
well defined and so natural, that except for the conve- 
nience of language, they might bq made good genera, 
there are given also to these subordinate groups, sub- 
stantive or substantively-taken adjective n aides. When 
these subordinate groups arfc less defined or less natural, 
either no names at all are given, and they are distin- 
guished by figures or signs such as *, **, or § 1, § 2, 
&c. or there are given them mere adjective names. 

Or, 2, To regard these intermecfiate groups between 
species and the original genera, as so many independent 
genera ; and to give them substantive names, to be used 
in ordinary botanical nomenclature. 

Now the second course is that which has produced 
the intolerable multiplication of genera in modern 
times ; and the first course is the only one which can 
save botanical* nomenclature from replunging into the 
chaos in which Linn am s found it. It was strongly ad- 
vocated by the elder De Candolle; although in the 
latter years of his life, seeing how general was the dis- 
position to convert his subgenera and sections into 
genera, he himself more or less gave in to the general 
practice. The same principle was adopted by End- 
lichen, but he again was disposed to go far in giving 
substantive names to purely technical or ill-defined 
subsections of genera. 

The multiplication of genera has. been much too 
common. Botanists have a natural pride in establish- 
ing new genera (or orders) ; aifd besides this, it is felt 
how useful it is, in the study of affinities, to define and 



3^8 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 

name all natural groups in every grade, however nume- 
rous they may be : and m the immeilse variety of lan- 
guage it i£ found easy to coin names indefinitely. 

But the arguments on the other side mudfi pre- 
ponderate. In attempting to introduce all these new 
names into ordinary botanical language, the memory is 
taxed beyond the capabilities of any mind, and the ori- 
ginal and legitimate object of the Linnsean nomencla- 
ture is wholly lost sight of. In a purely scientific view 
it matters little if the Orders are converted into Classes 
or Alliances, the Genera into Orders, and the Sections 
or Subsections into Genera : their relative importance 
does not depend on the names given to them, but on 
their height in the t , scale of comprehensiveness. But 
for language, the, great implement without which sci- 
ence cannot work, it is of the greatest importance, as our 
Aphorism declares, 'Jhat the groups which give their 
substantive names to every species which they include, 
should remain large. If, independently of the inevit- 
able increase of Genera by new discoveries, such old 
ones as Ficus , Begonia , Arum, Erica , &c. are divided 
into io, 20, 30, or 40 independent Genera, with names 
and characters which are to be recollected before any 
one species can be spoken of ; — if Genera are to be 
reckoned by tens of thousands instead of by thousands; 
— the range of any individual botanist will be limited 
to a small portion of the whole field of the sciences. 

And in like manner with regard to Orders, so long 
as the number of Orders can be kept within, or not 
much beyond a couple of hundred, it may reasonably 
be expected that a botanist of ordinary capacity shall 
obtain a sufficient general idea of their nature and cha- 
racters to call them at any time individually to his mind 
for the purpose of comparison: but if we double the 
number of Orders, all is CQnfusion. 

The inevitable confusion and the necessity of main- 
taining in some way the larger groups, have been per- 
ceived by those even who have gone the furthest in 
lowering the scale of Orders and Genera. As a remedy 
'for this confusion, they propose to erect the old genera 
into independent orders, and the old orders into classes 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 349 

or divisions. this is*but wi ih complete resumption 
of the old principles, without the advantage *of the old 
nomenclature. 

And it will not be asserted, with regard to these new 
genera, formed by cutting up the old ones, that the new 
group is better defined than the group above it : on {he 
contrary, it is frequently less so. It is not pretended 
that Urostigma or Phannacosyce , new genera formed 
out of the old genus Ficus , are better defined than the 
genus Ficus ; or that the new genera which have lately 
been cut out of the old genus Begonia , form more natu- 
ral groups than Begonia itself does. The principle 
which seems to be adopted in such subdivisions of old 
genera is this;, that the lowest definable group above a 
species is a genus. If we were to go a step further, 
every species becomes a genus with a substantive name. 

It ought always to be recollected that though the 
analytical process carried to the uttermost, and separat- 
ing groups by observation of differences, is necessary for 
the purpose of ascertaining the facti upon which botany 
or any other classiticatory science is based, it is a judi- 
cious synthesis alone, associating individuals by the ties 
of language, which can enable the human mind to take 
a comprehensive* view of these facts, to deduce from 
them the principles of the science, or to communicate 
to others either facts or principles. 

. 2. . Comparative Anatomy. 

The Language of Botany, as framed by Linnaeus, and 
regulated by his Canons, is still the most notable and 
successful example of scientific terminology which has 
obtained general reception among naturalists. But the 
Language of Anatomy, and especially of the Compara- 
tive Anatomy of the skeleton, has of late been an object 
of great attention to physiologists; and especially to 
Mr. Owen ; and the collection of terms which he has 
proposed are selected with so much thought and care?, 
that they may minister valuable lessons to* us in this 
£>art w of our subject. 

There is, at first sight, this broad difference between 
the descriptive language of Botany and of Comparative 



3$0 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 


Anatomy; that in tlfe formed science, we have com- 
paratively t few parts to describe, (calyx, corolla, stamen , 
pistil, pericarp, seed , (fee.):' while each of these parts is 
susceptible of many forms, for describing which with 
precision many terms must be provided : in Comparative 
Anatomy, on the other hand, the skeletons of many ani- 
mals are to be regarded as modifications of a common 
type, and the terms by which their parts are described 
are to mark this community of type. The terminology 
of Botany has for its object description; the language 
of Comparative Anatomy must have for its basis mor- 
phology. Accordingly, Mr. Owen’s terms arc selected 
so as to express the analogies, or, as he calls them, the 
homologies of the skeleton ; those parts of the skeleton 
being termed horruologues , which have the same place in 
the general type, and therefore ought to have the same 
name. 

Yet this: distinction of the basis of botanical and 
anatomical terminology is not to be pushed too far. 
The primary definitions in botany, as given by Lin- 
naeus, are founded on morphological views ; and imply 
a general type of the structure of plants. These are his 
definitions (Phil. Bot. Art. 86). 

Calyx, Cortex plantae in Fructificaiione praesens. 

Corolla, Liber plantae in Flora praesens. 

Stamen, Yiscus pro Pollinis praeparatione. 

Pistillum, Yiscus fructui adherens pro Pollinis re- 
ccptione. 

Pericarpium, YisGus gravidum seminibus, quae ma- 
tura dimittit. 

But in what follows these leading definitions, the 
terms are descriptive merely. Now in Comparative 
Anatomy, an important object of terms is, to express 
what part of the type each bone represents — to answer 
the question, what is it ? before we proceed, assuming* 
that we know what it is, to describe its shape. The 
difficulty of this previous question is very great when 
we come to r the bones of the head; and when we assume, 
{is morphology leads us to do, that the heads of all 
vertebrated animals, including even fishes, are com- 
posed of homologous bones. And, as i have already 



THE LANGUAGE 0? SCIENCE. 3 5* 

said in the History (b. xtii. c.|7)j speaking of Anijnal 
Morphology, the l?est physiologists are now agreed that 
the heads of vertebrates may be resolved info a series 
of vertebrae, homologically repeated and modified in 
different animals. This doctrine has been gradually 
making its way among anatomists, through a great 
variety of views respecting details; and hence, with 
great discrepancies in the language by which it has 
been expressed. Mr. Owen has proposed a complete 
series of terms for the bones of the head of all verte- 
brates ; and these names are supported by reasons which 
are full of interest and instruction to the physiologist, 
on account of the comprehensive and precise knowledge 
of comparative osteology which they involve ; but they 
are also, as I have said, interesting and instinctive to 
us, as exemplifying the reasons which may be given for 
the adoption of words in scidhtific -language. The rea- 
sons thus given agree with several of the aphorisms 
which I have laid down, and may perhaps suggest a 
few others. Mr. Owen has done irye the great honour 
to quote with approval some of these aphorisms. The 
terms which he has proposed belong, as I have already 
said, to the Terminology , not to the Nomenclature of 
Zoology. In the Jatter subject, the Nomenclature (the 
names of species) the binary nomenclature established 
by Linnaeus remains, in its principle, unshaken, simple 
and sufficient. 

J shrill best derive from Mr. Owen’s labours and re- 
flexions some of the instruction whitfh they supply with 
reference to the Language of Science, by making re- 
marks on his terminology with reference to such apho- 
risms as I have propounded on the subject, and others 
of a like kind. 

Mr. Owen, in his Homologies of the Vertebrate 
Skeleton , has given in a Tabular Form his views of 
the homology of the bones of the head of vertebrates, 
and the names which he consequently proposes for each 
bone, with the synonyms as they occur in the writings 
of some of the most celebrated anatomical philosophers, 
^Olivier, Geoffroy, Hallmann, Meckel and Wagner, 

* Agassiz and Soemmering. And he has added to this 
Table his i;easqns for dissenting from his predecessor^ 



3rg2 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 


to the extent tg which Ije has, done so. He has done 
this, he says, only where nature seemed clearly to re- 
fuse her sanction to them ; acting upon the maxim (our 
Aphorism X.) that new terms and changes of terms 
which are not needed in order to express truth, are to 
be‘a voided. The illustrations which I have there given, 
however, of this maxim, apply rather to the changes in 
nomenclature than in terminology; and though many 
considerations apply equally to these two subjects, there 
are some points in which the reasons differ in the two 
cases : especially in this point : — the names, both of 
genera and of species, in a system of nomenclature, may 
be derived from casual or arbitrary circumstances, as I 
have said in Aphorirm XIII. But the terms of a scien- 
tific terminology flight to cohere as a system, and there- 
fore should not commonly be derived from anything 
casual or arbitrary, but from some analogy or con- 
nexion. Hence it seems unadvisable to apply to bones 
terms derived from the names of persons, as ossa wor- 
miana; or even frpm an accident in anatomical his- 
tory, as os innominatum. 

It is further desirable that in establishing such a 
terminology, each bone should be designated by a single 
word, and not by a descriptive phpase, consisting of 
substantive and adjective. On this ground Mr. Owen 
proposes presphenoid for spthenoide anterieur. So also 
prefrontal is preferred to anterior frontal, and post- 
frontal to posterior frontal. And the reason which lie 
gives for this is worthy of being stated as an Apho- 
rism, among those which should regulate this subject. 
I shall therefore state it thus : 

Aphorism XXIY. 

It is advisable to substitute definite single names for de- 
scriptive phrases as better instruments of thought . 

It will be recollected by the reader that in the case of 
the Linmean reform of the botanical nomenclature of 
species, this was one of the great improvements which 
was introduced. 

Again : some of the first of the terms which Mr. Owen 
proposes illustrate, and confirm by their manifest claim 



THE LANGUAGE OB SCIENCE. 353T 

to acceptance, a maxim which re •stated as Aphorism 
XXII. : namely, 

Whe^ alterations in technical terms become neces- 
sary, it is desirable that the new term should contain 
in its form some memorial of the old one. 

Thus for ‘ basil aire/ which Cuvier exclusively applies 
to the ‘pars basilaris ’ of the occiput, and which Geof- 
froy as exclusively applies (in birds) to the ‘pars basi- 
laris’ of the sphenoid, Mr. Owen substitutes the term 
basioccipital. 

Again: for the term ‘ suroccipital’ of Geoffroy, Mr. 
Owen proposes paroccipital, to avoid confusion and false 
suggestion : and with reference to this word, he makes 
a remark in agreement with what v*e have said in the 
discussion of Aphorism XXI.: namely f that tlx? combi- 
nation of different languages in the derivation of words, 
though to be avoided in genci&l, is in some cases admis- 
sible. He says, ‘ If the purists who are distressed by 
such harmless hybrids as “mineralogy,” “terminology,” 
and “mammalogy,” should protest *against the com- 
bination of the Greek prefix to the Latin noun, I can 
only plead that servility to a particular source of the 
fluctuating.sounds of vocal language is a matter of taste : 
and that it seems no unreasonable privilege to use such 
elements as the servants of thought ; and in the interests 
of science to combine them, even though they come 
from different countries, when the required duty is best 
and m?st expeditiously performed by their combina- 
tion.’ 

So again we have illustrations of our Aphorism XII., 
that if terms are systematically good they are not to be 
rejected because they are etymologically inaccurate. In 
reference to that bone of the skull which has commonly 
been called vomer , tlie ploughshare : a term which Geof- 
froy rejected, but which Mr. Owen retains, he says, 
‘When Geoffroy was induced to reject the term vomer 
as being applicable only to the peculiar form of the bone 
in a small portion of the vertebrata, he appeafs not to 
have considered that the old term, in its wider applica- 
tion, would be used without reference to its primary 
^allusion to the ploughshare, a»d that becoming, as it 
NOV/OJtG. ; “ 23 



-854 further illustrations concerning 


lia^s, a purely arbitrary 4erm, it is superior and prefer- 
able to any partially descriptive one.’ 

Another condition which I have mentioned t in Aph- 
orism XX., as valuable in technical terms is, that they 
should be susceptible of such grammatical relations as 
their scientific use requires. 

This is, in fact, one of the grounds of the Aphorism 
which we have already borrowed from Mr. Owen, that 
we are to prefer single substantives to descriptive 
phrases. For from such substantives we can derive 
adjectives, and other forms; and thus the term becomes, 
as Mr. Owen says, a better instrument of thought. 
Hence, he most consistently mentions it as a recom- 
mendation of his .system of names, that by them the 
results of a long series of investigations into the spe- 
cial homologies of the bones of the head are expressed 
in simple Mid definite tefrns, capable of every requisite 
inflection ^ to express the proportion of the parts. 

I may also, in reference to this same passage in Mr. 
Owen’s appeal in behalf of his terminology, repeat what 
I have said under Aphorism X.: that the persons who 
may most properly propose new scientific terms, are those 
who have much new knowledge to communicate : so 
that the vehicle is commended to general reception by 
the value of what it contains. It is only to eminent dis- 
coverers and profound philosophers that the authority 
is conceded of introducing a new system of terms; just 
as it is only the highest authority in the state which has 
the power of quitting a new coinage into circulation. 
The long series of investigations of which the results are 
contained in Mr. Owen’s table of synonyms, and the phi- 
losophical spirit of his generalizations, entitles him to a 
most respectful hearing when he appeals to the Proces- 
sors and Demonstrators of Human Anatomy for an un- 
biassed consideration of the advantages of the terms 
proposed by him, as likely to remedy the conflicting 
and unsettled synonymy which has hitherto pervaded 
the subject. 

There is another rpmark which is suggested by the 
works on Comparative Anatomy, which I am now con- 
sidering. I have said in various places that Technical 



THE LANGUAGE OF* SCIENCE. 


355 


Terms are a necessary condition *>f tlie progress of a sot- 
ence. But we may say much more than this : # and the 
remark i£ so important, that it deserves to be stated as 
one of our Aphorisms, as follows : 

Aphorism XXV, 

In an advanced Science , the history of the Language of 
the Science is the history of the Science itself 

1 have already stated in previous Aphorisms (VIII. 
and XL) that Terms must be constructed so as to 
be fitted to enunciate general propositions, and that 
Terms which imply theoretical views fire admissible for 
this purpose. And hence it happens that the history of 
Terms in any science which has gone through several 
speculative stages, is really tfie history of the gene- 
ralizations and theories which have had currency 
among the cultivators of the science. 

This appears in Comparative Anatomy from wliat we 
have been saying. The recent progress of that science 
is involved in the rise and currency of the Terms which 
have been used by the anatomists whose synonyms Mr. 
Owen has to discuss;, and the reasons for selecting among 
these, or inventing others, include those truths and gene- 
ralizations which are the important recent steps of the 
science. The terms which are given by Mr. Owen in his 
tabl? to denote the bones of the head are good terms, if- 
they are good terms, because their adoption and use is* 
the only complete way of expressing the truths of homo- 
logy : namely, of that Special Homology, according to 
which all vertebrate skeletons are referred to the human 
skeleton as their type, and have their parts designated 
accordingly. 

But further : there is another kind of homology which 
Mr. Owen calls General Homology, according to which 
the primary type of a vertebrate animal is merely a series 
of vertebral ; and all limbs and other appendages are 
only developernents of the parts of #nc or another of the 
Verttibriie. And in order to express this view, and in 
1 %-oportion as the doctrine has b#come current amongst 

23—2 



'35^ FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 

anatomists, the parts ofrverte'bne haye been described by 
terms of t a degree of generality which admit of such an 
interpretation. And here, also, Mr. Owen Jias pro- 
posed a terminology for the parts of the vertebrae, which 
seems to convey more systematically and comprehen- 
sively than those of preceding writers the truths to 
which they have been tending. Each vertebra is com- 
posed of a centrum , neurapojihysis, parapophysis, pleura- 
pojdiysis, lmmaphyds , neural spine , and htvrnal spine , 
with certain exogenous parts. 

The opinion that the head, as well as the other parts 
of the frame of vertebrates, is composed of vertebra 1 , is 
now generally accepted among philosophical anatomists. 
In the History ( Hist . I. S. b. xvii. c. 7, sect, t ), I have 
mentioned this® opinion as proposed by some writers; 
and I have stated that Oken, in 1807 published a i Pro- 
gram’ On the signification of the bones of the Skull , in 
which h<j maintained, that these bones are equivalent to 
four vertebra : while Meckel, Spix, and Geoffrey took 
views somewhat different. Cuvier and Agassiz opposed 
this doctrine, but Mr. Owen has in his Archetype and 
Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton (1848), accepted 
the views of Oken, and argued at length r against the 
objections of Cuvier, and also those of Mr. Agassiz. 
As T have noted in the last edition of the History of 
the Inductive Sciences (b. xvii. c. 7), he gives a Table in 
which the Bones of the Head are resolved into four ver- 
tebra, which he terms the Occipital, Parietal, u Frontal 
and Nasal Vertebra respectively : the neural arches of 
which agree with what Oken called the Ear- vertebra, the 
Jaw-vertebra, the Eye -vertebra, andtheNose-vertebra. 

Besides these doctrines of Special Homology by which 
the bones of all vertebrates are referred to their corre- 
sponding bones in the human skeleton, and of General 
Homology , by which the bones are referred to the parts 
of vertebra which they represent, Mr. Owen treats of 
Serial Homology , the recognition of the same elements 
throughout the series of segments of the same skeleton ; 
as when we shew in< what manner the arms correspond 
to the legs. And thus, he says, in the head also,*' the 
basioccipital, basisphenoid , presphert'oid and vomer are 



THE LANGUAGE 0? SCIENCE. 3574 

homotypes with the centrums pf »11 succeeding verte- 
1 me. The exoccipitals , alisphenoids , orbitosphenoids , 
;md prefrontals , are liomotypes with the neurflpaph yses 
of all ftie succeeding vertebrae. The paroccipitals , 
mactoids and postfrontals , with the transverse processes 
of all the succeeding vertebrae : and so on. PerhajJs 
these examples may exemplify sufficiently for the general 
reader both Mr. Owen’s terminology, and the intimate 
manner in which it is connected with the widest gene- 
ralizations to which anatomical philosophy has yet been 
led. 

The same doctrine, that the history of the Language 
of a Science is the history of the Science, appears also 
in the recent progress of Chemistry*; but we shall be 
better able to* illustrate our Aphoristr^ in this, case by 
putting forward previously one or two other Aphorisms 
bearing upon the history of t$iat Science. 

Aphorism XX YI. 

In the Terminology of Science it may be necessary to 
employ letters, numbers, and algebraical symbols. 

1. Mineralogy. 

T have already «aid, in Aphorism XV., that sym- 
bols have been found requisite as a part of the ter- 
minology of Mineralogy. The names proposed by 
flaiiy, borrowed from the crystalline laws, were so 
inadequate and' unsystematic that they could not be 
retained. * He himself proposed a ifotatitn for crystal- 
line forms, founded upon liis principle of the deriva- 
tion of such forms from a primitive form, by decre- 
ments, on its edges or its angles. To denote this deri- 
vation he took the first letters of the three syllables to 
mark the faces of the PriM iTive form, P, M, T\ the 
vowels A, E, I, 0 to mark the angles ; the consonants 
B, C, I), &c. to mark the edges; and numerical expo- 
nents, annexed in various positions to # these letters, 
represented the law and manner of derivation. Tlius 

• 1 

•when vhe primitive form was a cube, B represented 
Uhe result of a derivation by a, decrement of one row 



>358 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 

1 

on an edge ; that ig; a\ rhoihbic octahedron ; and B P 
represented the combination of this octahedron with 
the primitive cube. In this way the pentagonal 
dodecahedron, produced by decrements of 2 to 1 
on half the edges of the cube, was represented by 

B 2 0 G 2 2 G. 

Not only, however, was the hypothesis of primitive 
forms and decrements untenable, but this notation 
was too unsystematic to stand long. And when Weiss 
and Mohs established the distinction of Systems of 
Crystallography 1 , they naturally founded upon that dis- 
tinction a notation for crystalline forms. Mohs had 
several followers;, but his algebraical notation so bar- 
barously violated all algebraical meaning, that it was 
not likely to last. Thus, from a primitive rhombo- 
liedron which ho designated by 7 i, he derived, by a 
certain process, a series of other rhombohedrons, which 
lie denoted by B 4- 1, B + 2, 11 — 1, &c. ; and then, by 
another mode of t derivation from them, he obtained 
forms which he marked as (R+ 2) 2 , (I? +2)“, &c. In 
doing this he used the algebraical marks of addition 
and involution without the smallest ground; besides 
many other proposals no less transgressing mathe- 
matical analogy and simplicity. 

But this notation might easily suggest a better. If 
w r e take a primitive form, we can generally, by two 
steps of derivation, each capable of numerical measure, 
obtain any possible face; and therefore any crystalline 
form bounded by such faces. Hence all that we need 
indicate in our crystalline laws is the primitive form, 
and two numerical exponents; and rejecting all super- 
fluity in our symbols, instead of (B + 2) 3 we might 
write 2 B 3. Nearly of this kind is the notation of 
Naumann. The systems of crystallization, the octa- 
hedral or tcssular, the rhombic, and the prismatic, are 
marked by the letters 0 , B, P\ and from these are 
derived, ?'by certain laws, such symbols as 
3OI, 00 R 2, if 2, 


1 Hist. find. Sc. b. xv. o. 4.* 



THE LANGUAGE Of SCIENCE. 359 

which have their definite signification flowing from 
the rules of the notation. 

But Professor Miller, who has treated tlfle subject 
of Crystallography in the most genera] and symme- 
trical manner, adopts the plan of marking each crys- 
talline plane by three numerical indices. Thus in the 
Octahedral System, the cube is {100}; the octahedron 
is {hi}; the rhombic dodecahedron is {on}; the 
pentagonal dodecahedron is 71- {012); where 7 r indi- 
cates that the form is not holohedral but hernihedral , 
only half the number of faces being taken which the 
law of derivation would give. This system is the 
most mathematically consistent, and affords the best 
means of calculation, as Professor Miller has shown ; 
but there appears to be in it this de^pet, thaj; though 
an essential part of the scheme is the division of crys- 
talline forms into Systems,* — the Octahedral, Pyra- 
midal, lthombohedral and Prismatic, — thiij division 
does not at all appear in the notation. 

But whatever be the notation yhich the crystal- 
lographer adopts, it is evident that he must employ 
some notation; and that, without it, he will be unable 
to express the l‘< urns and relations of forms with which 
he has to deal. 

2. Chemistry. 

The same has long been the case in Chemistry. 
As I have stated elsewhere 2 , the chemical nomencla- 
ture of the oxygen theory was for a time very useful 
and effective. But yet it had defeats -v^iich could not 
be overlooked, as I have already stated under Apho- 
rism II. The relations of elements were too nume- 
rous, and their numerical properties too important, to 
Unexpressed by terminations and other modifications 
of words. Thus the compounds *of Nitrogen and 
Oxygen are the Protoxide, the Deutoxide, Nitrous 
Acid, Peroxide of Nitrogen, Nitric Acid. The sys- 
tematic nomenclature here, even thus loosely extended, 
does not express our knowledge. And th« Atomic 
Theory, when established, brought to view numerical 


• 2 Hist. hid. Sc. xiv. c. 6 . 



,.360 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 

relations which it , was vevy important to keep in 
sight. If N represents Nitrogen and 0 Oxygen, the 
compounds of the two elements just mentioned might 
be denoted by N+ 0, F + 2 0> N + 3 0, N + 4 0$ N + 5 0. 
And by adopting a letter for each of the elementary 
substances, all the combinations of them might be ex- 
pressed in this manner. 

But in chemistry there are different orders of com- 
bination. A salt, for instance, is a compound of a 
base and an acid, each of which is already compound. 
If Fe be iron and G be carbon, Fe + 0 will be the pro- 
toxide of iron, and G + 2O will be carbonic acid; and 
the carbonate of iron (more properly carbonate of 
protoxide of iron)., may be represented by 
~ (Fe + O) + (C+2O) 

where the brackets indicate the first stage of compo- 
sition. 

But these brackets and signs of addition, in complex 
cases, would cumber the page in an inconvenient de- 
gree; and oxygen is of such very wide occurrence, that 
it seems desirable to abridge the notation so far as it 
is concerned. Hence Berzelius proposed 9 that in the 
first stage of composition the oxygen should be ex- 
pressed by dots over the letter; and thus the car- 
bonate of iron would be Fe + G. But Berzelius 
further introduced into his notation indexes such as 
in algebra denote involution to the square, cube, &c. 
Thus Gu being copper, the sulphate of copper io repre- 
sented by is iJ Gu. This notation, when first proposed, 
was strongly condemned by English chemists, and 
Berzelius’s reply to them may be taken as stating the 
'reasons in favour of such notation. He says 3 4 , ‘We 
answer to the opponents, that undoubtedly the mat- 
ter may be looked at in various lights. The use 
of Formulae has always, for a person who has not 
accustomed himself to them, something repulsive ; but 
this is e^sy to overcome. I agree with my opponent, 


3 System of Mineralogy , 1816. 

* Jahrcsbeiriclit, 1824, p. 119 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 36^ 

who says that nothing can be ui^erstood in a Formula 
which cannot be*expressed in words ; and that if *the 
words express it as easily as the Formula^ the use of 
the latter would be a folly. But there are cases in 
which this is not so ; in which the Formula says in a 
glance what it would take many lines to express* in 
words; and in which the expression of the Formula is 
clearer and more easily apprehended by the reader 
than the longer description in words. Let us examine 
such a Formula, and compare it with the equivalent 
description in words. Take, for example, crystallized 
sulphate of copper, of which the Formula is 

CuS 2 +ioZT 2 0. 

Now this Formula expresses the following proposi- 
tions : 

‘That the salt consists c£ one atom of copper-oxide 
combined with 2 atoms of sulphuric acid and with 10 
atoms of water; that the copper-oxide contains two 
atoms of oxygen ; and that the sulphuric acid contains 
3 atoms of oxygen for one atom of sulphur; that its 
oxygen is three times as much as that of the oxide; 
and that the number of atoms of oxygen in the acid is 
6; and ftiat the number of atoms of oxygen in the 
water is 10; that is, 5 times the number in the oxide; 
and that finally the salt contains, of simple atoms, 1 
ooj^per, 2 sulphur, 20 hydrogen, and 18 oxygen. 

# c Since so 11/uch is expressed in this brief Formula, 
how very long would the explanation be for a more 
composite body, for example, jflum; for which the 
Formula is 

K S 2 + 2 Al JS a + 48 IP 0 . 

It would take half a page to express all which this 
Formula contains. 

‘ Perhaps it may be objected that it is seldom that 
any one wants to know all this at once. But it might 
reasonably be said in reply, that the peculiar value of 
the Formula consists in this, that it contains answers 
•to Jill the questions which can be asked with regard 
to the composition of the body. 



362 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 

‘ Eut these Formujae have .also another application, 
of \vhich I have sometimes had occasion to make use. 
Experiments sometimes bring before us combinations 
which cannot be foreseen from the nomenclature, and 
for which it is not always easy to find a consistent 
and appropriate name. In writing, the Formula may 
be applied instead of a Name : and the reader under- 
stands it better than if one made a new name. In 
my treatise upon the sulphuretted alkalies I found 
Degrees of Sulphur-combination, for which Nomen- 
clature has no name. I expressed them, for example, 
by KS'\ KS'\ AT? 10 , and I believed that every one un- 
derstood what was thereby meant. Moreover, I found 
another class of bodies in which an electro-negative 
sulphuretted metal played the part of an Acid with 
respect to an electro-positive sulphuretted metal, for 
which a whole new nomenclature was needed ; while 
yet it were not prudent to construct such a nomencla- 
ture, till more is known on the subject. Instead of 
new names I used formula? ; for example, 

' EX* + 2AsS* 9 

instead of saying the combination of 2 atoms of Sul- 
phuret of Arsenic containing 3 atoms of 4 Sulphur, 
with one atom of Sulphuret of Potassium (Kali) with 
the least dose of sulphur.’ 

Berzelius goes on to say that the English chemists 
had found themselves unable to find any substitutes 
for his formula? when they translated his papers/ 

Our English ‘ehcfiiists have not generally adopted 
the notation of oxygen by dots; but have employed 
commas or full stops and symbols (, or . and -f), to 
denote various degrees of union, and numerical in> 
dices. Tims the double sulphate of copper and potash 
is Cu 0, S0 a + KO, M0 a . 

What has been said is applicable maiidy to inorganic 
bodies (as salts and minerals) l In these bodies there 
is (at least according to the views of many intelligent 
chemists) a binary plan of combination, union taking 


5 Fownes’s Qhemistry. Part ii\ 



THE LANGUAGE J>F SCIENCE. 363 

place between pairs of »element§, and the compounds 
so produced again uniting tliem selves to other Com- 
pound bodies in the same manner.- Thus, in the above 
example, copper and oxygen combine into oxide of 
copper, potassium and oxygen into potash, sulphur 
and oxygen into sulphuric acid; sulphuric acid in* its 
turn combines both with oxide of copper and oxide 
of potassium, generating a pair of salts which are 
capable of uniting to form the double compound 
Cu 0, S0 a + KO, SO n . 

The most complicated products of inorganic che- 
mistry may be thus shown to be built up by this 
repeated pairing on the part of their constituents. 
But with organic bodies the case remarkably differ- 
ent; no such arrangement can here be traced. In 
sugar, which is G v , J/ n 0 U , or morphia' 5 , whicli is 
C. AS // 2n iVD c , the elements tire as it were bound toge- 
ther into a single whole, which can enter into combi- 
nation with other substances, and be thence discharged 
with properties unaltered; the elements not being 
obviously arranged in any subordinate groups. Hence 
the symbols for those substances are such as I have 
given above, no marks of combination being used. 

It is perhaps a consequence of this peculiarity that 
organic compounds are unstable in comparison witli 
inorganic. In unorganic substances generally the ele- 
ments are combined in such a way that the most 
powerful affiifities are satisfied 7 , and hence arises a 
state of very considerable permaneye and durabi- 
lity. But in an organic substance containing three 
or four elements, there are often opposing affinities 
nearly balanced, and when one of these tendencies by 
lomc accident obtains a preponderance and the equili- 
brium is destroyed, then the organic body breaks up 
into two or more new bodies of simpler and more per- 
manent constitution. 

There is another property of many organic sub- 
stances which is called the Law of tiubstitvjtion. The 


* Fownes’s Chemistry , p. 354. 

7 See Hist. Ind. $c. b. xiv. c. 3 .# 



3O4 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 

Hydrogen of tlie organic substance may often be re- 
placed by Chlorine, Bromine, Iodine, or some other 
elements, twithout the destruction of the primitive 
type or constitution of the compound so modified. 
And this substitution may take place by several suc- 
cessive steps, giving rise to a series of substitution- 
compounds, which depart more and more in properties 
from the original substance. This Law also gives rise 
to a special notation. Thus a certain compound called 
Dutch liquid has the elements C v 4 II 4 Cl 2 : but this sub- 
stance is affected by chlorine (Cl) in obedience to the 
law of substitution ; one and two equivalents of hy- 
drogen being successively removed by the prolonged 
action of chlorine gas aided by sunshine. The succes- 
sive products may be thus written 

C 4 ^CI 1 ,jC' 4 {§Jci.;<7 4 {§ i }^ 

Perhaps’ at a future period, chemical symbols, and 
especially those of organic bodies, may be made more 
systematic and more significant than they at present 
are. 


AniORisM XXVII., 

In using algebraical symbols as a part of scientific 
language , violations of algebraical analogy are to be avoided , 
but may be admitted when necessary . 

As we mush m scientific language conform to ety- 
mology, so must we to algebra; and as we are not to 
make ourselves the slaves of the former, so also, not to 
the latter. Hence we reject such crystallographical 
notation as that of Mohs; and in chemistry we use 
C (2 , 0 3 , rather than C~, 0\ which signify the square 
of C and the cube of 0. But we may use, as we have 
said, both the comma and the sign of addition, for 
chemical combination, for the sake of brevity, though 
both steps of combination are really addition. 



THE LANGUAGE QF SCIENCE. 363 


Aphorism XXYIII. 

In a complex science , which is in a state of transition , 
capricious and detached derivations of terms are common ; 
hut are not satisfactory . 

In this remark I have especial reference to Chemis- 
try ; in which the discoveries made, especially in orga- 
nic chemistry, and the difficulty of reducing them to a 
system, have broken up in several instances the old 
nomenclature, without its being possible at present to 
construct a new set of terms systematically connected. 
Hence it has come to pass that chemists Jiave con- 
structed words in a capricious and detached way: as 
by taking fragments of wSrds, and the like. I shall 
give some examples of such derivations, #nd also of 
some attempts which have more of a systematic cha- 
racter. 

I have mentioned (Aph. XY. sect. 7) the word El- 
lagic (acid), made by inverting the word Galle. Several 
words l^ave recently been formed by chemists by 
taking syllables from two or more different words. 
Thus Chevreul discovered a substance to which he gave 
the name Ethol , from the first syllables of the words 
ether and alcohol , because of its analogy to those liquids 
igi ppint of Composition 1 2 3 . So Liebig has the word 
chloral 

Liebig, examining the product of distillation of alco- 
hol, sulphuric acid and amber, found a substance which 
he termed Aldehyd , from the words A fcohol dehydr * 
Togenated This mode of making words has been 
strongly objected to by Mr. Dumas 4 . Still more has 
he objected to the word Mercaptan (of Zeise), which 


1 Turner’s Chemistry, 1834, p. 9155. 

2 Berzelius’ JahresberyjtU, xv. p. 372. 

3 Ibid. xvi. p. 308. 

*^Lecons de Chimic,f>. 354. 



S / )6 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 


lie says rests upon a mere play of words ; for it means 
both mercurium captans and mercurib aptum. 

Dumas^and Peligot, working on pyroligneous^acids, 
found reason to believe the existence of a substance 5 
which they called methylene, deriving the name from 
methy, a spirituous fluid, and hyle, wood. Berzelius 
remarks that the name should rather be methyl, and 
that v\rj may be taken in its signification of matter, to 
imply the Radical of Wine: and he proposes that the 
older .^Ether-Radical, C\ II lQ shall be called JEthyl , 
the newer, C„ II (i , Methyl . 

This notion of marking by the termination yl the 
hypothetical compound radical of a series of chemical 
compounds has been generally adopted ; and, as we see 
from the above reference, it must be regarded as re- 
presenting the Greek word v\y : and such hypothetical 
radicals of bases have been' termed in general basyls . 

Bunsen, obtained from Cadet’s fuming liquid a sub- 
stance which he called Allcar sin (alksli-arsvmu'l) : and 
the substance produced from this by oxidation he 
called Alkaryen Berzelius was of opinion, that the 
true view of its composition was that it contained a 
compound ternary radical = C 4 IP" As", after the man- 
ner of organic bodies; and lie proposed for this the 

name 6 7 * Kakodyl. Alkarsin is Jvakodyl-oxyd, Kd. Al- 

kargen is Kakodyl-acid, Kd. 

The discovery of Kakodyl was the fii’st instance of 
the insulation <‘f an organic metallic busy l 

The first of the - iiydrocarbon Radicals of the Al- 
cohols was the radical of Tetrylic alcohol obtained by 
Kolbe from Valerate of Potash, and hence called Valyl 
0 II . 

10 1H 

Chloroform is per chloride of formyl, the hypotheti- 
cal radical of formic acid 9 . 


6 Berzelius’ Jahresbericht, xv. (1836). 

6 Ibid, xviii. p. 497. 

7 Ibid. xx. p. 52} 

H Miller’s Chemistry, iiL 220. 

y JDUi.ias } Lcfons sw* la Phil. Chim. p« 356. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 3 Gf 

The discovery of such b^set goes back to 
The substance formerly called Prussiate of Mercury , 
being treated in a particular manner, was ref olved into 
metallic mercury and Cyanogen . This substance, Cya- 
nogen , is, according to the older nomenclature, Bicar- 
buret of Nitrogen; but chemists are agreed that *its 
most convenient name is Cyanogen , proposed by its 
discoverer, Gay-Lussac, in T815 10 . The importance 
of the discovery consists in this; that this substance 
was the first compound body which was distinctly 
proved to enter into combination with elementary sub- 
stances in a manner similar to that in which they 
combine with each other. 

The truth of our Aphorism (XX Y.) that in such a 
science as chemistry, the history of th$ scientific nomen- 
clature is the history of the science, appears from this; 
that the controversies with Respect to chemical theories 
and their application take the form of objections to the 
common systematic names and proposals of new names* 
instead. Thus a certain coinpound f of potassa, sulphur, 
hydrogen, and oxygen, may be regarded either as Uy- 
drosulphate of Fotassa , or as Sulphide of Potassium in 
solution , according to different views 11 . In some cases 
indeed, changes are made merely for the sake of clear- 
ness. Instead of Hydrochloric and Hydrocyanic acid, 
many French writers, following Thenard, transpose the 
elements of these terms; they speak of C/dorhydric and 
Cyanfyydric acfd; by this means they avoid any ambi- 
guity which might arise from tfea. aasf of the prefix 
Hydro , which has sometimes been applied to compounds 
which contain water 12 . 

An incompleteness in chemical nomenclature was 
ftirther felt, when it appeared, from the properties of 
various substances, that mere identity in chemical 
composition is not sufficient to produce identity of 
chemical character or properties 13 . The doctrine of 

10 Turner’s Chemistry (1834), p. 4?o. Miller’s Chemistry, ii. 66. 

Miller’s Chemistry , voL ii. p. 583. • 

Ibid. ii. 433. 1 3 Ibid. ii. 65^. 



$68 FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS CONCERNING 

th? existence of comp*mqds identical in ultimate com- 
position, but different in chemical * properties, was 
termed Isotnerism. Thus chemists enumerate tjfe fol- 
lowing compounds, all of which contain carbon and 
hydrogen in the proportion of single equivalents of 
each 14 : — Methylene, Olehant gas , Propylene, Oil gas, 
Amylene, Caproylene, Naphthene, Eleene, Peramylene, 
Cetylene, Cerotylene, Melissine . 

I will, in the last place, propound an Aphorism 
which has already offered itself in considering the 
history of Chemistry 15 , as having a special bearing upon 
that Science, but which may be regarded as the su- 
preme /md ultimate rule with regard to the language 
of Science. 


Aphorism XXIX. 

In learning the meaning of Scientific Terms, the history of 
'science is our Dictionary: the steps of scientific induction are 
our Definitions. 

It is usual for unscientific readers to complain that 
the technical terms which they meet witli in books of 
science are not accompanied by plain definitions such as 
they can understand. But such definitions cannot be 
given. For definitions must consist of words ; and, in 
the case of scientific terms, must consist of words which • 
require again to be defined : and so on,' without limjt. 
Elementary suk?ian$es in chemistry, for instance, what 
are they? The substances into which bodies can be 
analysed, and by the junction of which they are com- 
posed. But wliat is analysis ? what is composition ? We 
have seen that it required long and laborious courses <5f 
experiment to«answer these questions; and that finally 
the balance decided among rival answers. And so it 
is in other cases. In entering upon each science, we 
come upon a new set of words. And ho w are we to learn 


14 Millet's Chemistry, ii. 654. 
16 Hist. Lul. Sc. b. xiv. c. 1. 



THE LANGUAGE .OP SCIENCE. 36$ 

tlie meaning of this collection of fords'? In what gjjfej 
language shall itfbe explained ? In what terms shall rfe 
define these new expressions ] To this we afe compelled 
to reply, that we cannot translate these terms into any 
ordinary or familiar language. Here, as in all other 
branches of knowledge, the meaning of words is tT> be 
sought in the progress of thought. It is only by going 
back through the successful researches of men respect- 
ing the composition and demerits of bodies, that we can 
learn in what sense such terms can be understood, so as 
to convey real knowledge. In order that they may have 
a meaning for us, we must inquire what meaning they 
had in the minds of the authors of our disco veri^^lind 
the same is the case in other subjects. To take the in- 
stance of Morphology. When the lyeginner js told that 
every group of animals may be reduced to an Archetype , 
he will seek for a definition f of Archetype. Such a defi- 
nition has l^)cn offered, to this effect : tlie Archetype of 
a group of animals is a diagram embodying all the organ**, 
and parts which are found in the group in such a rela- 
tive position as they would haveliad if none had at- 
tained an excessive development. But, then, we are led 
further to ask, How are we in each case to become ac- 
quaintedNvith the diagram ; to know of what parts it 
consists, and how they arc related ; and further; 
What is the standard of excess? It is by a wide 
examination of particular species, and by several suc- 
cessive generalizations of observed facts, that we are led 
to a diagram of an animal form ptla_^*tain kind, (for 
example, a vertebrate;) and of the various ways, exces- 
sive and defective, in which the parts may be developed. 

This craving for definitions, as we have already said, 
Arises in a great degree from the acquaintance with geo- 
metry which most persons acquire at an early age. 
The definitions of geometry are easily intelligible by a 
beginner, because the idea of space, of which they are 
modifications, is clearly possessed without any special 
culture. But this is not and cannot be the case in other 
sciences founded upon a wide gnd exact observation of 

NOV. ORGr. 


24 



JfO FURTHER ILLUSTRATIONS, &C. 

•TJ was formerly sai£ tl,iat there was no Royal Road 
to Geometry: in modern times we have occasion often 
to repeat tlf&t there is no Popular Road — no roac^-easy, 
pleasant, offering no difficulty and demanding no toil, — 
to Comparative Anatomy, Chemistry or any other of 
the ‘Inductive Sciences. 


THE ENJ). 


('Amjibidge: i’bintj by c. j. ciay, si. a. at tiie r ivkAsity i'ukss. 



WORKS, BY 

WJLLIAM WHEWELL, D.D. I.R.S. 

MASTER OF ^TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE. 


HISTORY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. Third 

and Cheaper Edition. Three Volumes, Small Octavo, 24 s. 

HISTORY OF SCIENTIFIC IDEAS, being the First 

Part of “Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.” Third Edition. 
Two Volumes, Small Octavo, 14s. 

PHILOSOPHY OP THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 

Second Edition. Two Volumes, Octavo, 3b.?. 

INDICATIONS OF TIIE CREATOR: Theological Ex- 
tracts from the “History an r -j the Philosophy of Inductive 
Sciences.” Second Edition. 56*. 6d. 

ELEMENTS ot MORALITY, INCLUDING POLITY. 

Third Edition, with a Supplement. Two Volumes, 15s. 

LECTURES ON SYSTEMATIC MORALITY, •js. 6d. 

LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OP MORAL PHI- 
LOSOPHY^IN ENGLAND. 8s. 

OF A LIBERAL EDUCATION IN GENERAL, and 

with Particular "Reference to the Studies of the University of Cam- 
bridge. Parts I. and II., in One Volume, 76*. 6d. Part III., 
Sewed, 28. 

ON THE PRINCIPLES OF ENGLISH UNIVER- 
SITY EDUCATION. Second Edition. 

COLLEGE CHAPEL SERMONS, tos. 6d. 

NOTES ON GERMAN CHURCHES. Third Edition. 

F#. 

THE MECHANICAL EUCLID. Fifth Edition. 

THE MECHANICS OF ENGINEE^NG. 9 & 

THE DOCTRINE OF LIMITS. Octavo, gs. 

CONIC SECTIONS. 25 . 6d. 

LONDON: JOHN PARKER ANJ> SON, WEST STRAND. 