ON THE 

PHILOSOPHY 

OF 


DISCOVERY 



Conttitilrgt : 

PRINTED BY O. J. CLAY, V. A 
AT THE ONlTl-ais^ITY l*RKaS» 



ON THE 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY, 

CHAPTERS HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL; 


hV 

WILLIAM WHEWELL, D.D. 

MA.STKU OK TllLVirV CJOLLECiK. C’AM^tlUOOJ:, AVI> 
i OKUh:sl*uNmNC! MEMUEll OF THE INSTITUTE OF FU ANX'K. 


[NCLODING TITK (-OMPLKXION OF THE THIRD EDITION 
OF THE PHILOSOPHY OP THE INDIATIVE SCIENCES. 



AAMHAAIA EXONTE2 AIAiOSOVIIN AAAHA0I2. 


LONDON: 

JOHN W. PAUKEK AND SON, WEST STRAND. 

i860. 



The following are thb latest editions of the series of works 
which has been published connected with the present subject : 

History of the Inductive Sciences, 3 Vols. 1857. 

History of Sdeivtific Ideas, ‘Z Vols. 1858. 

Novum Orynnon Reiwvatam, i Vol. 1858. 

On (he Philosophy of Discovery, 1 Vol. i860. 

To the History of the Inductive Sciences aro appended two 
Indexes (in Vol. I.), an Index of Proper Names, and an Index 
of Technical Terms. These Indexes^ and the Tables of Contents 
of the other works, will enable the reader to refer to any person 
or event included in this series. 



PREFACE. 


^JpiIE two works which I entitled The History of 
tlie Inductive Sciences^ and The Philosophy of the 
Inductive were intended to present to the 

reader a view of the steps by which those portions 
of human knowledge which are held to be most 
certain and stable have been acquired, and of the 
philosophical princi])les which are involved in those 
steps. Each of these steps w^as a scientific Bisco^cery^ 
in which a new conception vrus apj)lied in order to 
bind together observed facts. And though the con- 
junction of the observed facts was in each case an 
example of logical Induction^ it vras not the induc- 
tivo process merely, but the novelty of the result in 
each case which gave its peculiar character to the 
History ; and the Philosophy at which I aimed was 
not the Philosophy of Induction, but the Philosophy 
oj Discovery, In the present edition 1 have de- 
scribed this as my object in my Title. 



VI 


PREFACE, 


A great part of the present volume consists of 
chapters which coiiij)osed the twelfth Book of the 
Philosophy in former editions, which Book was then 
described as a ‘ Boview of Opinions on the imture of 
Knowledge and the Method of seeking it.’ I have 
added to this part scvenil new chapters, on Plato, 
Aristotle, the Arabian philosophers, Francis Bacon, 
Mr. Mill, Mr. Manscl, the late Sir William llamil- 
#ton, and the Gerniaii philosophers Kant, Fichte, 
Schelling and Hegel. I might, if. time had allowed, 
hiive added a new chapter on lioger Bacon, founded 
on his Opus Minus and other works, recently published 
for the first time under the direction of Master of 
the Rolls; a valuable contribution to the history of 
]ihilosophy. But the review of this work would not 
materially alter the estimate of Roger Bac;on which I 
had derived from the Opus Majus. 

But besides these hi.storical and critical surveys of 
the philosoj)hy of othei*s, I have ventured to intro- 
duce some new views of my own ; namely, views 
which Iwar upon the philoso])hy of religion. I have 
done so under the conviction that no philosophy of 
the universe can satisfy the minds of thoughtful men 
which does not deal with such questions as inevi- 
tably force themselves on our notice, respecting the 
Author and the Object of the universe ; and also 
under the conviction that every ydiilosophy of the 



PREFACE. 


Vll 


universe which has any consistency must sug- 
gest answers, at least conjectural, to such ques- 
tions. No CosTiWB is complete from which the ques- 
tion of Deity is excluded ; and all Cosmology has 
a side turned towards Theology. Though I am aware 
therefore how easy it is, on this subject, to give 
offence and to incur oblocpiy, I have not thought it 
right to abstain from following out my philosophical 
princijilcs to their results in this department of specu« 
lation. The results do not differ materially from 
those at which many jjious and thoughtful speculators 
have arrived in previous ages of the world ; though 
they have here, as seems to me, something of novelty 
in their connection with the philosophy of science. 
But this point I willingly leave to the calm de- 
cision of competent judges. ' ' 

1 have added in an Appendix various Essays, 
previously publisheti at different times, which may 
serve perhaps to illustrate some points of the history 
and philosophy of science. 


Tiunitt Lorge, 

February 8, 1806. 




ON 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 


CONTENTS. 


The chapters marked thus * appear mfw for the first time. 
The chapters marked thus t have api^carcd in other irorka. 


Chap. I. Introduction. 

CuAP. II. Plato. 

Chap. III. * Additional Kemarks on Plato. 

I. I'he Doctrine of Ideas. 

?. The Doctrine of the One and Many. 

* 3. The notion of the nature and aim of Science. 

4. The Survey of existing Sciences. 

5. The Constitution of the human Mind. 

Chap. IV. Aristotle. 

Chap. V. * Additional Kemarks on Aristotle. 

1. Induction. 

2. Invention. 

3. The One in the Many. 

4. The ''Five Words.’’ 

5. Aristotle's contribution to the Physical Sciences. 

?. Aristotle's Astronomy. 

7. Aristotle on Classification. 

8. F. Bacon on Aristotle. 

9. Discovery of Causes. 

10. Plato and Aristotle. 

1 1. Aristotle against Plato’s Ideas, 



X 


CONTENTS. 


.Chap. VI, The Later Giikeks. 

Chap. VII. The Romans. 

Chap. VIII. ‘Arabian Puilo.sophkrs. 


Chap. IX. The Schoolmen of the Middle Aces. 


Chap. X. The Innovators of the Middle Ages. 
Raymond Lully. 

Chap. XI. The Innovators op the Middle Ages— 
cmjjnu&L ^ 

Roger B;xcon. 


•Chap. XII. The Revival op Platonism. 

1 . Causes of Delay in the Advance of Knowledge 

2. Causes of Progress. 

3. Hormoiaus Barbarus, &c. 

4. jMCoiaus L.usauus. 

5. Manilius Ficinus. 

6. Francis Patricius. 

7. Picus, Agrippa, &c. 

8. Paracelsus, Fludd, &c. 


Chap, XIII. The TnEOREncAL Reformers op Science. 


1. Bernardiijus Telcsius. 

2. Thomas Catnpanella. 

3. Andrew Csesalpinus. 

4. Giordano Bruno. 

5. Peter Ramus. 

6. The Reformers in General. 

7. Melancthoii. 


Chap. XIV. The Practical Reformers of Science. 


1. Character of the Practical Reformers. 

2. Leonardo da Vinci. 

3. Copernicus, 

4. Fabricius. 

^ 5. Maurolycus. 

6. Bonedotti. 

7. Gilbert. 



CONTENTS. 


XI 


8. Galileo. 

9. Kepler. 

10. Tycho. 


(JUAP. XV, Fkanois Bacojt. 


1 . (I.) General Keinarks. 

2. Common CHtimate of liini. 

3. We consider ordy Physical Science. 

4. lie is placed at the head of the change : 

5. And justly. ^ 

6 . (IT.) Jlc proclaims a N*w Era^ 

7. ( 111 .) Eif a Change of Method; 

8. Inclmliiig successive Steps ; 

9. Gradually ascending. • 

10. (IV.) Ife contrasts the Old and the New Method. 

IT. (V.) J 1 us he neglected Ideast 

12. No. 

13. K.xamplca of Ideas treated by him. 

14. IIo has failed in appl)ing his Method 

15. (VI.) To the Came of Meat, 

16. Ho Meeks Causes before ljaw.q. 

17. (Vll.) //is Technical J^orm worthless. 

18. He is confused by words, 

19. Ills ''Instances.” 

30 . Contain sumo good Suggestions, 

31 . (VIU.) Jlis ^•Jiloh.^* 

33. (JX.) Mis view of Utihty, 

33. (X.) Jlis IJopffulncss, 

34. (XI.) Jlis JHety, 


CUAP. XVI, * Additional Remaiiks on Feancis Bacon. 

I. Mr. Ellis’s views. 

3. Mr. iSpeddiug's views. 


Chap. XVII, From Bacon to Newton. 

r. Harvey. 

.3. Descartes. 

3. Gassendi. 

4 . Actual Progress in Science. 



XU 


CONTENTS, 


5. Otto Guericke, &;c. 

6. Hooke. 

7. Royal Society. 

8. Bacon's New Atalantie, 

9. Cowley. 

10. Barrow. 


Chap. XVIII. Nkwton. 

I. Animating effect of his Discoveries. 

?. They confirm Bacon’s views. 

5. Nowion shuns Hypotheses. 

4. His views of Inductive Philosophy. 

5, His ** Rules of Philosophizing.” 

? . T/ie First Rule, 

7. What is a ** True Cause ” ? 

8. Such as are real? 

9. Or ihow which aie proved? 

10. Use of the Rule. 

II. Rule otherwise expressed. 

12. The Second Rule. 

13. What are Events ‘'of the same kind” ? 

14. The Third Rule: 

15. Not safe. 

16. The Fourth Rule. 

17. Occult Qualities, 

18. Ridiculed. 

19. Distinction of Laws and Causes. 


Chap. XIX. 


LOCKB and HI8 Ebench Followebs. 


1. Cause of Locke's j)Opularity. 

2. Sensational School. 

3. His inconsistencies. 

4. Condillac^ &,c. 

5. Importance of Language. 

6. Ground of this. 

7. The Encyclopedists. 

8. Helvetiua. 

9. Value of Arts. 

xo. Tendency to Reaction. 



CONTENTS. 


Xlll 


Chap. XX. Thk Bsaotion against the Sensational 
School. 


I. Nisi intollectus ipse.” 

Price’s "•Review.” 

3. Stewart defends Price. 

4. Archbishop Whately, 

5. Laromigui^ro. 

6. M. Cousin. 

7. M. Ampbre. 

8. His Classification of Sciences. 

9. Kant’s Reform of Philosophy .• 
TO. Its Effect in Germany. 


Chap. XXI. Forth rr Advance op the Sensational 
School. 


AI. Auguste Comte. 

1. M, Comte on three States of Science. 

2. AI. Comte rejects the Search of Causes. 

3. Causes in Physics. 

4. Causes in other Sciences. 

5. AI. Comte’s Practical Philosophy. 

6. AI. Comte on Hypotheses. 

7. AI. Comte’s Classification of Sciences. 


Chap. XXH. tAlR. AIill's Looio. 


( 1 .) What is Induction t §§ i— 14. 

(II.) Induction or Description, §§ 1 5 — 23, 

( 111 .) Ill Discovery a new Conception is introduced, 
§§ 24 — 37 - 

(IV.) Air. Alill’s Four Alcthods of Inquiry, §§ 38 
—40. 

(V.) His Examples, §§ 41 — 48. 

(VI.) Air, Alill against Hypotheses, §§ 49, 50. 

(VII.) Against prediction of Facts, §§ 51 — 53. 

(VIII.) Newton’s Vera Causa, §§ 54, 55. 

(IX.) Successive Generalizations, §§ 56 — 62. 

(X.) Mr. AliU’s Hope from Deductions, §§ 63—67. 
(XI.) Fundamental opposition of our Doctrines, §§ 68 

—71. 

(XII.) Absurdities in Air. Aiill’s Logic, §§ 72 — 7^. 



XIV 


CONTENTS. 


Chap. IjlXIII. ‘Political EcoNOMt as an Inductive 
. Science. 

1. Moral Sciences. 

2 . Political Economy. , 

3. Wages, Profits, and Bouts. 

4. Premature Gencralixations. 

5. Correction of those by Induction— Rent. 

6. „ Wages. 

7. „ Population. 

Chap. XXIV. tMoDBiiN German Philosophy. 

(I.) SciChce is the Idealization of Facts, §§ r— 8. 

(II.) Successive German Philosophies. 

Kant, Fichte, Schclliug, Hegel, 9 — 16. 

Chap. XXV. fTHE Fundamental Antituehls as it pxist.s 
IN TUK Moral World. 

Moral Progress is the Realization of Ideas. 

Chap. XXVI. ‘Of the '^Philosoput of the Infinite.'' 
God is Eternal. 

Chap. XXVIl. "Sib William Hamilton on Inebtia and 
Weight. 

I. Primary ard Secondary Qualities. 

?. Meaning of the Distinction. 

3. Sir W, llamilttm adds “Secundo-Primary.'’ 

4. Inertia. 

3. Sir W. Hamilton's arguments and reply. 

?. Gravity. 

Sir W. Hamilton’s arguments and reply. 

Chap. XXVIII. + Influence op German Systems of Pih- 
Losorur in Britain. 

1, Stewart on Kant. 

2 . Mr. G. H, Lewes on Kant. 

4—6. Mr. Mangel on Kant. 

His objection to our Fundamental Ideas, and 
Reply. 

7* - 10. Now Axioms are possible. 

II — 13. Mr. Mansel’s Kantianism. 

F4 — 16. Axioms are not from experience. 



CONTEISTS. 


XV 


Chap. XXIX. •Nboessaey Truth is Progressive. 
Objections considered. 

Chap. XXX. *Tue THEOLoaiCAr. Bearing op the Philo- 
sophy OP Discovery. 

I — 4. How can necessary truths be actual ? 

5, 6. Small extent of necessary truth. 

7. How did things come to be as they arc? 

8. View of the Thuist. 

9 — 13. la this Platonism I 

13. Idea of Time. • 

14, 15. Ideas of Jh'orce and Matter. 

16. Creation of Matter. 

17. Platonic Ideas. 

1 8 — 3 1 . Idea of Kind. 

33. Ide^a of Substance. 

33. Idea of Final Cause. 

34, 35. Human immeasurably inferior to Divine. 

36. Science advances towards the Divine Ideas. 

37. Kocapituhition. 

Chap. XXXI. * Man’s Knowledge op Cod. 
i, 3. Opinions. 

3. From Naturo we learn something of God. 

4 — 6. Though but little. 

7, 8. From ourselves wo learn something concerning 
God. 

9 — II. Objections answered. 

13 . Creation. 

13. End of tho World, 

14. Moral and Theological views enter. 

Chap. XXXII. * Analogies of Physical and Beligious 
Philosophy. 

i, 3. Idealization of Facts and Bealization of Ideas ; 

3, 4. Both imperfect. 

5, 6. Divine Ideas perfect. 

7 — 9. Bealization of Divine Love. 

10 — 13. Bealization of Divine Justice. 

14. Analogy of Physical and Moral Philosophy. 



XVI 


CONTENTS. 


15, 16. Supernatural Beginning, Middle, and End indi- 
• cated. 

17. Suggestion of a Future State. 
ilB— 20. Confinnation from the Intellect of Man. 

21. ' From the Moral Nature of Man. 


APPENDIX. 


Append. A« 
§ 

B. 
BB. 

C. 


PAOB 

Op the Platonic Thpoby op Ideas . 403 
On*’Plato’s Suevky op the Sciences . 417 
On Plato’s Notion of Dialectic . . ' 4^9 

Op the Intellectual Powers according 
to Plato 440 


D.* Criticism or Aristotle’s Account op 

Induction 449 

£. On the Fundamental Antithesis of 

Philosophy 462 

F. Remarks on a Review op the Philo- 

sophy OF THE InDLCTIVB SCIENCES , 482 

G. On the Tbanspobmation of Hypotheses 

IN the History or Science . . . 492 

H. On Hegel’s Criticism op Newton's 

Pbincipia 504 

Appendix to the Memoir on Hegel’s Criti- 
cism of Newton’s Principia . . >513 

K. Demonstration that all Matter is 

Heavy 522 




ox THE 

PHILOSOPHY 

OF 


DISCOVERY. 


B 



W^’ nicht das Auge sonnenliaft 
Wie kdnnten wir das Licht erblicken f 
Lebt* nicht in uus des Gottes eigne Kraft 
Wie kdnnte uns das Gbttliohe entzUckeu ? 

Goethe. 


Were nothing sunlike in the Eye 
How could we Light itself desciy ? 
Were nothing godlike in the Mind 
How could we God in Nature find? 



CHAPTER I. 


INTRODUCTION. 


B y the examination of the elements of human 
thought in wliich I ha^ been gngaged, and by 
a consideration of the history of the most clear and 
certain parts of our knowledge, I have been led to 
doctrines respecting the progress of that exact and* 
systematic knowledge which we* call Science ; and 
those doctrines 1 have endeavoured to lay before the 
reader in the History of the Sciences and of Scientific 
Ideas. The cpiestious on which I have thus ventured 
to pronounce have had a strong interest for man from 
the earliest period of his intellectual progress, and 
liave been the subjects of lively discussion and bold 
speculation in evciy age. I conceive that in the doc- 
trines to which those researches have conducted us, 
we have a for better hope that we possess a body of 
permanent truths than the earlier essays on the same 
subjects could furnish. For we have not taken our 
examples of knowledge at hazard, as earlier s{>ecula- 
tors did, and were almost compelled to do; but have 
drawn our materials from the vast store of unques- 
tioned truths which modern science offers to us : and 
we have formed our judgment concerning the nature 
and progress of knowledge by considering what such 
science is, and how it has reached its present condition. 
But though we have thus pursued our speculations 
cuncerning knowledge with advantages which earlier 
writers did not possess, it is still both interesting and 
instructive for us to regard the opinions upon this 
subject which have been delivered by the philosophers 
of past times. It is especially interesting to see^some 
of the truths which we have endeavoured to expound, 
gradimlly dawning in men's minds, and assuming the 



4 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


clear and permanent form in which we can now con- 
template* them. I shall thoretbre^ in the ensuing 
chapters, pass in review many of the opinions of the 
writers of various ages concerning the mode by which 
man best acquires the truest knowledge; and I shall 
endeavour, as we proceed, to aj)preciato the real value 
of such judgments^ and their place in the progress of 
sound philosophy. 

In this estimate of the 0 ])inions of others, I shall 
be guided by those general doctrines whicli I have, as 
I trust, establibVed in the histories ali-eady published. 
And without attempting here to give any summary 
of these doctrines, I may remark that there are two 
main principles by which speculations on such sub- 
jects in all ages arc connected and related to each 
other ; namely, the op|M>sition of Idem and Senaatiiyus^ 
and the distinction of practical and speculative know- 
ledge. The opposition of Ideas and Sensations is ex- 
hibited to us in the antithesis of Theory and Fact, 
which are necessarily considered as distinct and of 
opposite natures, and yet necessarily identical, and 
constituting Science by their identity. In like msui- 
ner, altlxough practic^ knowledge is in substance 
identical with specuUtive, (for all knowledge is specu- 
lation,) there is a distinction between the two in their 
history, and in the subjects by which they are exem- 
plified, which distinction is quite essential in judging 
of the philosophical views of the ancients. The 
alternatives of identity and diversity, in those two 
antitheses, — ^the succossive separation, opposition, and 
reunion of principles which thus arise, — have pro- 
duced, (as they may easily be imagined capable of 
doing,) a long and varied series of systems concerning 
the nal^ure of knowledge ; among which wo shall have 
to guide our course by the aid of the views already 
presented. 

I am far from undertaking, or wishing, to review 
the yholo series of opinioxis which thus come under 
our notice; and I do not even atteinj^t to examine all 
the principal authors who have written on such sub- 
jects. 1 merely wish to select some of the most con- 



INTRODUCTION. 


5 


siderable forms which such opinions have assumed, 
and to point out in some measure the progress of truth 
from ago to age. In doing this, I can only endeavour 
to seize some of the most prominent features of each 
time and of each Hep, and I must pass rapidly from 
classical antiquity to those which we have called the 
dark ages, and from them to modem times. At each 
of these periods the modifications of opinion, and the 
speculations with which they were connected, formed 
a vast and tangled maze, the byways of which our 
plan does not allow us to ^tcr. sha4 esteem 

ourselves but too fortunate, if we can discover the 
single track by which ancient led to modem philo- 
sophy. 

I must also repeat that my suf vey of philosojphical 
writera is here confined to this one poin^ — ^their opi- 
nions on the nature of knowledge and the method of 
science. I with, some effort avoid entering upon other 
parts of the philosophy of those authors of whom I 
speak; J knowingly pass by those portions of their 
speculations which are in many cases the most inter- 
esting and celebiuted ; — ^their opinions concerning the 
human so\il, the Divine Governor of the world, the 
foundations or leiuling doctrines of politics, religion, 
and general philosophy. I am desirous that my 
reader should bear this in mind, since he must other- 
wise Ik 5 offended with the scanty and partis view 
which I give in this jfiace of the philosophers whom 
1 enumemte. 



CHAPTER IL 
Plato. 


T here would be small advantage in beginning our 
examination earlier than the period of the Socratic 
School A Atheijis; for dithough the spirit of inquiry 
on such subjects had awakened in Gi'eece at an eorliei* 
^period, and although the p<‘culiar aptitude of the 
Grecian mind fur such researches had shown itself 
re})eatedly in subtle distinctions and acute reasonings, 
all the positive results of these early efforts were con- 
tained in a more definite form in the reasonings of the 
Platonic age. Before that time, the Greeks did not 
possess plain and familiar examples of exact know- 
ledge, such as the truths of Arithmetic, Gacoraetry, 
Astronomy and Optics became in tbo school of Plato ; 
nor were the antitheses of which we spoke above, so 
distinctly and fully unfolded as wo find them in Plato’s 
works. 

The question which hinges upon one of those anti- 
theses, occupies a prominent place in several of the 
Platonic dialogues j namely, whether our knowledge 
be obtained by means of Sensation or of Ideas. One 
of the doctrines which Plato most earnestly inculcated 
upon his countrymen was, that we do not know con- 
cerning sensible objects, but concerning ideas. The 
first attempts of the Greeks at metaphysical analysis 
had given rise to a school which maintained &at 
rnate:!^ objects are the only rcalitiea In opposition 
to this, arose another school, which taught that ma- 
terial objects have no permanent reality, but are ever 
waxing and waning, constantly changing their sub- 
stance. And hence,” as Aristotlo says', arose the 
doctrine of ideas which the Platonista hold. For they 


tSr«tavL.xiL4. 



PLATO. 


7 


assented to the opinion of Heraolitus, that all sensible 
objects are in a constant state of flux. So that if 
there is to be any knowledge and scnence, it must 
be concerning some permanent natures, different from 
the sensible natures of objects; for there can be no 
permanent science respecting that which is perpetu- 
ally changing. It happened that Socrates turned his 
speculations to the moral virtues, and was the first 
philosopher wlio endeavoured to give universal defi- 
nitions of such matters. He wished to reason sys- 
tematically, and therefore h% tried to cstabfrsh defi- 
nitions, for definitions are the basfr of s^tematic 
reasoning. There are two things which may justly 
bo looked upon as steps in philosophy due to Socrates; 
inductive rejisonings, and universal definitions; — ^both 
of them steps which belong to the foundations of 
science. Socrates, however, did not make universals, 
or definitions sepamble from the objects; but his fol- 
lowei's separated them, and these essences they termed 
Ideas^ And the same account is given by other 
writers®. ‘‘ Some existences are sensible, some intel- 
ligible : and according to Plato, if we wish to under- 
stand the principles of things, we must first separate 
the idem from the things^ such as the ideas of Simi- 
larity, Unity, Number, Magnitude, Position, Motion: 
second, that we mnst assume an absolute Fair, (rood, 
Just, aud the like : third, that we must consider the 
ideas of relation, as Knowdedge, Power: recollecting 
that the Things which we j>erceive have this or that 
appellation applied to them because they partake of 
this or that Idea; those things l>eingyus^ which par- 
ticipate in the idea of The Just, those being heautifid^ 
which contain the idea of The Beautifril.” And many 
of the arguments by which this doctrine was main- 
tain^ are to be found in the Platonic dialogues. Thus 
the opinion that true knowledge consists in sensation, 
which had been asserted, by Protagoras and others, is 
refuted in the TheasUtua: and, we may add, so vic- 
toriously lefuted, that the arguments there pub forth 


9 Diog. iMi. KiC. Plat 




8 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 


have ever since exercised a strong influence upon the 
speculative world. It may bo remarked that in the 
minds of Plato and of those who have since pursued 
the same paths of speculation, the interest of such dis- 
cussions as those we are now referring to, was by no 
means limited to their bearing upon mere theory ; but 
was closely connected with those great questions of 
morals which have always a practical import. Those 
who assorted that the only foundation of knowlc<lgc 
was sensation, asserted also that the only foundation of 
virtue ^||as the <|{euire of<pleaaure. And in Plato, the 
metaphysical part of the disquisitions concerning know- 
ledge in general, though independent in its principles, 
always seems to l>e subordinate in its pur|»ose to the 
questions ooncembi^ the knowle<lge ot our duty. 

Since Plato thus looked ut>ou the Ideas which were 
involved in each department of knowledge as forming 
its only essential part, it was natural that he should 
look upon the study of Ideas as the true mode of pur- 
suing knowledge. This he himself describes in the 
PhU^v^^, “ The best way of amving at truth is not 
veiy difficult to point oul^ but most haid to pumie. 
All the arts which have ever boon discovered, were 
revealed in this manner. It is a gift of the gods to 
man, which, as I conceive, they sent down by some 
Prometheus, as by Prometheus they gave us the light 
of Are ; and the ancients, more clear-sighted than we, 
and less removed from the gods, handed down tliis 
traditionary doctrine: tliat whatever is said to be, 
cornea of One and of Miiny, and comprehends in it- 
itself the Finite and the Infinite in coalition (being 
One Kind, and consisting of Infinite Individuals). 
And this being the state of things, we must^ in each 
case, endeavour to seize the One Idea (the idea of the 
Kind) as the chief point; for we shall find that it is 
there. And when we have seized this one thing, we 
may then consider how it comprehends in itself two, 
or three, or any other number; and, again, examine 
each \>f these ramifications separately; till at last we 


* T. IL pi. c, d. ed. Bekker, t v. pw 43^ 




PLATO. 


9 

perceive, not only that One is at the some time One 
and Many, but also liow many. And when we have 
thus filled up the interval between the Infinite and 
the One, we may consider that we have done with 
each one. The gods then, as I have said, taught us 
by tradition thus to contemplate, and to learn, and to 
teach one another. But the philosophers of the pre- 
sent day seize upon the One, at hazard, too soon or too 
late, and then immediately snatch at the Infinite; but 
the intermediate steps escape them, in which resides 
the distinction between a ti^ly logical and^a mci*e 
disputatious discussion.” 

It would seem that what the author here describes 
as the most perfect form of exi>ositiou, is that which ^ 
refers each object to its place in*a classification con- 
taining a complete series of subordinations, and which 
gives a definition of each class. We have repeatedly 
remarked that, in sciences of classification, each now 
definition which gives a tenable and distinct separation 
of classes is an important advance in our knowledge; 
but that su( h definitions are rather the last than the 
first htoj) in each advanca In the progress of real 
knowhidge, these definitions are always the results of 
a laborious study of individual cases, and are never 
arrived at by a pure effort of though^ which is what 
Plato appears to have imagined as the true mode of 
philosophizing. And still less do the advances of other 
sciences consist in seiziug at once upon the highest 
generality, and filling in afterwords all the interme- 
diate steps between that and the special instances. On 
the contrary, as we have seen, the ascents from par- 
ticular to general are all successive; and each step of 
this ascent requires time, and labour, and a patient 
examination of actual facts and objects. 

It would, of course, be absurd to blame Plato for 
having inadequate views of the nature of progressive 
knowledge, at the time when knowledge could hardly 
be said to have begun its progress. But we already 
find in his sjteoulations, as appears in the ps&sages 
just quoted from his writings, several points brought 
into view which will require our continued attention 



10 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


as we proceed.. In OYerlooking the necessity of A 
gradual and successive advance from the lees general 
to the more general truths, Plato dbared in a ^mness 
of vision^ which prevailed among philosophers to the 
time of Francis Bacon. In thinking too slightly 
of the study of actual nature, he manifested a bias 
from which the human intellect freed itself in the 
vigorous struggles which terminated the dark ages. 
In pointing out that all knowledge implies a unity of 
what we observe as manifold, which unity is given by 
the mi^d, Plato taughO a lesson which has of late 
been too obscurely acknowledged, the recoil by which 
men repair^ their long neglect of facts having car- 
/ ried them for a while so far as to think that facts 
wore the whole of Our knowledge. And in analysing 
this principle of Unity, by which we thus connect 
sensible things, into vaiious Ideas, such as Number, 
ll^gnitude. Position, Motion, he made a highly im- 
portant step, which it has been the business of philo- 
sophers in succeeding times to complete and* to follow 
out. 

But the efficacy of Plato’s speculations in their 
bearing upon physical science, and upon theory in 
geneiul, was much weakened by the confusion of 
practical with theoretical knowledge, which arose from 
the ethical propensities of the ^cratic school. In 
the Platonic Dialogues, Art and Science are constantly 
spoken of indiscriminately. The skill possessed by 
the Painter, the Architect, the Shoemaker, is consi- 
dered as a just examine of human science, no less 
than the knowledge which the geometer or the astro- 
nomer possesses of the theoretical truths with which 
he is conversant. Not only so; but traditionary and 
mythological tales, mystical imaginations and &ntaati- 
cal etymologiei^ are mixed up, as no less choice in- 
gredients, with the most acute logical analyses, and 
Ae most exact conduct of metaphysical controversies* 
There is no distinction made between the knowledge 
possessed by the theoretical psychologist and the 


* SeetheieiiiaiiuoathlipbnMlntheiMxtchftpker. 




PLATO- 


11 


pliy8i<nan| the philosophical teacher of morals and the 
legislator or the administrator of law. Thi^ indeed, 
is the less to be wondered at, since even in our own 
time the samte confusion is very commonly made by 
persons not otherwise ignorant or uncultur^. 

On the other hand, we may remark finally, that 
Platons admiration of Ideas was not a barren imagina- 
tion, even so far as regarded physical science. Fbr, 
as we have seGn^ he had a very important share in 
the introduction of the theory of epicycles, having 
been the first to propose to sistronomers in a distinct 
form, the problem of which that theofy was the solu- 
tion ; namely, “ to explain the celestial phenomena by 
the combination of equable circular motfbns.” This 
demand of an ideal hypothesis which should exactly 
express the phenomena (as well as they could tlien be 
observed), and from which, by the interposition of 
suitable steps, all special cases might be deduced, falls 
in well with those views respecting the proper mode 
of scekinff knowledge which we have quoted from the 
Fhilebus, And the Idea which couhl thus represent 
and replace all the particular Facts, being not only 
sought but found, we may readily suppose that the 
philosopher was, by this event, strongly confirmed in 
his persuasion that such an Idea was indeed what the 
inquirer ought to seek, lu this conviction all his 
genuine fi)llow^ers up to modern times luive partici- 
pated ; and thus, though they have avoided the error 
of those who hold that facts alone are valuable as the 
elements of our knowledge, they have frequently run 
into the opposite error of too much despising and 
neglecting facta, and of thinking that the business of 
tbe inquirer after truth was only a profound and con- 
stant contemplation of the conceptions of his own 
mind. But of this hereafter. 


* JTiit JnA5flLb.lU.c.U, 




CHAPTER in. 


Aldditioxal Remarks on Plato. 


T he leading points in Plato’s writings which bear 
upon the philosophy of discoveiy are these : 

I. The Docirine of ideas. ? 

2. The Doctrine of the One and the Many. 

3. The notiou of the nature and aim of Science. 

4. The survey of existing Sciences. 

I. The Doctrine of Ideas is an attempt to solve a 
problem which in all ages forces itself upon the notice 
of thoughtful men; namely, How can certain and 
peimanent knowledge be possible for man, since all 
his knowledge miist*be derived from traiHicnt and 
fluctuating sensations ? And the answer given by this 
doctrine is, that certain and pennanent knowledge is 
Kwt derived from SefiMatiom^ but from Ideas* There 
are in the mind certain elements of knowledge which 
are not derived from sensation, and are only imper- 
fectly exemplified in sensible objects; and when we 
reason concerning sensible things so as to obtain real 
knowledge, we do so by considering such things as 
partaking of the qualities of the Ideas concerning 
which there can be truth. The sciences of Geometiy 
and Arithmetic show that there ore truths which 
man can know; and the Doctrine of Ideas explains 
how this is possible. 

So far the Doctrine of Ideas answers its primajw 
purpose, and is a reply (by no means the least intel- 
ligible and satisfactory reply) to a question still agi- 
tated among philosophers: What is the ground of 
geometrical (and other necessary) tmtht 

But Plato seems, in many of 1 ^ writings, to extend 
this doctrine much further; and to assume, not only 
Ideas of Space and its properties, from which geome- 



ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON PLATO. 1 3 

trical truths are derived; but of Belations, as the 
Relations of Like and Unlike, Greater and liess; and 
of mere material objects, Tables and Chairs. Now 
to assume Ideas of such things as these solves no dif- 
ficulty and is supported by no argument. In this 
respect the Ideal theory is of no value in Science. 

It is curious that we have a very acute refutation 
of the Ideal theory in this sense, not only in Aristotle, 
the open opponent of Plato on this subject, but in the 
Platonic writings themselves : namely, in the Dialogue 
entitled Parmenides; which, <fa this lyxd on other ac- 
counts, I consider to be the work not of Plato, but of 
an opponent of Plato*. 

2. 1 have spoken, in the preceding chapter, of 
Plato’s doctrine that truth is to be obtained by dis- 
cerning the One in the Many. This expression is 
used, it would seem, in a somewhat large and fluctuat- 
ing way, to mean several things; as for instance, 
finding the one kind in many individiLah (for in- 
stance, the one idea of dog in»many dogs); or the 
one law in many pheminmia (for instance, the eccen- 
trics and epicycles in many planets). In any inter- 
pretation, it is too loose and indefinite a rule to be of 
much value in the formation of sciences, though it 
has been recently again propounded as important in 
modem times. 

3. I have said, in the preceding chapter, that 
Plato, though he saw that scientific truths of great 
geneitdity might be obtained and were to be arrived 
at by philosophers, overlooked the necessity of a pra- 
dual and mccesmyc advance from the less general to 
the more general; and I have described this as a 

dimness of vision.’ I must now acknowledge that this 
is not a very appropriate phrase; for not only no 
acuteness of vision could have enabled Plato to see 
that gradual generalization in science of which, as yet, 
tio eicample l^d appeared; but it was very fortunate 
fmr the progress of truth, at that time, that Plato had 
imagined to himself the object of science to be gdheral 


1 Tblfl matter is further dteenmeS the Apipendiz» Eway A. 




14 PHILOSOPHY OP BISCOVBHY, 

and sublime truths which prove thomselves to be true 
by the light of their own generality and symmetry. 
It is worth while to illustrate this notice of Plato by 
some references to his writings. 

In the Sixth Book of the Repuhli^ Plato treats of 
the then existing sciences as the instruments of a 
philosophical education. Among the most conspicu- 
ous of these is astronomy. He there ridicules the 
notion that astronomy is a sublime science because it 
makes men look upward. He asserts that the really 
sublime science^ is thatVhich makes men look at the 
realUieSy which are suggested by the appearances seen 
in the heavens : namely, the spheres which revolve and 
carry the luminaries in their revolutions. Now it was 
no doubt the detemined search for such ^'realities” 
as these which gave birth to the Greek Asironmiy^ 
that first and critical step in the progress of science. 
Plato, by his exhortations, if not by his suggestions, 
contributed efiectually, as I conceive, to this step in 
science. In the samift manner he requires a science of 
Ha/rmonics which shall be fic^e from the defects and 
inaccuracies which occur in actual instruments. This 
belief that the universe was full of mathematical rela- 
tions, and that these were the true objects of scientific 
research, gave a vigour, largeness of mind, and con- 
fidence to the Greek speculators which no moi*e cau- 
tious view of the problem of scientific discovery could 
have supplied. It was well that this advanced guard 
in the army of discoverers was filled with indomitable 
courage^ boundless hopes, and creative minds. 

But we must not forget that this disposition to 
what Bacon calls ci/rUicip(Uicm was full of danger as 
well as of hope. It led Plato into error, as it led 
Kepler afterwards, and many others in all ages of 
scientific activity. It led Plato into error, for in- 
stance, when it led him to assert (in the Tiknasm) that 
the four elements, Earth, Air, Fire and Water, have, 
for the forms of their particles respectively, the Cub^ 
the fcosahedron, the Pyramid, and tiie Octahedron; 
and again, when H led him to despise the practical 
controversies of the musidans of his time; wmoh con- 



ADDITIONAL REMAEKS ON PLATO. 1 5 


troversies were, in £sust, the proof of the truth of the 
mathematical theory of Harmonics. And in like man- 
ner it led Kepler into error when it led him to believe 
that he had found the reason of the number, size and 
motion of the planetary orbits in the application of 
the five regular solids to the frame of the universe”. 

How far the caution in fbrming hypotheses which 
Bacon’s writings urge upon us is more severe than 
suits the present prospects of science, we may hereafter 
consider; but it is plainly very conceivable that a 
boldness in the invention and application of hy|)o- 
theses which was propitious to science in its infancy, 
may be one of the greatest dangcra of its. more mature 
period: and further, that the happy effect of such a 
temper depended entirely upon tli^ candour, skill and 
labour widi which the hypotheses were compared with 
the observed phenomena. 

4. Plato has given a survey of the sciences of his 
time «s Francis Bacon has of his. Indeed Plato has 
given two such surveys: one, in the Republic^ in 
I'eviewing, as I have said, the dements of a philoso- 
phical education; the other in the TiniceuSy as the 
portions of a theological view of the uiiivei’so — such 
as has been called a Theodiema^ a justification of God. 
In the former passage of Plato, the sciences enume- 
rated are Arithmetic, Plane Geometry, Solid Geometry, 
Astronomy and Haimonics”. In the Timmus we have 
a further notice of many other subjects, in a way 
which is intended, I conceive, to include such know- 
ledge as Plato had then airiv^ at on the various parts 
of the universe. The subjects there referred to are, 
as I have elsewhere stated ^ these: light and heat, 
water, ice^ gold, geni^ rust and other natural objects: 
<>---odours, taste, rearing, lights, colour, and the powers 
of sense in general the parts and organs of the body, 
as the bones, the marrow, the brain, flesh, muscles, 
tendons^ ligaments and nerves; the skin, the hair, the 


^ HiMe nutteivAf^ airth«r dlucnssed In the Appendix, Ettej & 
¦ See Appendix, EbbajBi 
* Mid. /tut Se> h, 11. Additions ta3rd Bdt 




1 6 PHlliOSOPHT OP DISCOVBET. 

nails ^ the veins and arteries; respiration; genera^ 
tion; and in short, every obvious point of physiology. 
But the opinions thus delivered in the Timasua on 
latter subject have little to do with the piH:>gFes8 of 
real knowledga The doctrines, on the other hand, 
which depend upon geometiical and arithmetioal rela- 
tions are portions or prdudes of the sciences which 
the fulness of time brought forth. 

5. 1 may, as further bearing upon the Pl|tonic 

notion of science, notice Plato*s view of the constitu- 
tion of the human miiidc According to him the Ideas 
which are the Constituents of science form an Intel- 
ligible World, while the visible and tangible things 
which we perceive by our senses form the Visible 
World. In the visible world we have shadows and 
reflections of actual objects, and by those sliadows and 
I’eflections'we may judge of the objects, even when we 
cannot do so directly ; as when men in a dark cavern 
judge of external objects by the shadows which* they 
cast into the cavern. In like manner in the Intelli- 
gible World there are conceptions which are the usual 
objects of human thought, and about which we reason ; 
but these are only shadow^ and reflections of the Ideas 
which are the real sources of truth. And the Beason- 
ing Faculty, the Discursive Beason, the LogoSy which 
thus deals with conceptions^ is subordinate to the In- 
tuitive Faculty, the Intuitive" Beason, the Nousy which 
apprehends Ideas*. This recognition of a Faculty in 
man wliich contemplates the foundations — the Fundor 
Tmntal Ideas — of science, and by apprehending such 
Ideas, makt^ science possible, is consentaneous to the 
{diilosophy which I have all along presented, as the 
view taught us by a careful study of the hisi^ry and 
nature of science. That new Fundamental Ideas are 
unfolded, and the Intuitive Faculty developed and 
enlarged by the progress of science and by an intimate 
acquaintance wi^ its I'easonings, Plato appears to have 
discerned in some measure, though dimly. And this 
is th<^ less wondeiful, inasmuch ^ this gradual and 


* See these views further dlaeassed in the Appendix, Essay C. 




ADDITIONAL BEMARK3 ON PLATO. I 7 

successive extension of the field of Intuitive Truth, in 
proportion as we become familiar with a larger amount 
of derived truth, is even now accepted by few, though 
proved by the reasonings of the greatest scientific d^ 
coverers in every age. 

The leading defect in Plato’s view of the nature of . 
real science is his not seeing fully the extent to which 
experience and observation are the basis of all our 
knowledge of the universe. He considers the lumina- 
ries which appear in the heavens to be not the true 
objects of astronomy, but only some imperfect adum- 
bration of them ; — mere diagrams which may assist us 
in the study of a higher truth, as beautiful diagrams 
might illustrate the truths of geometry, but would not 
prove them. Tliis notion of an astronomy wliich is an 
astronomy of Theories and not of Facts, is not tenable, 
for Theories are Facts. Theories and Facts are equally 
real; true Tlicories are Facts, and Facts are familiar 
Theories. • But when Plato says that astronomy is a 
series of problems suggested by visible things, he uses 
expressions quite conformable to the time philosophy 
of science; and the like is tnie of all other sciences. 


c 



CHAPTER IV. 
Aristotije. 


T he views of Aristotle with regard to the founda- 
tions of human knowledge are very different from 
those of his tutor Platcj. and are even by himself put 
in opposition iSo them. He dissents altogether from 
the Platonic doctrine that Ideas are the true materials 
of our knowledge; and after giving, respecting the 
origin of this doctrine, the account wliich we quoted 
in the last chapter, he goes on to reason against it. 
^^Thus,” he says', “they devised Ideas of all things 
which are spoken of as universals : much as if any 
one having to count a number of objects, should think 
that he could not do it while they were few, and 
should expect to count them by making them more 
numerous. For the kinds of tilings arc almost more 
numerous than the special sensible objects, by seeking 
the causes of wliich they were led to their Ideas.” He 
then goes on to urgeveveral other reasons against the 
assumption of Ideas and the use of them in philoso- 
phical researches. 

Aristotle liimself establishes his doctrines by trains 
of reasoning. But reasoning must proceed from cer- 
tain First Principles; and the question then arises, 
Whence are those First Principles obtained? To this 
he replies, that they are the result of JSxperience, and 
he even employs the same technical expression by 
which we at this day describe the process of collecting 
these principles from observed fiicts; — ^that they are 
obtained by Inductim. I have alr^y quoted pas> 
sages in which this statement is made*. “ The way 
of reasoning,” he says*, “is the same in philosophy, 


1 Metagph, xlL Sev b. i c. UL sect a» 

* Analyt Prior, 1 30. 




ABISTOTLE. 


19 

and in any art or science : we must collect the facts 
(ra wrap^ovTc^i and the things to which the facts hap- 
pen, and must have as large a supply of these as 
|K>ssiblc, and then we must examine them according 
to the terms of our syllogisms.”... “There are peculiar 
principles in each science; and in each case these, 
principles must be obtained from experience. Thus 
astronomical observation supplies the principles of 
astronomical science. For the phenomena being 
rightly taken, the deinofistrations of astronomy were 
discovered ; and the same is flic case ^with any other 
Ai*t or Science. Bo that if the facts in e<ach case be 
taken, it is our business to construct the demonstra- 
tions. For if in our natural history (icara rijv toro- 
piav) we have omitted none of the facts and pro|>erties 
which belong to the subject, we shall learn what we 
can demonstrate and what wo cannot.” And again*, 
“It is manifest that if any sensation be wanting, 
there must be some knowledge wanting, which we are 
thus prevented from having. For we acquire know- 
ledge either hy Induction {iTrayuryff) or by Demonstra- 
tion : and Demonstration is from universals, but In- 
duction from paiiiculars. It is impossible to have 
universial theoretical propo.sitions except by Induction : 
and we cannot make inductions without having sen- 
sation ; for sensation has to do with particulars.” 

It is easy to show that Aristotle uses the term 
Induction, sis we use it, to express the process of 
collecting a gcneial proposition fi'om particular cases 
in which it is exemplified. Thus in a passage which 
we have already quoted*, he says, “Induction, and 
Syllogism from Induction, is when we attribute one 
extreme term to the middle by means of the other.” 
The import of this technical phraseology will further 
appear by the example which he gives: “We find 
tixtA sevei-al animals which ai^ deficient in bile ai'e 
long-lived, as man, the horse, the mule; hence we 
infer that all animals which are deficient in bile are 
Jong-lived.” * 


* Analyt, Friar, U. 23, mfX inv\fvyf,t* 
C2 


* AntUyt FotL L zS. 



20 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


We may observe, however, that both Aristotle’s 
notion of inductioi), and many other parts of his 
philosophy,, are obscure and imperfect, in consequence 
of his refusing to contemplate ideas as sbnsothiag 
distinct from sensation. It thus happens that he 
always assumes the ideas which enter into his ^ropoA- 
tion as given; and considers it as the philosopher’s 
business to determine whether such propositions are 
true or not : whereas the most important feature in 
induction is, as we have saiB, the inJtroduction of a 
new idea, and pot its tmployment when once intro- 
duced. That the mind in this manner gives unity to 
that which is manifold, — ^that we are thus led to specu- 
lative principles which have an evidence Jiigher than 
any othei^ — and that a peculiar sagacity in some men 
seizes upon the conceptions by which the facts may be 
bound into true propositions, — are doctrines which 
form no essential part of the philosophy of the Stagirite, 
although such views are sometimes recognized, more 
oV less clearly, in his expressions. Thus he says*, 

There can be no knowledge when the sensation does 
not continue in the mind. For this purpose, it is 
necessary both to perceive, and to have some unity in 
the mind (aurOavofiiwois ^ctv cv rc^ iy rg ^^xS) i 
many such perceptions having taken place, some 
difference is then perceived : and fiom the remem- 
brance of these arises Reason. Thus from Sensation 
comes Memory, and from Memory of the same thing 
often repeated comes Experience : for many acts of 
Memory make up one Experience. And fiom Exi>e- 
rience, or from any Universal Notion which takes a 
permanent place in the mind,<-r-&om the unity in the 
momifold^ the same some one thing being found in 
many fact% — brings the first principle of Art and of 
Science; of Art^ if it be employed about production.; 
of Srienoe, if alxiut existmice.” 

* AwUyt J^oet. it 19.. This conreetton ctoss not disturb, iho 

7 Bat the best reading seems to be general sense of the passage, that 
not button: and the danse must the ilrst piindpies of science are* 
be rendered “both to perceive and to obtained by finding the One In the 
retain the peioeptloa in the mind.’* Many. 



ARISTOTLE. 


21 


I tvill add to this, Aristotle’s notice of Sagacity; 
since, aJthough little or no further reference* is made 
to this quality in his phUosophy, the passage fixes our 
attention upon an important step in the formation of 
knowledge. ^‘Sagacity” (dyx^Voia), he says®, “is a 
hitting by guess (cvoroxui ns) upon the middle term 
(the conception common to two oases) in an inapprecia- 
ble time. As for example, if any one seeing that the 
bright side of the moon is always towards the sun, 
suddenly perceives why this is; namely, because the 
moon shines by the light of the sun? — or if he sees 
a i>erson talking with a rich man, he guesses that he 
is boiTowing money ; — or conjectures that two persons 
are friends, because they are enemies of the same 
person.’* — To consider only the first of these exam- 
ples ; — the conception hei'c introduced, that of a body 
shining by the light which another casts u];K>n it, is 
hot contained in the observed facts, but introduced 
by the mind It is, in shorty that conception which, 
in the act of induction, the mind superadds to the phe- 
nomena as they are presented by the senses : and to 
invent such appropriate conceptions, such “enstoclues,” 
is, indeed, the precise office of inductive sagacity. 

At the end of this work (the Lo^er Analytics^ 
Aristotle ascribes our knowledge of principles to In- 
tellect (i^oOs), or, as it appears necessary to translate 
the woixi, Intuition^, “ Since, of our intellectual habits 
by which we aim at truth, some are always true, but 
some admit of being false, as Opinion and Beasoning, but 
Science and Intuition are always true ; and since there 
is nothing which is more certain than Science except 
Intuition ; and since Principles are better known to 
tis than ike Deductions them ; and since all 
Science is Connected by reasoning, we Cannot have 
Science rest^oling Principles Considering this then, 
and that tne beginning of Demonstration cannot be 
Demonstration, nor the beginning of Science, Science; 
and since, as we have said, there is no other kind of 
truth, Intuition must be the beginning of Science.” 


^ Analut. i. 3^4. 


•IMcLU. 19. 



22 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEEY. 

What is hei'8 said, is, no doubt^ in accordance with 
the doctnnes which we have endeavoured to establish 
respecting the nature of Science, if by this Intpiiioiih 
we understand that contemplation of certain Funda- 
mental Ideas, which is the basis of all rigorous know- 
ledge. But notwithstanding this apparent approxi- 
mation, Aristotle was far from having an habitual 
and practical possession of the principles which he 
thus touches upon. He did not, in reality, construct 
his philosophy by giving Unity to that vvhich was 
manifold, or bjrseeWng^'in Intuition principles whicli 
might be the basis of Demonstration; nor did he col- 
led^ in each subject, fundamental propositions by an 
induction of particulars. Ho rather endeavoured to 
divide than to unite; he employed himself, not in 
combining fiicts, but in analysing notions; and the 
criterion to which lie referred his analysis was, not 
the facta of our experience, but our habits of lan- 
guage. Thus his opinions rested, not upon sound 
inductions, gathered in each case from the phenomena 
by means of approj^riate Ideas; but upon the loose 
and vague generalizations which are implied in the 
common use of speech. 

Yet Aristotle was so far consistent with his own 
doctrine of the derivation of knowledge from expe- 
rience, that he made in almost every province of human 
knowledge, a vast collection of such special facts as 
the experience of his time supplied. These collections 
are almost unrivalled, even to the present day, espe- 
cially in Natural History; in other departments, when 
to the facis we must add the tight Inductive Idea, in 
order to obtain truth, we find little of value in the 
Aristotelic works. But in those parts which refer to 
Natural History, we find not only an immense and 
varied coUection of facts and observatione, but a saga- 
city and acuteness in classification which it is impos- 
sible not to admire. This indeed i^pears to have l^n 
the post eminent faculty in Aristotle^s minA 

The influence of Aristotle in succeeding ages will 
come under our notice Portly. 



CHAPTER V. 


Additional Reuabks on Aristotle. 


I. /^NE of the most conspicuous points in Alie- 
va totle*8 doctrines as beanng upon tlie philosophy 
of Science is his account of that ^ode of attaining 
truth which is called Induction; for we are accustomed 
to consider Induction as the process by which our 
Sciences have been formed ; and w-e call them collect- 
ively the hiductive Sciences, Aristotle often speaks of 
Induction, hm for instance, when he says that Socrates 
introduced the frequent use of it But the cai*dinal 
passage on this subject is in his Analytics^ in which he 
compares Syllogism and Induction as two modes of 
drawing conclusions*. He there says that all lielief 
aiises either from Syllogism or from Induction: and 
adds that Induction is, when by means of one extreme 
term we infer the other extreme to be true of the 
middle term. The example which he gives is this ; 
knowing that particular animals are long-lived, as 
elephant, horse, mule; and finding that these animals 
a^^ee in having no gall-bladder; we infer, by Inr 
fmdixmy that all animals which have no gall-bladder 
are long-lived. This may be done, he says, if the 
middle and the second extreme are convertible : as 
the following formal statement may show. 

Mephant, horse, mule, Ac* are long-lived. 

Elephant, horse, mole, Ac. are all gall-less. 

If we might convert this proposition, and say 
All gall-less animala are as elephant^ horse, ij^ule, 
Aa : 


1 Anolyt Prior. U. 35* 



24 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVErvT. 

ve might infer syllogist^aily that 

All gdll-lesB animus are long-lived. 

And though we cannot infer this nyllogisticallj, we 
infer it by Induction^ when we have a sufficient 
amount of instances*. 

I have already elsewhere given this account of In- 
duction, as a process employ^ in the formation of our 
knowledge*. What I have now to remark concerning 
Aristotle is, that it does not appear to have occurred 
to him, that in establishing such a proposition as that 
which he gives « as his distance, the main difficulty is 
the di9covery of a middle term which will allow us to 
firame such a proposition as we need. The zoologist 
who wanted to knpw what kind of animals are long-^ 
lived, might guess long before he guessed that the* 
absence ^ the gall-bladder suppli^ the requisite 
middle term; (if &e proposition were true; which it 
is not) And in like manner in other cases, it is diffi- 
cult to find a middle term, which enables us to collect 
a proposition by Induction. And herein consists the 
imperfection of his view of the subject ; which con- 
siders the main point to be the proof of the proposition 
when the conceptions are given; whereas the main 
point really is, the disoovery of conceptions which will 
make a true proposition possible. 

2 , Since the maia characteristic of the steps 
which have occurred in the formation of tlie physi<^ 
sciences, is not merely that they are propositions col- 
lected by Induction, but by the introduction of a new 
conception; it has been suggested that it is not a 
chara^ristio designation of these Sdencea to call them 
IndiwUve ikimeea. Almost every discovery involves 
in it the introduction of a new conception, as the ele- 
ment of a new proposition; and the novelty of the 
conception is more characteristio of the stages of disco- 
veiy than the inductive application of it Hence as 


* See on tlifti lalidaofc App«n4ilc, ISsi^ 

* See the chapter on OiitalA GbatnoterletlBe of SdentUlo Indnction In 
tlw JfiA Sa. or in the <hy. 




ADDITIONAL ItfiMARKS ON AEISTOTLE. 25 


bearing upon tbe Philogophy of Disooveiy, the state- 
ments of Aristotle eonceming Induction, th<Aigh acute 
and vftluaUe, are not so valuable as they might seem. 
Even Francis Bacon, it has been asserted, erred in the 
same way (and of course with less e^use) in asserting 
Induction, of a certain kind, to be ihe great instrument 
for the promotion of knowledge, and in overlooking 
the necessiiy of the Iiwmtum which gives Induction 
its value. 

3 . The invention or discovery of a conception by 
winch many facts of observation conjoined so 
as to make them the materials of a proposition, is 
called in Plato, as we have finding tlw Om in the 
Many. 

In the passage quoted from the Lateir Analytics^ 
Aristotle uses the same expression, imd speaks y&ty 
justly respecting the forq^ation of knowledge. Indeed 
the TUlea of the chapters of this and many parts of 
Aristotle’s works would lead us to expect just such a 
Philosophy of Discovery as is the object of our study 
at present. Thus we have, Anal. Poet. B. il chap. 13 ; 
“ How we are to hunt (^ciktv) the predications of a 
Deiimtion.” Chap. 14 : Precepts for the invention 
of Problems and of a Middle Term:” and the like. 
But vrfien we come to read these chapters, they con- 
tain little that is of value, and resolve themselves 
mostly into permutations of Aristotle’s logical phraseo- 
logy. 

4 . The part of the Aristotelian {diilosophy which 
has most permanently retained its place in modem 
Sdences is a part of which a use has been made quite 
different from that which was originally contemplated. 
The Five words” which are explained in the Intro- 
duction to Aristotle’s Categories: namely, the words 
Qsnus^ Species^ IHfifermee^ Property^ Acddemtt were in- 
troduced mainly that they might ^ used in toe propo- 
sitions of which Syllogisms consist, and might thus be 
toe elements of reasoning. But it has so happened 
that these wcurds are rarely used in *ficiences of 
Beasoning^ but are abundantly and commonly used in 



26 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


the Sciences of Classification, as I have explained in 
speaking of the Classificatory Sciences^ 

5. Of Aristotle’s actual contributions to the PhysT^ 
cal Sciences I have spoken in the History of those 
Sciences^ I have" stated that he conceived the globu- 
lar form of the earth so clearly and gave so forcibly 
the arguments for that doctrine, that wo may look 
upon him as the most eifective teacher of it. Also in 
the Appentlix to that History, published in the third 
edition, I have given Aristotle’s account of the Rain- 
bow, as a farther; exampR* of his industrious aocumular 
tion of facts, and of his liability to error in his fiicta. 

6. We do not find Aristotle so much impressed 
as we might have expectc'd by that great monument 
of Grecian ingenuity, tlio theory of epicycles and ex- 
centrics which his predecessor Plato urged so strong- 
ly upon the attention of his contemporaries. Aris- 
totle proves, aa I have said, the globular form of the 
eai*th by good and sufficient arguments. Ho also 
proves by arguments which seem to him quite con- 
clusive’, that the earih is in the center of the universe, 
and immoveable. As to the motions of the rest of 
the planets, he says little. The questions of their 
order, and their distances, and the like, belong, he says, 
to Astrology". He remarks only that the revolution 
of the heaven itself, the outermost revolution, is simple 
and the quickest of all; that the revolutions of the 
others are slower, each moving in a direction opposite 
to the heaven in its own circle : and that it is reason- 
able that those which are nearest to the first revolu- 
tion should take the longest time in describing their 
own circle, and those that are fiirtbest off, the least 
time, and the intermediate ones in the order of their 
distances, as also the mathematicians show.” 

In the MUaphyries^ he enumerates the circular 
movememts which had been introduced by the astro* 


4 art II, or ifiat Sc. 

< B. L c. zi feet a. * Bl UL CL L sect 9. 

^ JkC<ao,iLi%, •zli.S. 



ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON ARISTOTLE. 2/ 


nomers Eudoxus and OaUppus fer the explanation of 
the phenomena presented by the sun, moon *and pla- 
nets. he says, amount to fifty- five; and this, he 

says, must be the number of essences and principles 
which exist in the universe. 

7. In the Sciences of Classification, and especially, 
in the classification of animals, higher claims have 
been made for Aristotio, which I have diseased in 
the History I have there attempted to show that 
Aristotle’s classification, inasmuch as it enumerates aU 
the parts of animals, may be stid to certain the 
rials of every subsequent classification : but that it can- 
not bo said to anticipate any modem system, because 
the different grades of classification are not made mh~ 
ordinate to one another as a system of classification 
re(|uires. I have the satisfimtion of finding Mr. Owen 
agreeing with me in these views". 

8. Francis Bacon’s criticism on Aristotle which I 
have quoted in the Api>6ndix to the History'*, is 
severe, and I think evidently the result of prejudice. 
He disparages Aristotle in comparison with the other 
philosophei's of Greeca * Their systems,* he says, ‘ had 
some savour of experience, and nature, and bodily 
things; wldle the Physics of Aristotle, in general, 
sound only of Logical Terms. 

‘Nor let any one be moved by this: that in his 
books Of Animals^ and in his ProbleTns, and in others 
of his tracts, there is often a quoting of experiments. 
For he had made up his mind beforehand; and did not 
consult experience in order to make light propositions 
and axioms, but when he had settled his system to his 
will, he twisted experience round and made her bend 
to his system.* 

I do not think that this can be said with any truth. 
I know no instances in lAiich Aristotle has twisted ex- 
perience round, and made her bend to his system, lu 


w B. xvLc. tL • 

u On the OtoM^ieaUon of Mammalia, : a lecture delti|ered at Ctim- 
Mdge, JHUf its 1859, p. 3. 


»n.Lc.xL 



28 PHILOSOPHY OP DISOOVfi&Y. 

Im PrMema, he is so far &om giving dogmatical solu- 
tions of mbiQ questions proposed, that in most cases, he 
propounds two or three solutions as mere suggestions 
and conjectures. And both in his History of Animals, 
as I have said, and in others of his works, the want of 
system gives tliem au inc<dierent and tumultuary cha- 
racter, which even a false system would have advan- 
tageously removed; for, as' I have said elsewhere^ it is 
easier to translate a system into a true one, than 
to introduce system into a muss of confusion. 

9- It is cupous thht a fundamental error into 
which Aristotle fell in his view of the conditions 
which detei*minc the formation of Science is very 
n^iy the same as one of Francis Bacon’s leading 
mistakes. Aristotle says, that Science consists in 
knowing the catiaes of things, as Bacon aims at ac- 
quiring a knowledge of the^Iwww or essences of things 
and their qualities. But the history of all the sciences 
teaches us that sciences do not begin with such know- 
ledge, and that in few cases only do they ever attain to 
it. Sciences begin by a knowledge of the laws otplie* 
wmeiia, and proceed by the discovciy of the scientific 
ideas by which the phenomena are colligated,* as I 
have shown in other works**. The discovmy of causes 
is not beyond the humap powers, as some have 
taught Those who thus speak disregard the lessons 
taught by the histoiy of Physical Astronomy, of 
Oology, of Physical Optics, Thermotics and other 
sciences. But i&e discovery of causes, and of the 
essential forms of qualities is a triumph reserved for 
the later stages of each Science, when the knowledge 
of the laws of phenomena has already made great 
progress. It was not to be expected that Aristotle 
would discern this truth, when, as yet^ there was no 
Science extant in whidi it haft been exemplified. Yet 
in jd^tronomy^ the theory of epicycles and exoentrics 
haft immense valu^ and even has still, as representing 
the laws of phenomena ; while the attempt to find in 


, w Biitorff qfScUn^fic XdeoB$i wd Nomm Oroam/uM 



ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON ARISTOTLE. 2g 

itf as Aristotle wished to do, the ultimate causes of 
the motions of the universe, could only mislead. The 
Aristotelian maxim, which sounds' so plausible, and 
has been so generally accepted, that to know truly is 
to know the causes of things,” is a bad guide in 
scientific research. Instead of it we might substitute 
this: that * though we may iispire to know at last 
why things are, we must be content for a long time 
with knowing how they ara” 

10. Hence if we are asked whether Plato or 
Aristc^tle had the truer viewssof the nature and pro- 
perty of Science, we must give the pro^rence to Plato ; 
for though his notion of a real Intelligible World, of 
which the Visible world was a fleeting and changeable 
shadow, was extravagant, yet it led him to seek to 
determine the forms of the Intelligible Things, which 
are really the laws of visible phenomena ; while Aris- 
totle was led to j>ass lightly over such laws, because 
tliey did not at once reveal the causes which produced 
the phenomena. 

1 1. Aristotle, throughout his works, takes numerous 
occasions to argue against Plato’s doctrine of Ideas. 
Yet these Ideas, so far as they were the Intelligible 
Porms of Visible Things, were really fit objects of 
philosophical research j and the search after them had 
a powerful influence in promoting the progress of 
Science. And we may see in the effect of this seaTOh 
the answer to many of Aristotle’s strongest argu- 
ments. For instance, Aiistotle says that Plato, by 
way of explaining things, adds to them as many 
Ideas, and that this is just as if a man having to 
reckon a large number, were to begin by adding to it 
another laige number. It is plain that to this we 
may reply, that the adopting the Ideas of Cycles, along 
with the motions of the^Planeta, does really explmn 
the motions; and that the Cycles are not simply added 
to the phenomena, but include and supersede phe- 
nomena : a finite number of Cycles include 

sent an infinite number of separate phenomena. * 

To Aristotle’s argument Ideas cannot be the, 
Causes or Principles of T^ungs, we should reply, that 



30 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


tliough they cannot be this, they may nevertheless be^ 
and must be, the Conditions and Principles of our 
Knowledge, which is what we want them to be. 

I have given an accoimt of the main features of 
Aristotle’s philosophy, so as it concerns the Physi- 
cal Sciences, in the History of the Inductive Sciences, 
Book I. 



CHAPTER VI. 


Thjs Later Greeks. 


T hus whUe Plato was disposed to seek the essence 
of our knowledge in Ideas alone, Aristotle, slight- 
ing this source of truth, looked to Experience as the 
beginning of Science ; and he attempted to obtain, by 
division and deduction, all that Experience did not 
immediately supply. And thus, with these two great 
names, began that struggle of opposite o]Huions which 
has ever since that time agitated the speculative world, 
as men have urged the claims of Ideas or of Expe- 
rience to our respect, and as alternately each of those 
elements of knowledge has been (devated above its due 
place, while the other has been unduly depressed. We 
shall sec the successive turns of this balanced struggle 
in the remaining portionis of this i*eview. 

But W6 may observe that piactically the influence 
of Plato predominated rather than that of Aristotle, 
in the remaining part of the history of ancient philo- 
sophy. It was, indeed, on habitual subject of dispute 
among men of letters, whether the sources of true 
knowledge are to be found in the Senses or in the 
Mind ; the Epicureans taking one side of this alterna- 
tive, and the Academics another, while the Stoics in 
a certain manner included both elements in their view. 
But none of these sects showed their persuasion that 
the materials of knowledge were to found in the 
domain of Sense, by seeking them there. No one 
appears to have thought of following the example of 
Aristotle, and gathering together a store of pbrorved 
facta We may except, perhaps, assertions bdon^ng 
to some provinces of Natural History, which were 
GoUected by various writers : but in these, the mixed 



32 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


character of the statements, the want of discrimination 
in the estimate of evidence, th^ credulity and love of 
the marvellous which the authors for the most part 
displayed, showed that instead of improving upon the 
example of Aristotle, they were wandering further 
and foi-thor from the path of real knowled^. And 
while they thus collected, with so little judgment, 
such statements as offered themselves, it hardly ap- 
pears to have occurred to any one to enlarge the stores 
of observation by the aid of experiment j and to learn 
what the laws of natuc*e were, by trying what were 
their results in particular cases. They u^ no instru- 
ments for obtaining an insight into the constitution of 
the* universe,, except logical ^stinetions and discussions ; 
and proceeded as if the phenomena familiar to their 
predecessors must contain all that was needed as a 
basis for natural philosophy. By thus contenting 
themselves with the fects which the earlier jdiiloso- 
phers had contemplated, they were led also to confine 
themselves to the ideas which those philosophers had 
put forth. For all the most remarkable alternatives 
of hypothesis, so far as they could be constructed with 
a slight and common knowledge of phenomena, had 
been promulgated by the acute and profound thinkers 
who gave the first impulse to philosophy ; and it was 
not given to man to add much to the original inven^ 
tions of their minds till he had undergone anew a long 
discipline of observation, and of thou^t employed 
upon observation. Thus the later authors of the Qreek 
whools b<^me little better than commentators oh 
the earlier; and the common-places with which, the 
different schools carried on their debates, — the con- 
stantly recurring argument,^ with its known attendant 
answer, — ^the distinctions dtown finer and finer and 
leading to nothing, — render the specolatiions of those 
times a scholaetic, philosophy, in the same sense in 
which we employ the term when we apeak of the 
labours of the middle ages. It will be understood. 
that*I now refer to that which is here my subject, the 
opinions concerning our knowledge of nature, and the 
methods in use for the purpose of obtaining such. 



THE LATEE QEEEKS. 


33 

ktiovlecl^. Whether the moral speculations of the 
ancient world were of the same stationaiy kind, going 
their round in a limited circle, like their metaphysics 
and physics, must bo considered on some other occa- 
sion. 

*Mr. Grote, iu his very interesting discussion of 
Soci-ates^s teaching, notices also* the teaching of Hip^ 
pocrates, which he conceives to have in one respect 
the same tendency as the philosophy of Socrates; 
namely, to turn away from the vague aggregate of 
doctrines and guesses which ccftistitutod the Pliysical 
Philosophy of that time, and to pursue instead a spe- 
cial and more practical course of inquiry : * Hippocrates 
selecting Medicine and Socrates sel^ting Ethics. By 
this limitation of their subject, they avoided some of 
the errors of their predecessors. For, as Mr. Grote 
has also remarked, “ the earlier speculators, Anaxa- 
goras, Empedocles, Democritus, the Pythagoreans, all 
had still present to their minds the vast and undivided 
problems which have been transmitted down from the 
old poets; bonding their minds to the invention of 
some system which would explain them all at once, or 
assist the imagination in conceiving both how the 
Kosmos first began and how it continued to move on.” 
There could be no better remedy for this ambitious 
eri'or of the human mind than to have a definite sub- 
ject of study, such as the diseases and the health of 
the human body. Accordingly, we see that the study 
of medicine did draw its cultivators away from this 
ancient but unprofitable field. Hippocrates® condemns 
those who, as Empedocles, set themselves to make out 
what man was from the beginning, how he began first 
to. exist, and in what manner he was constructed. 
This is, he says^ no part of medicine. In like manner 
he blames and refutes those who make some simple 
element, Hot, or Cold, or Moist, or Dry, the cause of 


1 TheTQioaiiideroftlilftcliapterlB new In the present edition. 
> HitL ^Chneoe, Part IL chapi GB. 

* Ds AniMqua Medidna, c. aa 



34 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEET, 


diseases, and give medical pi'ecepts professing to be 
founded‘on this hypothesis. 

These passages are marked by tho prudence which 
practical study suggests to a calm and clear-sighted 
man. They can hardly be said to have opened tho 
way to a Science of Medicine; for in the sense in 
which we here use the word Science^ namely, a collec- 
tion of geneiiil truths inferred from facts by successive 
discoverers, we have even yet no Science of Medicine. 
The question with regard to the number and nature 
of the Elements of which bodies are composed began 
to be agitated, as we have seen, at a very early period 
of Greek philosophy, and continued long to be regarded 
as a chief point of ^physiological doctrine. In Galon’s 
work we have a treatise entitled, On ifie Elements 
according to Hippocrates; and the writer explains* 
that though Hipi)ocrates has not written any work 
with the title On the Elements^ yet that he has in his 
Treatise on ihe Nntnre of Man shown his opinion on 
that subject. That the doctrine of the Pour Elements, 
Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, subsisted long in the schools, 
we have evidence in Galen. He tells us^ that when 
he was a student of nineteen yeai's old a teacher urged 
this lore upon him, and regarded him as very conten- 
tious and perverse, because he offered objections to 
it. His account of the Dialogue between him and the 
teacher is curious. But in Hippocrates the doctrine 
of these four elements is replaced, in a great measure, 
by the doctrine of the Pour Humours of which the 
human body is constituted; namely, Blood, Phlegm, 
Yellow Bile and Black Bile. Galen dwells with em- 
phasis upon Hippocrates’s proof that there must be 
more than one such element ^ 

What,” he asks, is the method of finding the 
Elements of bodies % There can, in my opinion, be 
no other than that which was introduced by Hippo- 
crates ; namely, we must inquire whether there be only 
one^ element, eveiy where the same in kind, or whether 


4Llb.l,a9» •DrEIeiikia 

* In fornwreitltloiui I hSTe sot dotidjaiitlos to this passage. 




TH£ LATEE GREEKS. 


35 


there are more than one, various and unlike each 
other. And if the Element be not one only, but 
several, various and dissimilar, ^'ve must inquire in 
the second place, how many elements there are, and 
what, and of what kind they are, and how related in 
their association. 

Now that the First Merafeiit is not one only of 
which both oiir bodies and those of all other creatures 
were produced, Hippocrates shows from these consi* 
derations. And it is better first to put down his own 
expressions and then to expoflnd them* ‘ I assert that 
if man consisted of one element only he could not fall 
sick; for there would be nothing which could derange 
his health, if he were all of one IJement.* " 

The doctrine of One Element did not prevail much 
after the time of Hippocrates : the doctrine of Four 
Elements continued, as I have said, long to hold pos- 
session of the Schools, but does not appear as an 
important part of the doctrine of Hippocrates. The 
doctrine of the Four Humouia (Blood, Phlegm, Yel- 
low Bile and Black Bile) is more peculiarly his, and 
long retained its place as a principle of physiological 
Science. 

But we arc liere not so much concerned with his 
discoveries in medicine as with his views respecting 
the method of acquiring sound knowledge, and in this 
respect, as has been said, he I'ecommen^ by his prac- 
tice a prudent limitation of the field of inquiry, a 
rejection of wide, ambitious, general assertions, and a 
practical study of his proper field. 

In ascribing these merits to Hippocrates’s medical 
speculations as to the ethical speculations of his con- 
temporary Socrates, we assign considerable philosophi- 
cal value to Hippocrates, no less than to Socrates. 
These merits were at that time the great virtues of 
physieal as well as of ethical philosophy. But, as 
Hr. Grote well observes, the community of diara^r 
which then subsisted between the physical and ethical 
speculations prevailing at that time, ceased to ob- 
in later times. Indeed, it coas^ to exist just 
at that time, in, consequence of the establishment of 

^ D 2 



36 FHIIiOSOPHT OP DISCOVERT. 

flcientifio astronomy by tbe exertions of Plato and his 
contemporaries. From that time the Common Sense 
(as we call it) of a man like Socrates, though it might 
be a good guide in ethics, was not a good guide in phy- 
sics. I have shown elsewhere^ how the Common Sense 
of Socrates was worthless in matters of astronomy. 
From that time one of the great intellectual lessons 
was, that in order to understand the external world, we 
must indeed observe carefully, but we must also guess 
boldly. Discovery here required an inventive mind 
like Plato’s to deal with* and arrange new and varied 
facts. But in ethics all the facts were old and fami- 
liar, and the generalizations of language by which 
they were gi‘ouj>ed Virtues and Vices, and the like, 
were common and well-known words. Here was no 
room for invention; and thus in the ethical specula- 
tions of Socrates or of any other moral teacher, we 
are not to look tor any contributions to the Philosophy 
of Discovery.' 

N'or do I find anything on this subject among later 
Greek writers, beyond the commendation of such in- 
tellectual virtues as Hippocrates and Galen, and other 
medical writers, school^ by the practice of their art, 
enjoined and praised. But before we quit the ancients 
1 will point out some peculiarities which may be noticed 
in the Boman disciples of the Greek philosophy. 


7 Bist. Iiut Sc, addiUon to latroduction in Third Edition. 



CHAPTER VII. 


The Romans. 


T he Romans had no pliilosophy but that which 
they borrowed from tho TTreek9;«and what they 
thus received, they hardly made entirely their own.- 
The vast and profound question of which we h^ve 
been speaking, the relation betw{$en Existence and 
our Knowledge of what exists, they never appear to 
have fathomed, even so far as to discern how wide 
and deep it is. In the development of the ideas by 
winich natui-e is to be understood, they went no f\ir- 
ther than their Greek masters had gone, nor indeed 
was more to be looked for. And in the practical 
habit of accumulating observed facts as materials for 
knowledge, they were much less discriminating and 
more credulous than their Greek predecessors. The 
descent from Aristotle to Pliny, in the judiciousness 
of the authors and the value of their collections of 
facts, is immense. 

Since the Romans were thus servile followers of 
their Greek teachers, and little acquaintod with any 
example of new trutlis collected from the world around 
them, it was not to be expected that they could have 
any just conception of that long and magnificent ascent 
from one set of truths to others of higher order and 
wider compass, which the history of science began to 
exhibit when the human mind recovered its progres* 
sive habits. Yet some dim presentiment of the splendid 
csireer thus destined for the intellect of man appears 
from time to time to have arisen in their minds. Per- 
liaps the circumstance which most powerfully contri- 
buted to suggest this vision, was the vast intellectual 
pro^ss which they were themselves conscious of 
having xnade^ through the introduction of the Greek 



38 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

philosophy; and to this may be added, perhaps, some 
other features of national character. Their temper 
was too stubborn to acquiesce in the absolute authority 
of the Greek philosophy, although their minds were 
not inventive enough to establish a rival by its side. 
And the wonderful progress of their political power 
had given them a hope in the progress of man which 
the Greeks never possessed. The Homan, as he be- 
lieved the fortune of his State to be destined for 
eternity, believed also in the immortal destiny and 
endless advance^f that Intellectual Bepublic of wliich 
he had been admitted a denizen. 

tt is easy to find examples of such feelings as I have 
endeavoured to describe. The enthusiasm with which 
Lucretius and Virgil speak of physical knowledge, 
manifestly arises in a great measure from the delight 
which they had f dt in l>ccoming acquainted with the 
Greek tlicorios. 

Me vero primum dulcos ante omnia Musee 
Quanim sacra fero ingenti perculsiis amore 
Accipiant, coelique viaa et sidera monstvvnt, 

Defectus Solis varios, Lunoeque laborcs ! . . . 

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas t 

Ye sacred Muses, with whos<> beauty fir’d. 

My soul is ravisht and my brain inspir’d: 

'Whose Priest I am, whose holy fillets wear. 

Would you your Poet’s first petition hear, 

Give me the ways of wand’ring stars to know. 

The depth of Heaven above and Earth below; 

Teach me tho various labours of the Moon, 

And whence proceed th* eclipses of the Sun; 

Why flowing Tides prevail upon the main. 

And in what dark abyss they shrink again; 

What shakes the solid Earth; what cause delays 
The Summer Kights; and shortens Winter Days. . . 

Happy the man who, studying Nature’s Laws, 

Tbrou^ known effects can trace the secret cause ! 

Ovid' expresses a similar feeling. 

Felices animos quibus heso cognoscere primis 
• Inque domos superas scandere cura f m ! . , » 


XLlh.Ll'a«& 



THIS ROMANS. 


39 


Admovere oculis distantia sidera nostrU 
Ailtheraque ingenio supposuero suo. 

Sic petitur coolum: non iit ferat Ossam Olympus 
Summaque Pcliacus sidera tanget apex. 

Thrice happy souls! to whom 'twas given to rise 
To truths like these, and scale the spangled skies! 

Far distant stars to clearest view they brought. 

And girdled ether with their chain of thought. 

So heaven is reached: — not as of old they tried 
By mountains piled on mountains in their pride. 

And from the whole tenour of these and fdmilar 
passages, it is evident tliat iiiteljcctual pleasure 
which arises from our first introduction to a beautiful 
physical theory had a main share in producing this 
enthusiasm at the contemplation of the victories of 
science; altliough undoubtedly the moral philosophy, 
which was never separated from the natui*al philosophy, 
and the trium])h over superstitious fear's, which a know- 
ledge of nature was supposed to furnish, abided warmth 
to the feeling of exultation. 

We may trace a similar impression in the ardent 
expressions which Pliny* makes use of in speaking of 
the early astronomers, and which we have quoted in 
the History, “ Great men ! elevated above the com- 
mon standard of human nature, by discovering the 
laws which celestial occurrences obey, and by freeing 
the wretched mind of man from the fears which 
eclipses inspired.” 

This exulting contemplation of what science had 
done, naturally led the mind to an anticipation of 
further achievements still to be perfonnetL Expres- 
sions of this feeling occur in Seneca, and are of the 
most remarkable kind, as the following example will 
show^: 

Why do wc wonder that comets, so rare a pheno- 
menon, have not yet had their laws assigned? — that we 
should know so little of their beginning and their eu^ 
when their recurrence is at wide intervals? It is not 
yet fifteen hundred years since Greece, 

Stellis nuineros et nomina fecit. 







40 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

^ reckoned the stars, and gave them names/ There 
are still many nations which are acquainted with the 
heavens by sight only ; which do not yet know why the 
moon disappears, why she is eclipsed. It is but lately 
that among us philosophy lias reduced these matters 
to a certainty. The day shall come when the course 
of time and the labour of a maturer age shall bring 
to light what is yet concealed. Ono generation, even 
if it devoted itself to the skies, is not enough for re- 
searches so extensive. How then can it be so, when 
we divide this scanty aUoivance of years into no equal 
shares bctweeif our studies and our vices! These 
things then must be explained by a long succession of 
inquiries. We have but just begun to know how 
arise the morning 'and evening ap2>earance3, the sta- 
tions, the progressions, and the retrogradations of the 
fixed stars which put themselves in our way ; — which 
appearing perpetually in another and another place 
compel us to be curious. Some ono will hereafter 
demonstrate in what region the comets wander ; why 
they move so far asunder from the rest; of what size 
and nature they are. Let us be content witli wliat we 
have discovered : let posterity contribute its share to 
truth.” Again he adds^ iu the same strain: *^Let 
us not wonder tliat what lies so deep is brought out 
so slowly. How many animals have become known 
for the first time iu this age! And the members of 
future generations shall know many of which we are 
ignorant. Many things are reserved for ages to come, 
when our memoty shall have passed away. The world 
would be a small thing indeed, if it did not contain 
matter of inquiiy for ml the world. Eleusis .rcseiryes 
something for the second visit of the worshipper. So 
too Natwre does not out once disclose all her mysteries. 
We think ourselves initiated; we are but in the ves- 
tibule. The arcana are not thrown open without 
distinction and without reserve. This age will see 
some things; that which comes after us, others.” 


Q!ua:tS.NaL viL 30, 31, 



THE KOMANS. " 4 1 

While we admire the happy coincidence of these 
conjectures with the soundest views which the history 
of science teaches us, we must not forget that they 
are merely conjectures, suggested by very vague im- 
pressions, and associated with very scanty conceptions 
of the laws of nature. Seneca’s Naiural QuestionSy 
from which the above extract is talflen, contains a series 
of dissertations on various subjects of Natural Philo- 
sophy; as Meteors, Rainbows, Lightnings, Springs, 
Rivers, Snow, Hail, Rain, Wind, Earthquakes and 
Comets. In the whole of these dissertations, the 
statements are loose, and the explanations of little or 
no value. Perhaps it may be worth our while to 
notice a case in which he refers to an observation of 
his own, although his conclusion froloi it be enoneous. 
He is arguing® against the opinion that Springs arise 
from the water which falls in rain. ‘‘In the first 
p-lace,” he says, “ I, a very diligent digger in my vine- 
yard, affinu that no rain is so heavy as to moisten the 
earth to the deptli of more than ten feet. All the 
moisture is consumed in this outer crust, and descends 
not to the lower part.” We have here something of 
the nature of an experiment; and indeed, as we may 
rojidily conceive, the instinct which impels man to 
seek truth by cxi>eriment can never be altogether ex- 
tinguished. Seneca’s experiment was deprived of its 
value by the indistinctness of Ids ideas, which led him 
to rest in the crude conception of the water being 
“ consumed ” in the superficial crust of the earth. 

It is unnecessary to pursue further the reasonings 
of the Romans on such subjects, and we now proceed 
to the ages which succeeded the fall of their empire. 


*X^td.UL7. 



CHAPTER VIIL 


Aba%iak Philosophers. 


I HAVE noticed certain additions to Physical Science 
made by tlie Arabians; namely, in Astronomy*. 
The discovery of the motion of the Sun’s Apogee by 
Albategnius, and the discovery of the Moon’s VartaCt07i 
by Aboul-Wefa; a&d in Optics* the assertion of Alhazen 
that the angle of reflection is not proportional to the 
angle of incidence, as Ptolemy had supposed : and cer- 
tain steps in the philosophy of vision. We must also 
suppose, as the Arabic word alkali reminds us, that 
the Arabians contributed to lay the foundations of che- 
mistry. The question which we have here to ask is, 
whether the Arabians made any steps beyond their 
predecessors in the philosophy of discovery. And to 
this question, 1 conceive the answer must be this: 
that among them as among the Greeks, those who 
practically observed nature, and especially those who 
made discoveries in Science, must have hatl a practical 
acquaintance with some of the maxims which are 
ezemplifiod in the formation of Science. To discover 
that the Apogee of the Sun was 17 degrees distant 
from the point where Ptolemy had placed it, Alba- 
tegnius in^e careful observations, and referred them 
to the theory of the eccentric, so as to verify or correct 
that theory. And when, in the eleventh century, 
Arzachcl ibund the Apogee to be less advanced than 
Albategnius had found it, he proceeded again to cor- 
rect the theory by introducing a new movement of the 
equinoctial points, which waa called the Trepidalwih. 


1 ma, Ind Sc. b UL c. Iv. feet. 8. 





ARABIAN PHILOSOPHERS. 4$ 

It appeared afterwards, however, that, in doing this, 
he had had too much confidence in the observations of 
his predecessors, and that no such movement as the 
Trepidation really existed. In like manner to correct 
Ptolemy’s law of refraction, Alhazen had recourse to 
experiment : but ho did not put his experiments in 
the form of a Table, as Ptolemy' had done. If he 
had done this, he might possibly have discovered the 
law of sines, which Snell afterwards discovered. 

But though the Arabian philosophers thus, in some 
cases, observed facts, and referred yiose facts to 
general mathematical laws, it does not appear that 
they were led to put in any new or striking geneial 
form such maxims as this : That the progress of Sci- 
ence consists in the exact observation of facts and in 
colligating them by ideas. Those of them who were 
dissatisfied with the existing philosophy as barren and 
useless (for instance AlgazeP), were led to point at 
the faults and contradictions of that philosophy, but 
did not attempt, so far as I know, to substitute for it 
anything better. If they rejected Aristotle’s Organon^ 
they did not attempt to construct a new Organon for 
themselves. 

Indeed they do not appear even to have had suffi- 
cient confidence in the r^ truth of the astronomical 
theories which they had adojited from tlie Greeks, 
always to correct and extend those where their obser- 
vations showed that they i*equired correction and ex- 
tension. Sometimes they did this, but not generally 
enough. When Arzachel found by obseivation the 
Apogee of the Sun to be situated too far back, he ven- 
tured to correct Ptolemy’s statement of its motion. 
But when Aboul-Wefa had really discovered the Vari- 
ation of the Moon’s motion, he did not express it 
by means of an epicycle. If ho had done so, he would 
have made it unnecessaiy for Tyebo Bnihe at a later 
period to make the same discovery. 


• See nut, Ind, Sa lx Iv. c. L 




4^ PHILOSOPHT OP DISCOVERY. 

The moral of this incident is the same moral which we 
have perpetually to note as taught us at every step by 
the histoiy of Science ; — namely, the necessity of con- 
stant, careful and exact observation of Facts ; and the 
advantage of devising a Theory, (even if it have to be 
afterwai^ rejected,) by which the Facts shall bo 
bound together into a coherent whole. 



CIIAPTBR IX. 

The Schoolmen of the Middle Ages. 


I N the History of the Scietices 1 have devoted a Book 
to the state of Science in the middle ages^ and have 
endeavoured to analyse the intellectual defects of that 
period. Among the characteristic features of the hu- 
man mind during those times, 1 haVe noticed Indis- 
tinctness of Ideas, a Comnientatorial Spirit, Mysticism, 
and Dogmatism. The account there given of this 
poiiion of the history of man belongs, in reality, 
rather to the History of Ideas than to the History of 
Progressive Science. For, as we have there remarked, 
theoretical Science was, during the period of which we 
speak, almost entirely stationaiy; and the investiga- 
tion of the causes of such a state of things may be 
considered as a pa-rt of that review in which we are 
now engaged, of the vicissitudes of man’s acquaintance 
with the methods of discovery. But when wc offered 
to the world a history of science, to leave so large a 
chasm unexplained, would have made the series of 
events seem defective and broken; and the survey of 
the Middle Ages was therefore inserted. 1 would beg 
to refer to that portion of the former work the reader 
who wishes for information in addition to what is here 
given. 

The Indistinctness of Ideas and the Commenta- 
torial Disposition of those ages have already been here 
brought under our notice. Tiewed with reference to 
^the opposition between Experience and Ideas, on 
which point, as We have said, the succession of opinions 
in a gx^t measure turns, it is clear that the commdn- 
tatoii^ method belongs to the ideal side of the ques- 
tion: for the commentator seeks for such knowledge 



46 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

as he values, by analysing and iUastmting wliat his 
author has said; and, contout with this xnatetial of 
speculation, does not desire to ad<l to it new stores of 
experience and observation. And with I’cgard to the 
two other features in the^character which we gave to 
those ages, we may observe that Dogmatism demands 
for philosopliical theories the submission of mind, due 
to those revealed religious doctrines which arc to guide 
our conduct and direct our hopes : while Mysticism 
elevates ideas into realities, and offers them to us as 
the objects (\f c»ur religious regard. Tims the Mysti- 
cism of the middle ages anti their Dogmatism alike 
arose from not discriminating the offices of theoretical 
and practical pliilost)phy. M^-xticism claimed for ideas 
the dignity and reality of principles of moral action 
and religious hope: Dogmatism imposed theoretical 
opinions respecting speculative points with the impe- 
irative lone of rules of conduct and faith. 

If, however, the opposite claims of theoiy and prac- 
tice interfered with the progress of science by the con- 
fusion they thus occasioue<l, they did so far more 
by drawing men away altogether from mere physical 
speculations. The Cliris^ian religion, with its pre- 
cepts, its holies, and its promises, became the leading 
subject of men’s thoughts ; and the great active truths 
thus revealed, and the duties thus enjoined, made all 
inquiries of mere curiosity appear frivolous and un- 
worthy of man. The Fathers of the Church some- 
times philosophized ill ; but far more commonly they 
were too intent upon the great lessons which they had 
to teach, respecting man’s situation in the eyes of his 
Heavenly Master, to philosophize at all respecting 
things remqte from the business of life and of no im- 
portwee in man’s spiiitual concerns. 

Yet man has his intellectual as well as his spiritual 
wants. He has faculties which demand systems and 
reasons, as well as precepts and pramises. The Oirist-, 
um doctor, who knew so much more than the heathen 
pnilosopher respiting the Creator and Governor of the 
aniTerae, was not long content to know or to teach less, 
respecting the unirerse it8el£ While it was still main* 



SCHOOLMEN 07 THE MIDDLE AGES. 47 

tainod that Theology was the only really important 
study, Theology was so extended and so fashioned as 
to include all other knowledge ; and after no long 
time, the Fathers of the Church themselves became 
the authors of systems of utiivorsal knowledge. 

But when this happened, the commentatorial spirit 
was still in its full vigour. The leaimed Christians 
could not, any more than the later Greeks or the 
Homans, devise, by the mere force of their own inven- 
tion, new systems, full, comprehensive, and connected, 
like those of the heroic age of®i)hilosophy. The same 
mental tendencies which led men to Jook for s}>ecula^ 
tivc coherence and completeness in the view of the 
universe, led them also to admire (^nd dwell upon the 
splendid and acute sjKJculations of the Greeks. They 
wei'O content to find, in those immortal works, the 
answers to the questions which their curiosity prompt- 
ed ; and to seek what further satisfaction they might 
require, in analysing and unfolding the doctrines pro- 
mulgated by those great masters of knowledge. Thus 
the Christian doctoiis became, as to general philosophy, 
commentotoi's upon tlie ancient Greek teachers. 

Among these, they selected Aristotle as their pecu- 
liar object of admiration and study. The vast store, 
both of opinions and facts, whicli his works contain, 
his acute distinctions, his cogent reasons in some por- 
tions of his speculations, his ^mmetrical systems in 
almost all, naturally commended him to the minds of 
subtle and curious men. Wc may add that Plato, 
who taught men to contemplate Ideas septimto from 
Things, was not so well fitted for general acceptance 
as Aristotle, who rejected this separation. For al- 
though the due apprehension of this opposition of ldea,s 
and Sensations is a necessary step in the progress of 
true philosophy, it requires a dearer view and a more 
balanced mind than the common herd of students 
possess; and Aristotle^ who evaded the necessary per- 
plexities in which this antithesis involves us, appeared, 
to the temper of those times, the easier and* the 
pldner guide of the two. 

The Doctors of the middle ages having thus adopted 



48 PHILOSOPHT OP MSOOVEEY* 

Aristotle as their master in philosophy^ we shiiJl not be 
surprised to find thorn declaring, after him, thiit eX'^ 
periencc is the source of our knowledge of the visible 
world. But though, like the Gi-oeks, they thus talked 
of ex])ci^ment^ like the Greeks, th«^ wowed little 
disposition to discover the laws of nature by observa- 
tion of facts. This barren and formal recognition of 
expcrioiKio or sensation as one source of knowledge, 
not being illustrated by a practical study of nature, 
and by real theoretical trutlis obtained by such a 
study, remained over* vague, wavering, and empty. 
Such a mere acknowledgment cannot, in any times, 
ancient or modem, be considered as indicating a just 
apprehension of the true basis an<l nature of science. 

In imperfectly peiueiving how, and how far, expe- 
rience is the aoiu-ce of our knowledge of the external 
world, the teachoi*s of the middle ages were in the 
dark ; but so, on this subject, have been almost all tlic 
writers of all ages, with the exception of thejse who 
in recent times have had their minds eulighteneil by 
contemiilating pliilosophically the modern progress of 
science. The opinions of the doctors of the middle 
ages on such subjects generally bad those of Arist(»t}c 
for their basis; but the subje^ was often still further 
analysed and systematised, with an licute and metho- 
dical skin hardly inferior to that of Aristotle himselC 

The Stagiritc, in the beginning of his Physics^ had 
made the following remarl^ In all bodies of doc- 
trine which involve principles, causes, or elements^ 
Bcionce and Knowledge arise from the knowledge* 
of these; (for we then consider ourselves to kiww 
respecting any subject^ when we know its first caus^ 
its first principles, its ultimate elements.) It is evi- 
dent, therdbre, that in seeking a knowledge of 
nature, we moat first know what are its principles. 
But the course of our knowledge from &e tmngs 
which are better known and more manifest to ui, io 
the, things whiofa are more certain and evident in 
nature. For those things which are most evident in 
truth, are not most evident to m [And consequently 
we must advance from things obscure in nature^ but 



SOHCK)liMSN OF THB VIDDLE AOBS. 49 

to to'wwds tlio things which are really ia 
nature more clear and certain^ The things which 
are first obvious and apparent to ns are com^x; and! 
finm these we obtain^ by analysis, principles and ele- 
ments. We must pinceed from universals to particu^ 
lars. For the whole is l>etter known to our senjses 
than the parts, and for the same rea^son, the universal 
better known than the ^rtidular. ^nd thus words 
signify things in a large and iudiscriminate way, 
which 18 afterwards analysed by definition ; as we see 
that the c]iijdi*cn at fii^st call all men and all 

women moikery but afterwards Icam to distinguish.** 
There are* various assortions contained in this ex- 
tract wbicli came to be considered aa standard maxims, 
and which occur constantly in the writers of the mid- 
dle ages. Such are, for instance, the maxim, “ Ver^ 
scire eat per oansas scire;** the reinai*k, that ooin- 
poimd-s are known to us before their parts, and the 
illustration from the expressions used by childi*eiL 
Of the mode in which this subject was treated by the 
schoobnen, we may judge by looking at passages of 
Thomas Aquinas which treat of the subjeset of the 
human understanding. In the Sumnia TJieologiop^ the 
eighty-fifth Question is On the maimer and order of 
\vndeTBtanding<^ whidi subject he considers in eight 
Articles; and these must, even now, be looked upon 
as cxhilntiug many of the moat important and iuteiv 
eating points of the eaibject They are, Firely Whether 
our understanding understands by abstracting ideas 
(apedes) from appearances; Second^ Whether intelli- 
^ble sj^cies abstracted from appeai*ances are related 
to our understanding as that whkJi we understand, or 
that 6 y which we understand; Thirds Whether our 
understanding does naturally imderstand universals 
fii’st ; Foftirih^ Whether our understanding can under- 
stand many things at once; Fifik^ WheAer ow un- 

* d^tanding understands by compounding and dividing j 

* Sigethf Whether the understanding can err; Sevmdh^ 
>yhether one person can understand the ^ame thing 
better than another; FtgMhy Whether bur under- 
standing understands the indivisible sooner than the 

B 



50 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEEY. 


divisibla And in the discnsHion of the last pointy for 
example, reference is made to the passage of Aristotle 
which we have already quoted. It may seem,** he 
says, “ that we understand the indivisible before the 
divisible; for tlm PkilosopJieT says that wo mnierstand 
and know by knowing principles and elements; but 
indivisibles arc the principles and elements of divisible 
things. But to this we may reply, that in oiu* receiving 
of science, principles and elements are not always 
first ; for sometimes from the sensible effects we go on 
to the knowledge of itflielligible principles and causes.” 
We see that both the objection and the answer are 
drawn from Aristotle. 

We find the siinie close imitation of Aristotle in 
Albertus Magnus,' who, like Aquinas, flourishcjd in the 
thirteenth century. Albertus, indeed, wrote tretaiises 
coiresponding to almost all those of the Stagirite, and 
was called the Ape of Aristotle. In the beginning of 
his Phf/siesy he says, “ Knowledge does nut always 
begin from that which is first according to the nature 
of things, but from that of which the knowledge is 
easiest. For the human intellect, on account of its 
I’elation to the senses (^propter r^xionem q^iam habet 
ad semum), collects science from the senses ; and thus 
it is easier for oui* knowledge to begin from that which 
we can apprehend by sense, imaginatipn, and intellect, 
than frc;m tliat which we appreheml by intellect alone.” 
We see that he has somewhat systematized what he 
has WTOwed. 

This disposition to dwell upon and systematize the 
Icarling doctrines of metaphysics assumed a more defi- 
nite and permanent sliape in the op]:)ositiou of the 
Kealists and Sfominalists. The op|>osition involved in 
this controversy is, in fact, that fundamental antithesis 
of Sense and Ideas about whidi phUpsoidiy has always 
been engaged; and of which we have marked the 
manifestation in^ Plato and Aristotle. The,, question, 
What is the object of our thoughts when we reason ^ 
eoheerning the eternal worldf must occur to all 
speculative minds : and the difficulties of the answer 
iire manifest We must reply, either that our owip^ 



SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 5 1 


IdeB&f or that Sensible Tilings, are the elements of 
our . knowledge of nature. And then the acruplcH 
again occur, — ^how we have any general knowledge if 
our thoughts are fixeil on particular objects; and, on 
the other hand, — how vre can attain to any true know- 
ledge of nuture by contemplating ideas which arc not 
identical witli objects in nature. The two o]»po8ite 
opinions maintained on this aubj«‘ct were, on the one 
side, — that our general propositions refer to objects 
which are rcaly though divested of the peculiarities of 
individuals; and, ou the othf^* Ridc,-r'that in such 
propositions, individuals are not represented by any 
reality, but bound ttigetlier by a name. These two 
views w»ore held by the Il«3siUsta an^l Nominalists re- 
spectively : and thus the Jlealist manifested the adhe- 
rence to Ideas, and the Nominalist the adherence to 
the impressions of Sense, which have always existed 
as opposite yet c(»rrelafive bmdencies in mam 

The Kealists w^ero the prevailing sect in the Scho- 
histic tirru'S : for example, both Thomas Aquinas and 
Duns Scotus, the Angelical anti tlie Subtle Doctor, 
held this t»piiiion, although o])posed to each oilier in 
iuany of their leading dt»ctrine3 on other subjects. 
And as the Nominalist, fixing his atttmtion upon sen- 
sible objects, is obliged to consider what is the princi- 
pie of gencralizafiou, in order that the possibility of 
any general jiroposition may be conceivable; so on the 
other hand, the Bealist, banning with the contem- 
plation of universal ideas, is compelled to ask what is 
the prineiple of iudivldiialiony in order that he may 
comprehend the application of genoml propositions in 
each particular instance. This inquiry concerning the 
principle of individuation was accordingly a problem 
which occupied all the leading minds among the 
Schoolmen It will be ajqiarent from what has been 
said, that it is only one of the many forms of the 
. ftmdamental antithesis of the Ideas and the Senses, 
which we have constantly before us in this review. ^ 


1 Sea the opialon of AanJjuui, la Degexan^Ob Cm S^st, iv. 499: 
of Duns Sootus, iMd ir. 521. 


£1 




52 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


The recoguitiou of the derivation of our knowledge, 
in part at least, from Experience, though always loose 
and incomplete, appeal's often to be independent of the 
Peripatetic trailitioiis. Thus Richtutl of St. Victor, 
a writer of coiitem])Uitive theology in the twelfth cen- 
tury, says', that “there are three sources of know- 
ledge, experience, reason, faiUi. Some things we prove 
by experiment, others we collect by reasoning, the 
cei*tainty of others avo hold by believing. And with 
regal'd to tcnipoml mattoi's, we obtain our knowledge 
by actual exi^Kirieiicc*; the other guides belong to 
divine knowledge.’* Richard also proj>onnds a division 
of human knowdedgo which is clearly not derived 
directly from the ancients, and which shows tliat con- 
siderable attention must have been paid to such si>ecw- 
lations. Ife l)egius by laying down clearly and broadly 
the distinction, which, as we have seen, is of primary 
impoi-tatice, between practice and theory, Practwe^ ho 
says, includes seven mechanical arts; those of the 
clotliier, the armourer, the navigator, the htnitcr, the 
physician, and the player. Th&}ry is threefold, divine, 
natural, doctrinal ; and is thus dividcfl into Theology, 
Physics, and Matliematics. Mathenuitics^ he adds, 
treats of the invisible forme of visible things. Wc 
have seen that by many prc/found thinkers this word 
fornia has been selected os best fitted to describe those 
relations of things which ai'e the subject of mathema- 
tics. Again, Physics discovers causes from their effects 
and effects fwm thoir causes. It would not be easy 
nt the present day to give a better account of the ob- 
ject of physical science. But Richard of St. Victor 
makes this account still more romarkitbly judicious, 
by the examples to which ho alludes; which are 
earthquakes, tiie tides, the viHues of plants, tlie in- 
stincts of animals, the classification of minerals, plants 
and reptiles. 

XTnrle tremor terns, qq& ti marift alia tumesoant, 

^ Herbanim vires, aitimos imque feraram, 

Omne genns frutloum, lapidum quoque, reptifiumqtui. 


* Mer JBdieerptknum, LIK L c. L 


SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 53 


He further adds*, Physical science ascends from 
ofiects to causes, and dascends again from causes to 
effects.’^ This declaration Francis Baam himself 
might have ailoptedL It is true, tliat Bichard would 
probably liave lieeii little able to produce any cl^r 
and dchnite iiistances of knowledge, in which this 
ascent and descent wei’e exeini>lified ; but still the 
statement, even considered as a mei*e conjectural 
thought, contains a portion of that sagacity and com - 
prehensive power which we adryiiro so much in Bacon. 

Bichard of St. Victor, who lived in the twelfth 
century, thus exhibits more vigour and indei>ondeuce 
of speculative power than Thomas Aquinas, Albertus 
Magnus, and Duns Scotus, in the thirteenth. In the 
iuteiwal, about the end of the twelfth century, the 
writings of Arisbjtle had become generally known in 
the West; and had been elevated into the stmidard of 
philosophical doctrine, by the divines mentioned abt>ve, 
who felt a reverent symjiathy with the systematizing 
and subtle spirit of the Suigirite as soon as it was 
made manifest to them. These doctoi-s, following the 
exam[) 1 e of their greiit forerunner, reduced every })art 
of human knowledge to a systematic form ; the sys- 
tems which tliey thus framed wore })resonted to men's 
minds as the only true philosophy, and dissent from 
them was 110 longer considered to be blameless. It was 
an offence ogaiust religion as well as reason to reject 
the truth, and the tnith could l>e but one. In this 
manner arose that claim which the Doctors of the 
Church put forth to control men's opinions upon all 
subjects, and which we have spoken of in the Ilistory 
of Science as the Dogmatism of the !&iiddle Ages. 
There is uo difficulty in giving examples of this cha- 
racteristic. We may take for instance a Statute of 
the University of Paris, occasioned by a Bull of Pope 
John XXI., in which it is enacted, ** that no Master 
» or Bachelor of any faculty, shall presume to read lec- 
tures upon any author in a private room, on account 
of the many i>erils which may arise therefrom; but 


» 2V. AAl4ta.Lc.Tll. 




54 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEEY. 


shall read iu public jdaccs, where all may resort, and 
may faithfully report what is there taught ; excepting 
only books of Grammar tind Logic, in which there can 
be no presumption.*^ And certain errors of Bresciaii 
are condemned in a [Rescript* of the papal Legate 
Odo, with the following expressions : “ Whoixms, as 
we have been informed, certain Logical professors 
treating of Theology in their disputations, and Theo- 
logians treating of Logic, contmry to the command of 
the law are not afraid ^to mix and confound the lots 
of the Lord*s heritage; we exliort and admonish your 
University, all and singular, that they be content with 
the landmai'ks of the Sciences and Faculties which 
our Fathers have fixed ; and that liaving due fear of 
the curse pronounced in the law against him who 
removeih his neighbour’s landmark, you hold such 
sober wdadoni according to the Apostles, that yo may 
by no means incur the blame of innovation or pre- 
sumption.** 

The account which, in the Hidory of Scimcey I gave 
of Dogmatism as a cliarocteristic of the middle ages, 
has been indignantly rejected by a very pleasing 
niodehi writer, who has, wdth great feeling and great 
diligence, brought into view the merits and beauties 
of those times, termed by him Ages of Faith. He 
urges ^ that religious authority was never claimed for 
physical science : and he quotes from Thomas Aquinas, 
a jiassage in which the author pi-otcsts against the 
practice of conibunding opinions of philosophy with 
d^ictrines of faith. We might quote in return the Ke- 
script* of Stephtm, bishoji of Paris, in which he declares 
that there can be but one truth, and rejects the dis- 
tinction of things being true according to philosophy 
and not according to the Catholic faith ; and it might 
be added, that among the errors condemned in this 
document are some of Thomas Aquinas himself We 
might farther oliserve, that if no physical doctriuea 

^ Teno^man, vUI. 461^ 

* Jtfore* vUL p. 

* Teanemoii, viii. 4S1X ’ 



SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 55 

were condemued m the times of which we now speak, 
this -^^as because, on such subjects, no new opinions 
were promulgated, and' not because opiniem was free. 
As soon as new opinions, even on physical subjects, 
attracted general notice, they wore prohibited *by 
authority, as we see in the cose of Galileo’. 

But this disinclination t<j recognize philosophy as 
indeptmdent of religion, and this disposition to find in 
new theories, even in physical ones, something conti*ary 
to religion or scripture, are, it^wo\ild seem, very Ba- 
tumi tendencies of theologians; and itw^uldbe unjust 
to assert tJiat these jjropensities were con&ied to the 
periods when tlie authority of papal Borne was highest ; 
or that the spirit w'liicli has in a *gi*eat degree con- 
trolled and removed such habits was intrcwluced by 
the Beformation of religion in the sixteenth centuiy. 
We must trace to other causes, the clear and geiier^ 
recognition of Philasophy, as distimit from Theology, 
and in<le[>en<lent of her authority. In the eaiiior ages 
of the Church, indeed, this separation bad l»eeu ac- 
knowledged. St, Augustin says, “ A Christian should 
beware how he speaks on questions of natural philo- 
soj>hy, as if they were doctrines of Holy Scripture ; for 


* If there w^re any douht on tlds 
subject, wu might refer to the writers 
who afterwardH questioned the su- 
premacy of Aristotle, and who with 
one voice assort that an infallible 
authority liad been claimed for him. 
Thus Liiunmtius Valla : Quo minus 
ferendi sunt receiites rcrfpateUd, 
qoi tuilUas seetn homlnlbus interdi- 
cunt llbertate ab Arlstotele dlssenU- 
endi, qui^ sopho* blc, non phUoso- 
phuia*' /y^.inZHa£.fretm«mau,ix. 
9 ^) So Lndovlcau Vlves; ** Sunt ex 
* Iditloiophih et ox tbeologii qul non 
ipjiim quo Aristoteles p^rvenit ex- 
tiemnm e»e aiunt natune, led quA 
pervenlt wm NdMmam ease om- 

nluto et certiuhnnm In natnra vlniii.*' 


frenneman, U. 43.) "We might urge 
too, the evasions practised by philo- 
sophical Reformers, through fear of 
the dogmatism to which they had to 
submit; for example, the protesta- 
tion of Telcsius at the cud of the 
Proem to his work, Jh Rerum No- 
twra: **Nec tamcn, si quid eonim 
qu» nobis posita sunt, sacrls Uteris, 
Uatholioseve eccleshe decietis non 
oohsereat, tenendum Id, quin penitua 
ntlldendum asseveramua eontendi- 
mawpie. Noque eniin humetna modo 
ratio quievis, sed ipse etlam smetca 
iUls «l it QUs nonton- 

gnial, abnegandua onaulno et Ipse 
etUua eat aenaua.** 



5^ PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

an infidel who should hear hini deliver absurdities 
ooidd npt avoid langliiug. Thus the Christian would 
be confosed, and the iii^del but littlo edified j for the 
infidel would conclude that our authors really enter- 
tained these extiavagant opinions, and therefoiv they 
would despise them, to their own eternal ruin. There- 
fore the opinions of philosophers should never be pro- 
posed as dogmas of faith, or rejciCteil as conti’ary to 
faith, when it is not certain that they are so.’^ These 
wor<ls are ejuoted witji approbation by Thomas Aqui- 
nas, and it i^said**, are cited in the same manner in 
eveiy encyclopedical work of the mid(||e ages. This 
warning of genuine wisdom was aftei wawls rejected, 
03 we Imve seen ; and it is only in modern times that 
its value has again beem fully recognizeiL And this 
improvement we must ascribe, mainly, to the prf)gress 
of physical science. For a gi'cat body of deniable 
truths on physical subjects being accumulated, such as 
had no reference to nor connexion with the trutlis of 
religion, and yet such as possessed a sti*ong iuteriist for 
most men’s minds, it was impossible longer to deny 
that there were wide provinces of kiiowhxlge which 
were not included in the dominions of Theology, and 
over wliich she had no authority. In the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries, the fimdamental doctrines of 
mechanics, hydrostatics, optics, magnetics, chemistry, 
were ostabli^ed and promulgated; and along with 
them, a vast train of consequences, attractive to the 
inind by the ideal relations which they exhibited, and 
striking, to the senses by the power which they gave 
man over nature. Here was a region in which pliilo- 
^phy felt herself entitled and impelled to assetrt her 
independency From this region, there is a gradation 
of subjects in which pliilosofihy gdvtoces more 'and 
n^re towards the peculiar domain of religion ; and at 
some intermediate points there haVe been, and pro- 
bably will always be, conflicts respecting the bonnd<^ 


• A4fa Fa^ via. ajr; to tbv tiia for 

Sootstiou. 




SCHOOLMEN OP THE MIDDLE AOES. 57 

line of the two fields of Bpccnlation. For the limit i» 
vague and obscure, and appeal's to fiuctuate and shift > 
with the progress of time and knowledge. 

Our busino&s at present is not with the whole ex- 
tent and limits of philosophy, but with the pmgress of 
physical science more particuhu'ly, and tlie methods by 
which it may l>c attained : and we are endeavouring 
to tmcc histoiically tluj views which have prevailed 
respecting such methods, at various periods of man's 
intellectual progress}- Among the most conspicuous of 
the revolutions which opinioift on this subject have 
uihlorgone, is the transition from an implicit trust in 
the internal powers of man's mind to a professed de- 
pendence ujxm external observation ; and from an un- 
bounded reverenc(j for the wisdom of the past, to a 
fervid expecti\ti()U of change and iinx>roveineut. The 
origin and progress of this deposition of mind ; — ^ihe 
introduotum of a stttte of things in which men not 
only obtained n bixly of indestructible truths from 
experience, and increased it from generation to gene- 
ratioii, but professedly, and we may say, ostenta- 
tiously, declared such to be the source of their know- 
ledge, and such their ]io}>es of its dtistiued ctiiver ; — 
the rise, in sliurt, of Experimental Philosophy, not 
only lis a habit, but as a Philosophy of Experience, is 
what wo must now endeavour to exhibit. 



CHAPTER X. 

The Innovators op the Middle Ages* 


^ Rayffiond LuUy, 

I. General Remarks. — In the rise of Experimental 
Philosophy, nuderstanding the term in the way just 
now stated, two features have already been alluded to ; 
the disposition to caat off the prevalent rcvei'e^ce for 
the opinions and methods of preceding teachoi’s with 
an eager expectation of tome vast advantage U) be de- 
rived from a change ; and the belief that tliis improve- 
ment must be sought by drawing our knowle<lge from 
exteinol observation rather than from mere intellectual 
efforts; — the Insurrection against Authority^ and the 
Appeal to 'Experience. These two moveinciits were 
closely connected ; but they may easily be distinguished, 
and in fact, persons were very prominent in the fomior 
part of the l^k, w'ho had no comprehension of the lat- 
ter principle, from which alone the change derives its 
valua There were many Malcontents who had not 
the temper, talent dr knowledge, which fitted them to 
he Reformcars. 

. The authority which was questioned, in the struggle 
of which we speak, was that of the Bcholaatic System, 
the combination of Philosophy with Theology ; of which 
Aristotl^ presented in the form and maimer which the 
Doctors of the Church had imposed upon him, is to be 
considered the representative. Whop there was do- 
nmnded of men a submission of the imnd, such as this 
system claimed, the natural love of freedom in man*s 
bosojn, and the speculative tendencies of hia intellect, 
rose in rebellion, from time to ttme, s^inst the ruling 
oppression. We find in all^perioda of the scholimtic 
, ages examples of this disposition of man to resist over^ 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 59 

Htrainod authority; the tendency being mostly, how- 
ever, combined with a want jof* solid thought, and 
showing itsidf in extravagant pretensions and fiintasti- 
cal systems put forwards by the insurgents. We have 
poiiitcHl out one such opponent* of tlie established sys- 
tems, even among the Arabian schoedmen, a moire 
seiwile race than ever the Europeans were. We may 
here notice nioi'e especially an extraordinary chai'acter 
who appeared in the thirteenth ccntuiy, and who may 
be considered as Ixdonging to the Prelude of the lie- 
form ill Plulof«»phy, although ne luid Ao share in the 
lieform itself. 

i. Raymonrl LuUy , — Eaymond Lully is perhaps 
traditionally best known sis an Alchemist, of which 
art he .ap]iears to have been a cultivator. But this 
was only one of the many impulses of a sj>irit ardently 
thirsty of knowledge and novelty. He had"*, in his 
youth, been a man of pleasure, but was driven by a 
sudden shook of feeling to resolve on a comph^ change 
of life. He plunged into solitude, endeavoured to still 
the remorse of his conscience by prayer and penance, 
and soon had his soul ponsessed by visions which ho 
conceived were vouchsafed to him. In the feeling of 
religious enthusiasm thus excited, he resolved to de- 
vote his life to the diffusion of Christian truth among 
Heathens and Mahoiuedana. For this piir}>ose, at the 
ago of thirty he betook liimsolf to the study of Gram- 
mar, and of thf? Arabic language. He breathcnl earnest 
supplications for an illumination from above ; and these 
were answered by his receiving from heaven, as his 
admii*ers declare, his Ats Mayna by which he was able 
witliout labour or effort to learn and apply all ktiow- 
ledge. The real state of the case is, that he put him-^ 
self in opposition to the ^tahlished systems, and pro-.- 
pounded a New Art> from which ho promised the most 
wonderful results; but that his Art really is merely ^ 
mode of combining ideal conceptions without any re- 
ference to real sources of knowl^ge, or any possibility 


> Algavel. tntL Sc, h, iv. c. u 

* TennOnan, tUL 830, 




60 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVBRT. 

• 

of real advantage. In a Treatise addressed, in A.l>« 
1310, to King Philip of France, entided LiKm La- 
mmtationis Duodecim Prindpiorttm PhilosophicB contra 
AverroistaSy Lully introduced Philosophy, accompanied 
by her twelve Principles, (Matter, Form, Qeueratiou, 
&c,) uttering loud complaints against the prevailing 
system doctrine; and represents her as presenting 
to the king a petition that she may be upheld and 
restored by her favourite, the Author. His Talnila 
GeneraUs ad omnes Scientias applimbilis was begun 
the 13th September, 1292, in the Hai’bour of Tunis, 
and finished in 1293, at Naples. In order to fiunie jui 
Art of thus tabulating all existing sciences, and indeed 
all possible knowltKlge, he divides into various classes 
the conceptions with wliich he has to deal. The first 
class contains nine Absolute Conceptions: Goodness, 
Greatness, Duration, Power, Wisdom, Will, Virtue, 
Truth, Majesty. The second class has nine Pelative 
Conceptions: Difference, Identity, Contrariety, Begin- 
ning, Middle, End, Majority, Equality, Minority. The 
third class contains nine Questunis: *\^ether? What? 
Whence 1 Why ? How great % How circumstanced 1 
When? Whore? and How? The fourth class coutaina 
the nine Most General Subjects: God, Angel, Heaven, 
Man, Imaginalivuwy Sensitivumy Vegetativuniy PUemsn- 
tativumy Insiruvicntativum, Then come niixe Prmdica- 
rmritSy nine Moral QualUieSy and so on. These con- 
ceptions are arranged in the compartments of certain 
concentric moveable circles, and give^various combina- 
tions by means of triangles and other figures, and thus 
propositions are constructed. 

It most be clear at once^ that n>al knowledge, which 
is the uiif9n of facts and ideas, can never result from 
^is machinery for shifting about, joining and disjoin- 
ing, empty oonciqxtions. This, and all six^ar schemes, 
go upon the supposition that the logical eonibinations of 
notions do of themsolves <^mpose knowledge; and that 
reayy existing things^ may be arrived at by a successive 
system of derivation from our most general ideas. It 
is imagined that by distributing the nomenclatare of 
abstmot ideas according to the place which th^y can 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 6 1 


hold in oiir propositionsi and by combining them ac- 
cording to certain conditions, we may obtain formulas 
including all possible truths, and thus fabricate a 
science in which all sciences arc contained. We thus 
obtain the means of talking and writing upon all sub- 
jects, without the trouVjle of thinking ; the I'evolutiOns 
of the emblematical figures are substituted for the 
opcmtioiHi of the mind. Both exertion of thought, 
and knowledge of facts, become superfluous. And this 
re4lection, adtls an intelligent author”, explains the 
enormous number of bof^ks whitli Lull}^ is said to liave 
written; for he might have written. those even during 
his sleep, by the aid of a moving j>ower which should 
keep his machine in motion. Having once devised 
this invention for manufacturing science, Lully varied 
it in a thousand ways, and followed it into a variety 
of developments. B»jisides Synoj)tical Tables, he em- 
ploys Genealogical Trees, each of wliich ho dignifies 
with the name of the Tree of Science. The only riHjui- 
site for the application of his System was a certain 
agreement in the numbers of the classes into which 
diflbrent subjects were disti*ibiitcd ; and as this sym- 
metry does not really exist in the operations of our 
thoughts, some violence was done to the natural dis- 
tinction and subordination of conceptions, in order to 
fit them for the use of the system. 

Thus Lully, while he professed to teach an Art 
which w-as to shed new light upon every part of 
science, was in fact employed in a pedantic and trifling 
repetition of known truths or truisms; and while he 
com{>la]ned of the eiTOi*s of existing methods, ho pro- 
posed in their place one which was far more empty, 
barren, and worthless, than the custom^y processes of 
human thought. Yet his method is spoken of* ^with 

. y 

* DegeraiidOi Iv. 535. Arte ComUti^iioriat paliilS no. et 

* MbniU's expressignB are, {Op. U qpA a TeSmpHmAjtprSa malgr< luoL 

vL p. 16) : y^tais Jenne, Je MaU comme JenemeprVMriien faeUe- 

prenotoqudquearXrt deLuUepiuaia ineut» exceptS les aria diviiulkoires 
Jacros f entrevotr bt^a des dSfoctob^ quo ue soul qaedeB^vip«l4B touted 
altSs, dout J’ai dlt qiielqae cboiadaiii pores, J'allrouvS qdelqoo chose d*es- 
ini petit lEssai d'Soolier int&lulS tfmable'enooie dasia d« Lutle.’* 



62 


PHIL*OSOPHY OP OISCOVJBRY. 


some praise by Leibnitz, who indeed ratlier delighted 
in the region of ideas and words, than in the world of 
realities. But Fj'aucis Bacon speaks far otherwise and 
more justly on this subject*. “ It is not to be omitted 
that some men, sw'ollen wdth emptiness rather than 
knowledge, have laboured to produce a certain Method, 
not deserving the name of a legitimate Method, since 
it is rather a method of iiiipostiire : which yet is 
doubtless highly gmteful to certain would-be philoso- 
phei's. Tliis iiiethud scattei-s about cc'i*taiii little drops 
of science in guch a tnanner that a .smattercr may 
make a perverse and oaten tathnw use of tlicrn with a 
certain show of learning. Such wtis the art of Lully, 
which consisted of nothing but a mass and hea]> of the 
Words of each science; with the intention that ho who 
can readily produce the words of any science *shall be 
supposed to know' the science itself. 8uch collections 
are like a rag shop, w'herc you find a patch of every- 
thing, but nothing which is of any value.” 

^ irortj*, \ ii. 



CHAPTER XI. 


The Tnnov'ators of the Middle Ages — coxtjxued. 


Roger Bacon, 

¦* 

W fJ now come t<j a j>hilosoplier of a very diflTwrent 
chamcter, wlio wiis imjKjlled to dedans Ids dissent 
from the reigning philosophy by the abundance of his 
knowledge, and })y Ins clear apja-oh^nMion of the mode 
in wliich real kiiow^ledge had been acquired and must 
l>e increased. 

Roger Bacon was born in r 2 r 4, near Ilchoster, in 
Somersetshire, of an old family. In lus youth he was 
a student at Oxford, and made extraordinary progress 
in all bmnche.s of learning. He then went to the 
XJnivorsity of Paris, as w'as afc that time tlie custom 
of learned Englishmen, and there reccivwl the degixie 
of Doctor of Theology. At the persuasion of Robert 
Grostete, bishop of Lincoln, he entered the brother- 
hood of Franciscans in Oxford, and ga\'e himself up to 
study witli extraoi’dinaiy fervour. He was termcHi by 
his brother monks Doctor Mirabilis, We knitw from 
his own works, as well as from the traditions concern- 
ing him, tliat he possessed an intimate iiequaintance 
with all the science of his time which could be ac- 
quired from books; and that he had made many re- 
markable advances by means of his own experimental 
labours. He was acquainted with Arabic, as w^U as 
with the other languages common in his tiioO. In 
the title of his wo^s, we find ilio whole ivniga of 
soience and philosophy, Mathematics and Mechanics^ 
Optics, Astronomy, Geography, Chronology, Ohemis^, 
Magio, Music, Medicine, Grammar, Logic, Metaphysics, 
Ethics, and Theology; mid judging from those which 
are published, these works are full of sound and exact 



64 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

knowledge. He is, with good reason, supposed to 
have discovered, or to have had some knowl(<lge of, 
sevcxnl of the most remai'kable iiiventioiis which were 
made generally known soon afterwartla; as gunpow- 
der, louses, burning specula, tidesoopes, clocks, the 
correction of *the calemUir, and the explanation of the 
rainbow. 

Thus ])Osscssing, in the acquirements and habits of 
his owu mind, abundant examples of the nature of 
knowledge and of the pi*ocess of invention, Roger 
llacon felt al.sq a deep interest in the growth and pro- 
gress of science, a spirit of inquiry respecting the 
causes which protluced or prevented its advaiict*, and 
a fervent hoj)e and trust in its future destinies; and 
these feelings impelled him to speculate worthily and 
wisely respecting a Reform of the Method of Philoso- 
phiziTig. The manuscri[)ts of his works have existed 
for nearly six hundred years in many of the libraries 
of Europe, and esjwjcially in those of England; and 
for a long i>erioil the very imperfect portions of them 
which were generally known, left the character and 
attainments of the author shrouded in a kind of mys- 
terious oliscurity. Abo*it a century ago, however, his 
was published* by Dr, S. Jebb, princi- 
jMilly from a manuscript in the Library of Trinity 
College, Dublin ; and this contained most or all of the 
separate works which were previously known t<j the 
public,* along with others still more peculiar and cha- 
racteristic. Wo are thus able to judge of Roger 
Bacon’s knowledge ontl of his views, and they are in 
every way well worthy our attention. 

The OjJtu Mimba h addressed to Pope Clement the 
Fourth, whom Bacon htul ^known who^ he was legate 
ill England as Cardinabbishop of Sabina, and who 
admired the talents of the monk, and pitied him for 
the persecutions ib which he was exposed. On his 
elevation to the papal choir, this account of Bacon’s 

1 tirUrUI(o^B(Uon,Or^^ MU Ma.Codioet)vhlfy^^ 
wrrwa^ Optu od CUmMm Imtiem mmc pHimm 

iimrlnm, FonUjlem Bomanim, e« 8. Jebb, UD. LondH 




INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 65 

labonm and Tiews waa sent, at the earnest request of 
the pontiff. Besides the Opus Majus^ ho wrote two 
others, the Opus Minus and Opus Tertium; which 
wore also sent to tlie pope, as the autlior says*, “on 
acc(»uut of the danger of roads, aud the possible Ipss 
of the work.” Those works still exist impubUshed, 
in the Cottonian aud other libraries. 

The ()pv9 Majna is a work equally wonderful with 
regard to its general scheme, and to the special trea- 
ties with whicli the outlines of the pfan are filled up. 
The pnifessw^d object of the worl? is to lurgc the neces- 
sity of a reform in the inode of philosophiziug, to set 
forth the realms why knowledge had not made a 
greater progress, to dinw back nttentipn to the sources 
of knowledge which had been uu wisely neglected, to 
iliseover other sonreos wdiich were yet almost un- 
touched, and to animate men in the imdiTtaking, by a 
prtwpect of the vast advantages which it offered. In 
the development of iliis plan, all the leading portions 
of science are expounded in the most complete shape 
which they had at that time assumed; and improve- 
ments <»f a very wide and striking kind are pru]K»Rt d 
in some of the princijial of these departments Even 
if the work had had no leading purpose, it would have 
lieen highly valuable as a treasure of the most solid 
knowledge and soundest sjieculations of the time; even 
if it had contained no such details, it would have been 
a work most remarkable for its general views and 
scojH?. It may be considered as, at the same time, the 
Encychpedia and the Mo mm Orgaiwn of the thir- 
teenth centuiy. 

Since this work is thus so important in the history 
of Inductive Philosophy 1 shall give, in a note, a view* 


i QpitsMajuMi Fmf. 

> Oo&Uatt of Boiser Boooii'i Opvtt 

PMtI. On iliofMircaiiMflOf human 
ignoniiiiw><-Aathorligr, Oustora, 
Popultr Opinion, and the Pride 
of ouppeei^ Knowledge. 


Pari IL On the source of perfect 
wisdom in the Sacred Scrip- 
ture. 

Part IlL On the Ueefulaen ^of 
^ Grammar. 

Part IV. OnthetnAlhlnessof Ma* 
thcmatlcs. 



66 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


of its divisions and contents. But I must now endea** 
vour to point out more especially the way in which 
the various principles, which the reform of scientific 
method involved, are here brought into view. 

One of the first joints to be noticed for this pur- 
pose, is the resistance to authority ; and at the stage 
of xihilosophical histoiy with which wc hero have to 
do, this means resistance to the authority of Aristotle, 
as adoi)ted and intei 7 >reted by the Doctors of the 
Schools. Bacon’S work* is divided into Six Parts; and 
of these Par^s, the S'ii’st is, Of the four universal 
(causes of all Human Ignomnce. The causes thus 
enumerated’ are: — the force of unworthy authority; 
— traditionary habit; — ^the imperfection of the undis- 
ciplined senses;— and the disjK>sition to conceal our 
ignorance and to make an ostentatious show of our 
knowledge. These influences involve eveiy man, oc- 
cupy every condition. They prevent our obtaining 
the most usefiil and large and fsiir (lo<;trinc8 of wisdom, 
the secret of all sciences and arts. Ho th(tn proceeds 
to argue, from the testimony of philosophci-s them- 
selves, that the authority of antiquity, and especially 
of Aristotle, is not infallible. “ We find" their books 
full of doubts, obscurities, and peqde.Kities. They 
scarce agree with each other in one empty question or 

(i) The neoeftilty of Mathemstici in (4) The ncowwlty of M&themattai In 

llttmnn Thlns« (published w- the State.— Of Climate*: a**, 

porately as the Specula MaUic- Uydrographr: 3°* Geogiaphy: 

fnaiiqa), 4‘». Astrolo^o'. 

The necessitj of Mathematics In PartV. On IH^rspeetlvo (pnblhAied 
Divine Things.— This study separately as PcrapediwiU 
has occttplfid My men; 2®. (t) The organs of vision. 

Geography : 3®. Chronology: 4®. fet Vision in straight lines. 

Cydes; the Golden Kumher, Vision reflected and reftacteiL 
4ra ; Natttnd Phenomena, (4) De multIpUicattone spedemm 
as the Rainbow: Axithme* (oil the propagation of the Im- 

tic : 7®. Music* pressions of light, heat, dut) ' • 

The necessity orMaihoiiiatfcs in PaitVl. OnExpetiiuentidflolencih 
Kooleslastloal ThlngpL AThe * Op, %. 

Certifleatioaof Mih: a®.The *IWdp.3. . 

Collection of the CUendiiv r p, to, 




INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 6^ 

one worthless sopliism, or one operation of science, as 
one man agrees with another in the practical oi>erations 
of medicine, Surgery, and the like arts of Secular 
men. Indeed,” he adds, ** not ordy the philosophers, 
but the siduts have fallen into errors which they have 
afterwards retract<‘d,” and this he instances in Augus* 
tin, Jei-onie, and others. Ho gives an admirable 
sketch" of the progress of philosophy from the Ionic 
?School to Aristotle; of whom he speaks with great 
applause. “ Yet,” lie adds* “ those who cama after 
liim corrected him in some thihgs, aiut added many 
things to his works, and shall go on adding to the end 
oi the world.” Aristotle, he adds, is now called pecu- 
liarly® the Philosopher, “yet there .was a time when 
his philosophy was silent and unregJirded, either on 
account of the rjirity of copies of his w^orks, or Iheir dif- 
ficulty, or from envy ; till after the time of Mahomet, 


• 

I wiU Ufirn a fspeciinen. 

c. vlii p. 35 : *• Thi^fse two kinrlH 
of philosophers, the Ionic and Itolic, 
ramiflfxl through many sects and 
various siiccesbors, till they came to 
the doctrine of Aristotle, who cor- 
rected and clianged the propositions 
of alibis predecessors, and attempted 
to i>erfect philosophy. In the Iltatic] 
Biiecesslon, Pythagoras, Archytas Ta- 
rentiuus and Tbnieus are most pro- 
minently mentioned. But the prin- 
cipal idtUosophors, adSocratos, Plato, 
and Aristotle, did not descend ftrom 
tlda line, but were lonlca and true 
Greeks, of whom the first was Thalea 
Hlleetua. . . Socrates, according to Au- 
gUKtlne In his 8 th book, la related to 
have been a disciple of ArchelauiL 
* This Socrates is called the father of 
the great phttosoidieta, since he was 
themaster of Plato and Aristotle,lrom 
whom all the sects of pbilosophen 
desimided...Pfiito,fint learning what 


Socrates and Greece could teach, made 
a laborious voyage to Egypt, to Ar- 
cliytas of Tarrutiun and Tiixneua, as 
says Jerome to Paulinas. And tills 
Plato Ls, according to holy men, pre- 
ferred to all philosophers, because ha 
has written many excellent things con- 
cerning God, Olid morality, and a fu- 
ture life, which agree with the divine 
wisdom of Ood. And Aristotle was 
bom before the death of Socrates, 
since he was his hearer for three 
years, as we read in the life of 
Aristotle . . . This ArlstoUe, being 
made the master of Alexander the 
Great, sent two thousand man into 
aU regions of the earth, to search out 
the nature of things, as Pliny relates 
in the Sth book of bis NaturaUa, and 
oompooed a thousand books, as we 
read In hU life.” , 

• IMd.pL3& 

* AwtonosiarioA 

T 2 




68 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT, 


when Avicenna and Averroes, and others^ recalled 
this philosophy into the full light of exposition. And 
although the Logic and some otlier works were trans- 
lated by Boethius from the Greek, yet the philosiv- 
phy of Amtotle fii*st received a quick increase among 
the Latins at the time of Michael Scot ; who, in the 
year of our Lord 1230, appeared, bringing with him 
|)ortions of the books of Aristotle on Natural Philo- 
sophy and Mathematics. And yet a small part only 
of the works of this ^uthor is translated, and a still 
smaller part «l8 in the hands of common Htudents.” 
Ho adds further*® (in the Third Part of the Opn& 
which is a Dissertation on language), that the 
translations which are current of these writings, aro 
very bad and imperfect. With these vie\v.s, ho is 
moved to express himself somewhat impatiently" re- 
specting these works : “ If I had,” he says, “ jx)wer 
over the works of Aristotle, I vrould have them all 
burnt; for it is only a loss of time to study in them, 
and a cause of error, and a multiplication of ignorance 
beyond expression.” The common herd of students,” 
he says, “with their hea<b, have no principle by wdiich 
they can be excited to any worthy employment ; and 
hence they mope and make asses of themselves over 
their bad translations, and lose their time, and trouble, 
and money.” 

The remedies which he recommends for these evils, 
are, in the first place, the study of that only perfect 
wisflom which is to he found in the sacred Scripture**, 
in the next place, the study of mathematics and the 
use of experiment**. By the aid of these methods, 

op. Mai. p. igBCR’ADtiflB ultra Id quod iraleat ox- 

Heo TrtS, to Jebb's edition. The pUcarL . . . Volgua studentutn ettm 
pan^ageR, there quoted, however, are capitibna suia non habet unde exd- 
not eatiuuta from the bat tetar ad aliqaid digsttui, et Ideo laa* 

(apparently) from the Ofw dfintu gnet et (Miitinat circa male timoidata, 

CotL Tib. e. 5.1 **91 haberem et terapus et etudlam amittU la ixm* 
poi^tatem anpra libeoa Ariatotelia. nSbus et expenaaa.** 
ego faoerem oninea creit)«(!| ; quia non 1* Part 11. 

eat Dial temporia amissto atndore In 1* Parts iv. r. and vU 
lUs, et causa errorls, et maltlplteatio 



INNOVATORS OF THS MIDDLE AGES. 69 

Bacon anticipates the most spIeiiiUd* progress for human 
kuowlcdgei. He takes tip sti'ain of hope and 
conMence which we luave noticed as so peculiar in 
the Roman writci ^ ; and quotes some of tlie ^lassages 
of Seneca which we adduced in illustration of this ; — 
that the attempts in science were at first mde and 
imperfect, and wci*e afterwards inqiroved; — ^that the 
clay will come, wdicm what is still unknown shall be 
brought to light by the progress of time and the 
labours of a longer jHtriod; — that one ago docs not 
suffice for inquiries so wide aifd variens; — that the 
])eople of iiiture times shall knr>w many things un- 
known to us; — and that the timc'sliall arrive when 
posterity will wonder tliat we ovcrloi>ked w'hat "was so 
obvious. Bacon himself adds anticipations more pecu- 
liarly in the sjjirit of his owm time. “ \V e have seen,” 
he says, at the end of the work, “how Aristotle, by 
the ways which wisdom teaches, cx)uld give to Alex- 
ander tlie empire of the world. And this thti Church 
ought to take into consideration against the infidels 
and rebels, that there may l>c a sparing of Christian 
blood, and especially on account 'of the troubles that 
shall come tv pass in the days of Antichrist; which 
by the grace of G(»d, it would be easy to obviate, if 
})relates and princes would cncoiu’age study, and join 
in searching out the secrets of nature and art.” 

It may not be iiupniper to observe liere that this 
Indief in the appointed progress of knowledge, is not 
combined with any overweening belief in the un- 
l)ouuded and imlependent power of the human intellect. 
i)n the contrary, one of the lessons which Bacon dmws 
from the state and prospects of knowledge, is the duty 
of faiih and humility. “To him,” he stiys'^ “who 
denies, the truth of the faith liecause he is unable to 
undei'Stand it, I will propose in re^dy the course of 
nature^ and as we have seen it in examples.” And 
^after giving some instances, he adds, “ These, and the 
like, ought to move men and to excite them to t]ie 
reception of divine truths. For if, in the vilest objects 






70 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

of creation, truths are found, boibre which the inward 
pride of man must bow, and believe though it cannot 
understand, how much more should man humble his 
mind before the glorious truths of God!” Ho had 
before said**t “Man is iiica]>ablo of perfect wisdom in 
this life ; it is hard for him to ascend towards perfec- 
tion, easy to glide downwards to falsehoods and vani- 
ties ; let him then not boast of his wisdom, or extol 
his knowledge. What he knows is little and worth- 
less, in respect of that which he believes without know- 
ing; and stilhleas, in respect of that which he is igno- 
rant of. He is mad who thinks highly of his wisdom ; 
he most mad, who' exhibits it as something ti» be won- 
dered at.” He adds, as another reason for humility, 
that he has proved by trial, he could t<*ach in one year, 
to a poor boy, the marrow of all that the most diligent 
pei-son could acquire in forty years* laborious and ex- 
pensive study. 

To proceed somewhat more in detiiil with regard to 
Roger Bacon s views of a Refonn in Scientific In4[uiry, 
we may obseiwe tliat by making Mathematics and Ex- 
periment the two great points of his recommendation, 
he directed his iin[»rovernent to the two essential parts 
of all knowledge, Ideas and Facts, and thus took the 
course which the most enlightenfnl philosophy would 
have suggested. He did not urge the prosecution of 
cxi>criment, to the comparative neglecjt of the existing 
niatliematiea.1 sciences and conception; a fault which 
there is some ground for ascribing to his gix^at name'* 
sake and succ(3Ssor Francis Bacon: still less did he 
C4>nteiit himself with a mere protest against the au- 
thority of the schools, and a vague demand for change, 
which was almost all that was done by those who put 
themselves forward as refonnors in the intermediate 
time. Rc^er Bacon holds his way steadily betwee^k 
the two poles of human knowledge; which, as we have 
seen, it is far from eaty to do. “ There are two modes* 
otknowing,” says he‘*; “hy argument, and by experi- 


op. Mad. p. ^Sdtiikto nlim wdunt ims prltidpta 

1* 2 bid. p. 445, eoe abo p. 4481, inv&ain per experimeitto, wd ttoa- 



INNOVATOBS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 7 1 

ment. Argument concludes a question; but it docs 
not make us feel certain, or aoc|uiesce in the contem> 
plation of truth, except the truth be also found to be 
so by experience.” It is not easy to express more 
decidedly the clearly seen union of exact conceptions 
with certain facts, which, as we have explained, consti- 
tutes real knowledge. 

Olio largo division of the Opu-s Majm is the 
Usefulness of Mathematics,” which is sdiown Viy a copi- 
ous enumeration of existing branches of know ledge* aa 
Chronology, Geograjthy, the Caflendar and (in a separ 
rate Pjirt) Optics. There is a chapter*^ in which it 
is proved by reasem, that all scien<.*c requires matlie- 
inatios. And the. arguiiients wdiicli are used to es- 
tablish this (loctnno, show a most just appreciation of 
the otiice of niuthematics in science. They are such as 
follows : — That otlujr sciences use examples taken from 
inatlieniaiics as th(‘. most evident : — That mathematicAl 
knowledge is, as it were, innate in us, ou which point 
he refers to the Avell-knowii dialogue of Plato, as 
quoted by Cicero : — That this science, being the easi- 
est, the best inti*tiduotioii to the more dilficult : 

— That in inatheniutics, things as knowm to us are 
identical with things as known to natui*o: — That we 
can here entirely avoid doubt and error, and obtiuu 
certainty and truth : — That mathematical* is prior to 
other scieiia^s in nature, because it takes cognizance of 
quantity, which is ap])ivhended by intuition, {inttiUu 
intdlect/mY “ Moreover,” he adds*”, “ there have been 
fouml famous men, us Robert., bishop of Lincoln, and 
Brother Adam Marshmaii (de Maiisco), and many 
others, who by the power of mathematics liave been 
able to explain the causes of things ; as may be seen 
in the writings of these men, for instance, concerning 
tlie Rainbow and Comets, and the generation of heat, 
and dimates, and the celestial bodies.” 


eln^tionei} per ergumenta facta oa 
tmadpIlB Inventifl. SI vero Aebeant 
liatieM eaperlentlam conchiBloiaim 
mumask particttlarein et comptetam, 


tnne oportet qaod habeant perfi^u- 
toriom latiiu adentin nobUla («ape- 
rimentalU)*** 

. 1 ’ WIK<ip. 64 . 




72 i Of J)IS00VJJ»Y. 

Blit undk>ubtedly the mast remarkable portion ot the 
Ma^ is the Sixth and last Bart^ which is en- 
titled ^^ Be Smentia experimental” It is. indeed an 
extraordinary circumstance to find a iviiter of the 
ihirteentii century, not only recogniziug experiment 
as one source of knowledge, but urging its claims as 
something far more impoiiiant than men had yet heeni 
aware of, exemplifying its value by striking and just 
examples, and speaking of its authority with a dignity 
of diction which sounds like a foreinurmur of the Ba- 
conian sentei^Jea uttered nearly four hundred years 
later. Yet this is the character of what we here End*®. 
“Experimental science, the sole mistress of speculative 
sciences, has three great Prerogatives among other 
parts of knowledge ; Eirat she tests by expci*imeut the 
noblest conclusions of all other sciences: Next she 
discovers respecting the notions which other sciences 
deal with, inagniEcent tiniths to which these sciences 
of themselves can by no means attain : her Third dig- 
nity is, that she by her own power and without resi^ect 
of other sciences, investigates the secret of nature.” 

The examples wliich Bjujoh gives of these “Prerogar 
tives” are very curious, exliibiting, among some error 
and credulity, sound and clear views. His leading 
example of the First Prerogjitive, is the Rainbow, of 
which the cause, as given by Aristotle, is tested by 
reference to experiment with a skill which is, even to 
us now, truly aflmirablc. Tlie examples of Uio Second 
Prerogative are three:— the ait of making an 
artificial sphere which sliall move with tho heavens by 
natural iiifiuences, which Bacon trusts may be done, 
though astronomy herself cannot do it — “ot tunc,” he 
says, “ thesauiiim unlus regis valeret hoc instruineu-i 
turn;” — secotully^ the art of prolonging life, which 
experiment may teach, though medicine no means 
of uocuriug it,exce]^)t by regimen the art of 


Veritates magpjttcM in tenni' UtiTHruitt, poUst Op, 

nla aUanim adeiiUuitiii in qnu p«r p. 465. 

ttttUun y\axa posnint Ubs fd«ntl«i, On* of ttieinsrvSionto of apRe* 
Imoc ioU Bcicnttnrum Uoulan ptamtlon li«o luMitlOMd, k tbn Seik 



INMOVATOBd OF TBB iflODJiB AGES. 7$ s' 

making gold finer tkan fine gold, which goes bejoiui 
the power of alchemy. The Third Prerogative of ex- 
perimental science, arts independent of the received 
sciences, is exemi^ified iii many curious examples, many 
of them whimsical traditions. Thus it is said tW,the 
character of a people may be altered by altering the 
air®*. Alexander, it seems, applied to Aristotle to 
know wdietber he should exterminate certain nations 
which he had discovered, as being irreclainiably bar- 
barous; to which the philosopher replied, “ If you can 
alter their air, permit them to live, if iA)t, put them to 
death.** In this part, we find the suggestion that the 
fire- works made by children, of saltpetre, might lead 
to the invention of a formidable military weapon. 

It could not be expected that Roger Bacon, at a 
time when ex})eriuiGniEd science hardly existed, could 
give any precepts for the discovery of truth by exfveri- 
inent. But nothing can be a better example of the 
method of such investigation, tlian his inquiry con- 
cerning the cause of the Rainbow. Neither Aristotle^ 
nor Avicenna, nor Seneca, he says, have given us any 
<?lear knowledge of this matter, but experimental 
science can do so. Let tlie ex})erimenter {experinieTtr 
tatcr) consider the cases in which lie finds the same 
colours, as the hexagonal crystsils from li'eland and 
India; by looking into these he will see coloui's like 
those of the rainbow. Many think that this arises 
from some special virtue of these stones and their hex- 
agonal figure; let therefore the experimenter go on, 
and he will find the same in other transiiarent stones, 
ill dark ones as well as in light-coloured. He will find 
the same effect also in other forms than the hexagon, 


of a dtagoii, vbteh it. appear* 1* ufwd tliein, and make them bound about 
m food by the Kihloplans. The mode In the air Vi a violent manner, that 
of preparing this food cannot fail to the hardueea and toughness of Uie 
rnnusQ the reader. Where thero are ftesh may be reduced, as boars aro 
isood ilylug dragons, by .the art which hunted and bulls art baited b 9 h>i'e 
they posseM^ they draw Uiem ont of they are*kUled for eating.*' Op. JfoJ. 
their detts, and hare bridles and sad- p. 47a 
dkttla feadiikem, and they ride upon ^ <1 op; MaJ. p. 47^ 




74 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


if they be furrowed in the surface, as the Irish ciys** 
tala are. Let him consider too, that he sees the same 
colours in the drops which are dashed from oars in 
the sunshine j — and in the spray thrown by a mill- 
wheel; — and in the dew-drops which lie on the grass 
in a inea4low on a summer-morning; — and if a man 
takes water in his mouth and projeots it on one side 
into a sunbeam; — and if in an oil-lamp hanging in the 
air, the rays fall in ceiiain positions ujx^n the surface 
of tlie oil ; — ^aiid in injj.ny other ways, are colours pro- 
duced. We hAve here a collection of inst»uiCt!S, which 
are almost all examples of the same kind as the phe- 
nomenon under consideration; and by the help c»f a 
principle collected? by induction from these facts, the 
colours of the rainl>ow were afterwards really explained.r 

With regard to the foi*m and other circumstances of 
the bow he is still more precise. He bi<ls us mejisure 
the height of the bow and of the sun, to show that the 
center of the bow is exactly opposite to the sun. He 
explains the circular fonn of the bow, — its being inde- 
pendent of the fonn of the cloiid, its moving when we 
move, its flying when we follow, — by its consisting of 
tlie reflections from a ‘^ast number of minute drops. 
He does not, indeed, trace the course of the raj's 
through the drop, or account for the precise magni- 
tude which the bow assumes; but ho approaches tf» 
the verge of this jmrt of the explanation; and must be 
considered as having given a most hapi^y example of 
experimental inquiry into nature, at a time when such 
examples were exceedingly scanty. In this respect, 
he was more fortunate than Francis Bacon, as wo shall 
hereafter see. 

Wo know but little of the biography of Boger Bacon, 
but vre have every reason to believe that his influence 
upon his age was not great. He was suspooted of 
magic, and is said to have been put into close confine- 
ment in consequence of this charge. In his work he 
speak.s of Astrology as a science well worth cultivat- 
ing. *^But,” says he, ^^Tlieologians md Deoretists, 
not being learned in such matters and seeing that evil 
as well as good may be done, neglect and abhor such 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 75 

things, and reckon them among Magic Arts.” We 
liave already seen, that at the very time when Bacon 
was thus raising his voice against the habit of blindly 
following authority, and seeking for all science in 
Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas was employed in fishion- 
ing Aristotle’s tenets into that fixed form in which 
they became the great impediment to the progress of 
knowIcHlge. It would seem, indeed, that something 
of a struggle between tlie progressive and stationary 
powers of the liuman mind wa j going on at this time. 
Bacon himself says", “Never wa« th§re so gi'eat an 
appearance of wisdom, nor so nnicli exercise of study 
in so many Faculties, in so many regions, as for this 
last foity years. Doctoi-s are dispersetl eveiywhei’C, in 
every castle, in every burgh, and especially by the stu- 
dents of two Orders, (ho means the Franciscans and 
Dominicans, ¦who were almost tlic only religious orders 
that distinguished themselves by an application to 
study") which ha.s not hapiHJued except for about 
forty years. And yet there was never so much igno- 
itiiice, so much ciror.” And in the part of his work 
which refers to Mathematics, he sJiys of that study^**, 
that it is the door and the key of the sciences; and 
that the neglect of it for thirty or forty years has en- 
tirely mined the studies of the Latins. According to 
these statements, some change, disastrous to the for- 
tunes of science, mnst have token place about 1230, 
soon after the foundation of the Dominican and Fran- 
ciscan Oi'dci’s" Nor can we dchibt that the adoption 
of the Aristotelian philo,sophy by these two Orders, 
in the form in which the Angelical Doctor had sys- 
tematized it, was one of the^ events which mast tended 
to defer, for three centuries, the reform which Boger 
Bacon urged as a matter of crying necessity in his 
own time. 


** Qaoted by Jebb, Prtf. to Op, Maj. « Bist, lU. 

_ ^0p,MaJ,p,S7^ . M08heim,iiiiGj. 



CHAPTER XIL 


The Revival of Platonism. 


I. Causes of Dday%n the Advance of Knowledge.— 
In' the insight possessed by learned men into the 
method by which truth was to be disco veiled, the four- 
teenth and fifU^cuth c.enturies went backwards, rather 
than forwards, from the point which had been reached 
in the thirteenth. Roger Bacon had urged them to 
have recoui’se to experiment; but they returned with 
additional and exclusive zeal to the more favourite 
employment of reasoning upon their own conceptions. 
He had called upon them to look at the world without; 
but their eyes forthwith turned back upon the world 
within. In the constant oscillation of the human 
mind between Ideas and Facts, after having for a 
moment touched the latcer, it seemed to swing back 
more impetuously to the former. Not only was the 
philosophy of Aristotle firmly established for a con- 
siderable period, but when men began to question its 
authority, they attempted to set up in its place a phi'* 
losophy still more puvely ideal, that of Plato. It was 
not till the actual progress of ex)>erimental knowledge 
for some centuries had given it a vast accumulation cdT 
force, that it was able to break its way fully into the 
circle of speculative science. The new Platonist school* 
men had to run tlicir course, the practical discoverers 
hafl to pi'Dve their merit by their works, the Italian 
innovators had to utter their aspirations for a change 
l»efore the second Bacon could truly declare that the 
tir^ for a fundamental reform was at length arrived. 

It cannot but seem strange, to any one who attempts 
to trace the general outline of tlie intellecttial progress 
of man, and who considers him as under the gaiaattee 



REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 


77 


of a Providential sway, that he should thus be permit- 
ted to wander so long in a wilderness of intellectual 
darkness; and even to turn back, by a perverse ca- 
price as it might seem, when on the veiy border of the 
brighter and better land which was his destined in- 
heritance. We do not attempt to solve this difficulty: 
but such a course of things naturally suggests tlie 
thought, that a progrt^ss in physical science is not the 
main object of man’s career, in the eyes of the Power 
who directs the foi*tunes of our race. We can easily 
conceive that it may haVo behn necessary to man’s 
general welfare tliat he should continue to turn his 
eyes inwards upon his own heart and faculties, till 
liaw and Duty, Religion and Government, Faith and 
Hope, had been fully incori>orated with all the past 
acquisitions of human intellect; mther than that he 
should have rushed on into a train of discoveries tend- 
ing to chain him to the objects and operations of the 
material world. The systematic Law' and philoso- 
phical Theology 'which acquired their ascendancy in 
men’s minds at the time of which we speak, kept 
them engaged in a region of si>eculations which per- 
haps prepared the way for a profoundcr and wider 
cirilizatioii, for a more elevated and spiritual charac- 
ter, than might have been possible 'without such a 
preparation. The great Italian poet of the fourteenth 
century speaks with strong admiration of the fonndors 
of the system which prevaileil in his time. Thomas, 
Albert, Gratian, Peter Lombard, occupy distinguished 
places in the Paradise. The lirst, who is the i>oet*8 
instructor, says, — 

Id fui degli agni <l«lla santa greggia 
Clie Doineuioo meua per caiomino 
TJ* ben a’iiupingua ae non si vaneggia. 

Questo ohe m'b a deeira (>lu vicuio 
Prate e maestro fiunmi; ed esso Alberto 
£ di Oologua, ed io Tomas d’Aquino. . , , 

' Quell’ aliro fiammeggiar csce del riso 


1 dmtlia trabtiiiihed the and ClYil Law became aregnlsr OxLdf 

is the twelflheeiitui 7 ;andtlieCan(m In the ttnlTendUes soon afteiwarda 


78 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


De Grazian, che I'uiio et Taltro foro ’ 

Ajutb Bi che piacd iu Paradifio. 

I, then, was of the lambs that Dominic 
Leads, for his saintly flock, along the way 
"Where well they thrive not swoln with vanity* 

He nearest on my right-hand brother was 
And master to me; Albert of Cologne 
Is this; and of Aquinum Thomas, I. . . . 

That next resplendence issues from the smile 
Of Gratian, who to either forum lent 
Such help as favour wins in Paradise. 

It appears j>rolEa\)lo tMt neither poetry, nor painting, 
nor the other arts which require for their perfection a 
lofty and spiritualized imagination, would have ap- 
peared in tho nohle and beautiful forms which they 
assumed in the f<mi*tcenth and fifteenth centuiy, if 
men of genius had, at the beginning of that period, 
made it their main business to discover the laws of 
nature, and to reduce them to a rigorous scientific 
form. Yet who can doubt that the absence of these 
touching and impressive works would have left one of 
the best and purest parts of man’s nature without its 
due nutriment and development? It may perhaps 
be a necessary condition in the progress of man, that 
the Ai'ts which aim at beauty shoidd reach their ex- 
cellence before the Sciences which seek speculative 
truth; and if this be so, we inherit, from the middle 
ages, treasures which may well reconcile us to the 
delay which took place in their cultivation of experi- 
mental science. 

However this may be, it is our business at present 
to trace the circumstances of this very lingering ad- 
vance. We have already noticed tho contest of the 
Nominalists and Realists, which was one form, though^ 
with regard to scientific methods, an unprofitable one^ 
of tlie antithesis of Ideas and Things, lliough, theie- 
fore, this struggle continued, we need not dwell upon 
it. The Nominalists denied the real existence of Ideas, 
wh^ch doctrine was to a great extent implied in the 
prevailing systems; but the controversy in which they 
thus engaged, did not lead them to seek for knowledge 
iu a new field and by new methods* Tho aigumentSj^ 



REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 


79 


which Occam the Nominalist opposes to those of Duns 
Scotus the Kealist, are marked with the stamp of the 
same system, and consist only in permutations and 
combinations of tho same elementary conceptions. It 
WHS not till the impulse of external circumstances' was 
added to the discontent, w'hicli the more stin-ing in- 
tellects felt towards the barren dogmatism of their 
age, that the activity of the luiman mind was again 
called into full play, aAd a new career of progression 
entered upon, till then undreamt of, except b^^ a few 
prophetic spirits. • , 

2. Causes of Frogress , — These circumstances were 
principally the revival of Greek and Roman literature, 
the invention of Printing, the Protestant Reformation, 
and a great number of curious discoveries and inven- 
tions in the arts, whicli were soon succeeded by im- 
portant steps in speculative physical science. Con- 
nected with the first of these events, was the rise of a 
party of learned men who exjamsed their dissatisfac- 
tion with the Ariatotehan philosophy, fis it was then 
taught, and manifested a strong preference for the 
views of Plato. It is by no means suitable to our plan 
to give a detailed account of this new Platonic school; 
but we may notice a few of the writers who belong to 
it, so fiir at least as to indiciitc ks influence upon the 
Methods of pursuing science. 

In tho fourteenth centuiy*, the frequent intercourse 
of tho most cultivated persons of the Eastern and 
Western Empire, the increased study of the Greek lan- 
guage in Italy, tho intellectual activity of the Italian 
States, the ddscovery of manuscripts of the classical 
authors, were circumstances which excited or nourished 
a new and zealous study of the works of Greek and 
Roman goniua The genuine writings of the ancients, 
when presented in their native life and beauty, instead 
of being seen only in those lifeless fragments and dull 
transformations which the scholastic system had ez- 
* hibited, excited an intense enthusiasm. Europe, at 
tbiit period, might be represented by Plato’s beautiful. 


* Tenneman, tx. 4. 




8o THILOSOPHT OP DISOOVmT. 

allegory^ of a man who, after being long kept in a dai:ib 
oavem, in which his knowledge of the external world 
is gathered from the images which stream through th^e 
chinks of his prison, is at last led foi-th into the full 
blaze of day. It was inevitable that such a change 
should animate men’s efforts and enlarge their facul- 
ties. Greek literature became more and more known, 
especially by the influence of learned men who came 
from Constantinople into Italy : "theii^e teachers, though 
they honoured Aristotle, reverenced Plato no less, and 
had never been* accustdtned to follow with servile sub- 
mission of thought cither these or Any other leaders. 
The effect of such influences soon reveals itself in the 
works of that period. Dante has woven into his JHvina 
Commedia some of the ideas of Platonism. Petrarch, 
who had formed his mind by the study of Cicero, and 
had thus been inspired with a profound admiration for 
the literature of Greece, learnt Greek from llarlaam, 
a monk who came as ambassatlor from the Emperor of 
the Eixst to the Pope, in 1339. With this instructor, 
the poet read the works of Plato; struck by .their 
beauty, he contributed, by his writings and his con- 
versation, to awake in others an admiration and love 
for that philosopher, which soon became strongly and 
extensively prevalent* among the learned in Italy, 

3. HerTOolavs BarharaSy dec , — Along with the feel- 
ing there prevailed also, among th^jse who had learnt 
to relish the genuine beauties of the Greek and Latin 
writers, a strong disgust for the barbarisms in which 
the scholastic pMlosophy was clothed. Hermolaus Bar- 
barus®, who was born in 1454, at Venice, and had 
formeci his taate by the study of classical literature, 
translated, among other learned works, Themistiiis’s 
paraphrastic cxjiositions of the Physics of Aristotle; 
with the view of trying whether the Aristotelian Natu- 
ral Philosophy could not be presented in good Latin, 
which the scholastic teachers denied. In his Preface 
he expresses great indignation against those {d:Liloso- 
phers who have written and disputed on philosophical 


* Tctfuiemui, li. 95. 




REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 


Si 

subjects in barbarous Latin, and in an uncultured 
style, so that all refined minds are repelled from these 
studies by weariness and disgust. They have, he says^ 
by this barbarism, endeavoured to secure to themselves, 
in their own province, a supremacy without rivals or 
opponents. Hence they maintain that mathematics, 
phiiosojihy, juiisprudcnce, cannot be expounded in cor- 
rect Ljitin ; — that between these sciences and the go- 
imirie li^atin language there is a great gulf^ as between 
tilings that cannot be brought ^together : and on this 
ground they blame those who comViine tHe study of plii- 
lology and eloquence with that of science. This opinion, 
adds llermolaus, perverts and iniins our studies; and is 
highly prejudicial and unworthy in respect to the state. 
Herniolaus awoke in others, as for instance, in John 
I'icus of Mirandnla, the same dislike to the i*eigning 
school philosophy. As an opponent of the same kind, 
wo may add Marius Nizolins of Bersallo, a scholar who 
carried his admiration of Cicero to an exaggersitcd ex- 
tent, and who was led, by a controversy witli the de- 
fenders of the scholastic philasophy, to jmblish 
a work On the Trve Principles and True Method of 
Philosophizing, In the title of this work, he professes 
to give “the true j»rinciplcs of almost all arts and 
scicuc&s, refuting and rejecting almost all the false 
principles of the Logicians and Metaphysicians.” But 
although, in the work, he attacks the scholastic phi- 
losophy, he does little or nothing to justify the large 
pretensions of his title; and he excitc*d, it is said, little 
notice. It is therefore curious that Leibnitz should 
have thought it worth his while to ro-edit this work, 
which he did in 1670, adding remarks of his own. 

4. Nicolaus Gvraamis . — Without dwelling upon 
this opposition to the scholastic system on the ground 
of taste, I shall notice somewdiat further those writers 
who put forwards Platonic views, as fitted to complete 
, or to replace the doctrines of Aristotle. Among these, 
I m&y place Nicolaus Cusanus, (so called from Ous^ a 
village on the Moselle, where he was bom in 1401;) 
who was afterwowis raised to the dignity of cardinal., 
We. might, indeed, at iirst be. tempted to include 

a 



82 PHILOSOPHY OP DifeCOVBRT. 

Cusonus among thoso p«r^ns who were led to rej^ 
the old philosophy by being themselves agents in iho 
progressive movement of physical . science. For he 
published, before Copoiiiicus, and independently of 
him, the doctrine that the earth is in motion\ But 
it should be recollected that in order to see the possi- 
bility of this doctrine, and its claims to acceptance, 
no new reference to observation was recpiisite. The 
Heliocentric System was merely a new mode of repre- 
senting to the mind facts, with which all astronoinera 
had long been 'fain iliarV The system might very easily 
liavc been embraced and inculcated by Plato himself ; 
as indeed it is said to have been actually taught by 
Pythagonis. The/ mere adoption of the Heliocentric 
view, therefore, without attempting to realize the sys- 
tem ill detail, as ^Copernicus did, cannot entitle a 
writer of the fifteenth century to be h>oked upon as 
one of the authors of the discoveries of that f period; 
and we must consider Cusanus as a speculative anti- 
Aristotelian, rather than as a )iracticiil reformer. 

The title of Cusanu.s*s book, Db Doetd Ignorantid^ 
shows how far ho was fi'om agreeing with thosti who 
conceived that, in the works of Ari,stotle, they had 
a full and complete system of all human knowledge. 
At the outset of this book®, he says, after pointing out 
some difficulties an the received philosophy, “If, there- 
fore, the case be so, (as even the very profound Aris- 
totle, in his First Philosophy y affirms,) that in things 
most nmnifest by nature, thei*e is a difficulty, no less 
than for an owl to lofik at the sun ; since the ap{)6tite 
pf knowledge is not implanted in us in vain, we ought 
to desire to know that we are ignorant. If we can 
fully attain to this, wc shall arrive at Instructed /r/- 
noraac^iP How far ho was from placing the source of 
knowledge in experience, as opposed to ideas, we may 
see in the following passage*’ from another work of 
his, On Conjectures, “Conjectures must proceed from 


^ " J*in nobln manlfefltum eat tomm Istam in rerltate moveri," 
JSoctA Ignormntld, lib. ii. c. xlL 
? J>i J)jcL lifnor, lib. i. c. L 


• Ve ConJtcturU, Ub.Lti.UL ir. 




REVIVAL OP PLATONISM, 


83 

our minil, os the real world proceeds from the infinite 
Divine Reason. For since the human mind, tlie lofty 
likeness of God, participates, as it may, in the finitful- 
ness of the creative nature, it doth from itself, as the 
image of the Onmi potent Form, bring forth retisonablc 
thoughts which have a similitude to venl existences. 
Thus the Human Mind exists os a eoiijoctuml fuj-m of 
the world, as the Divine Mind is its real form.” We 
have hero tlie IMaConic or ideal side of knowledge put 
prominently and exclusively forwards. 

5. MarsUhisFiciiHLH^ — A persoi/who had much 

more influence on the diffusion of Plabjiiism was Alar- 
silius Ficinus, a physician of Florence. In that city 
there prevailed, at the time of which we sjx»ak, the. 
greatest eiithiisia.sin for Plato. George Gemistius Ple- 
tho, when in attendance upoii the Poiiiicil of Florence, 
had iiai)arted to many persons the doctrines of the 
Greek philosopher; and, among othei-s, laid infused a 
lively interest on this subject into the elder Cosmo, 
the head of the family of the Medici. Cosmo forniocl 
the plan of founding a Platonie academy. Ficinus^ 
well instructed in the works of Plato, Plotinus, l^ro- 
clus, Jind other Platonists, was selected to further this 
object, and was employe<l in translating the works of 
the.se authors into Latin. It is not to our present 
purpose to consider the doctrines of this school, except 
so far as they bear upon the nature and mctliods of 
knowledge; and therefore I must pass by, as I have 
in other instances done, the greater part of their specu- 
lations, which 1‘elated to the nature of God, the im- 
mortality of the soul, the principles of Goodness and 
Beauty, and other points of the same order. The 
object of those and other Platonists of this school, 
however, was not to expel the aiitliority of Aristotle 
by that of Plato. Many of them had come to the con- 
viction that the highest ends of philosophy were to be 
, reached only by bringing into accordance the doctrines 
of Plato and of Aristotle. Of this opinion w'as John 
Picus, Count of Mirandula and Concordia; and under 


7 Boru ill 1433. 



84 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

this persuasion he employed the whole of his life in 
labounng upon a work, De Concordid Platonia ti 
iotelis, which was not completed at the time of his 
death, in 1494; and has never been published. But 
about a century later, another writer of the same school, 
Francis Patricius®, pointing out the discrepancies be- 
tween the two Greek teachers, urged the propriety of 
deposing Aristotle from the supremacy he had so long 
enjoyed. ‘‘Now all these doctrines, and others not 
a few,” he says®, “ since they are Platonic doctrines, 
philosophicallyiiiost true, and consonant with the Catho- 
lic faith, whilst the Aristritelian tenets are contiury 
to the faith, and philosophically false, who will not, 
both as a Christian and a Philosopher, prefer Plato to 
Anstotle? And why should not hereafter, in all the 
colleges and mona^tenes of Europe, the reading and 
study of Plato be introduced I Why should not the 
j)hilosophy of Aristotle be forthwith exiled from such 
jilkces 1 Why must men continue to drink the mortal 
poison of impiety from that source?” witli much more 
in the same strain. 

The Platonic school, of which we have spoken, had, 
however, reached its highest point of prosperity before 
this tijne, and was already declining. About igoo, 
the Platouists appeared to triumph over the Peripar 
tetics*®; but the death of their great patron, Cardinal 
Bessarion, about this time, and we may add, the hol- 
lowness of their system in many points, and its want 
of lituess for the wants and expectations of the age, 
turned men’s thoughts partly back to the established 
Aristotelian doctrine.s, and partly forwards to schemes 
of bolder and fresher promise. 

6. Francis Patriems. — Patricias, of whom we have 
just spoken, was one of those who had arrived at the 
conviction that the formation of a new philosophy, 
and not merely the restoration of an old one, was 
needed. In 1593, appeared his Nova dc Universis , 


“ Born died 1507. 

• AriitoUlet Ex 4 )Urieu»t p. 30. w Xiruboticbl, i. ViL pL IL p* 4ti. 




REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 85 

Philosophia; and the mode in which it begins" can 
hardly fail to remind ns of the expressions which 
Francis Bacon soon afterwards used in the opening of 
a work of the same nature. “ h’l-ancis Patricius, being 
about to found aiiew tlie true philosophy of the uni- 
verse, dared to begin by announcing the following 
iudisputuble princiiiles.” Hei'e, however, the resem- 
blance between Patricius and true inductive philoso- 
phers ends. If is princi]»Jes are barren d priori axioms; 
and his system lifts one main element, Lights (LuXy or 
to which all openiticms of riatifre are i*eferred. 
In general cultivathm, and practical knowledge of 
nature, he was distinguished ann»ng his contempora- 
lies. In various pa.'^siigtis of his works he relates ob- 
seivations which he had made in the coui*se of his 
tniYols, in Cypms, Corfu, Spain, the mountains of the 
Modenese, and Dalmatia, which was his own country; 
liis observations i*elate to light, tlie saltuess of the sea, 
its flux and reflux, and otlier points of astronomy, 
meteorology, and natural liistoiy. He speaks of tlm 
sex of fdants'*^; rejects judicial astrology; and notices 
the astronomical systems of Copernicus, Tycho, Fr«- 
castoro, and Torre. But the mode in which he speaks 
of experiments proves, w^hat indeed is evident from 
the general scheme of his system, that he had no due 
appreciation of the place which observation must hold 
in real and natural philosophy. 

7. Pieus^ Agrippa^ <frc. — It had been seen in the 
later philosophical history of Greece, how readily tlie 
ideas of the Platonic school lead on to a system of 
unfathomable and unbounded mysticism. John Picus, 
of Mirandula", added to the study of Plato and the 


u **FrattclBCu$Pairiclu8,novamve- Ante piiinum nihil, 

nuaintegramdeuTilvmlHconditurug Post prliniun omuliv, 

philo8ophiaiii,seqaentiautlverissinia A priucipio omnia/' &c. 

prtenunfciare est aosos. Pnimimciata llifi other works are Panavgia, Pan- 
online pcrsecutus, dlvluis oracuUs, co8inl€it J)vi»ertatioHtB PeripaM:ht, 
SeomotTiciaTaUonlbua, darlahmisque i« Tirabosehl, t. Tli. pt U. p. 41X. 
exi^erlmentin comprobavit. Disiert. Perip. t it Bb. v. sub On* 

M Tenneman, U. 148. 



86 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

Neoplatonists, a mass of allegorical interpretations of 
the Sci’iptures, and the dreams of the Cabbala, a Jew- 
ish system'*, which pretends to explain how all things 
are an emanation of the Deity. To this his nephew, 
Fmneis Piens, added a reference to inward illumina- 
tion'*, by which knowledge is obtained, independently 
of the progress of reasoning. John Keuchlin, or Oap- 
nio, born 1455; John Baptist Helmpnt, born if 577 5 
Francis Mercurina Helmont, born 16 iS, and others, 
succeeded John Pious ^ in his admiration of the Cab- 
bala: while others, as Jacob Badiinen, rested upon 
internal revelations like PVaneis Picas. And thus 
wo liMve a scri< 3 s of mysticjil writers, continued into 
motlern times, who* may be considered as the successors 
of tlio Platonic school; and who all exhibit views alto- 
gether erroneous with regard to the nature and origin 
of knowledge. Among the various dreams of this 
seliool arc certain wide and loose analogies of terres- 
trial and spiritual things. Thus in the writings of 
Coniolius Agrippa (who was boin 1487, at Cologne) 
we hive such systems as the following*^: — “Since 
thon^ is a threefold world, elemental, celestial, and in- 
t'dlcctual, and each lover one is governed by tbao 
above it, and receives the influence of its ]N>wcrs : ho 
that tlui very Archetype aiul Supreme Author trans- 
fuses tlic virtues of his omnipotence into us tlirough 
angels, lieavens, stars, elements, anininls, plants, stones, 
— into U.S, I say, for whose .soiwico he has frames! and 
creatcfl all these things; — the Magi do not think it 
irrafionjd that we should be able to ascend by the 
same degrees, the same worlds, tt> this Archetype of 
the w-firld, the Author and Fii-st Cause of all, of whom 
all tilings are, and from whom tlicy pi'Oceed; and 
should not only avjiil ourselves of those powers which 
exist in the nobler works of creation, but also should 
bo able to attract other powers, and add them to 
these.” 

Agrippa’s work, De Ymdtate ScierUiarum^ may be 


Tcuneman. lx. 167. i<* Jfcid 158; 

Agrippa, Vc Occiitt PhiL lib. L c. I 




REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 8/ 

said rather to have a skeptical and cynical, than a 
riatouic, character. It is a declamation***, in a nielan- 
chuly mood, against the condition of the sciences in 
liis time. His indignation at the worldly success of 
men whom he considered inferior to himself, had, he 
says, metanior])liost‘d him into a dog, as the poets 
relate of Hecuba of Troy, so that his impulse was to 
snai*J and bark. His professed piirjjose, however, was 
t.«i c'xposo tlic dogmatism, the servility, the self cone . at, 
and tlie neglect of religious truth which prevailed in 
ihe reignhig Schools of p)nh)Sopfiy. HS% views of the 
natinu of sci(‘nce, and the mocles of improving its cul- 
tivation, are too imperfect and vague to allow us to 
rank Jiiin among the reforinei's of science. 

8. Paraeehtts^ Flmldy d’C. — The celebrated Para^ 
celsiis**^ j»ut liiiuself forwards as a reformer in philo- 
sojdiv, and obtained no small number of adherents. 
Jie was, in most respects, a shallow and impudent 
}M*ctonderj and had small knowledge of the literature 
or science of his time : but by the tone of his s})eaking 
and w'riting ho manifestly belongs to the mystical 
school of which we aie now speaking. Perhaps by 
the lioldness wdth which h(» pro])ose<l new systems, 
and by connecting tln‘se with the practical doctrines 
of mciliciue, lie contributed somotliing to the iiitixi- 
ductiou of a uaw j>hilosophy. We have seen in the 
History of Chemistry that he was the author c>f the 
system of Three Princijdcs, (s^alt, sulphur, and mer- 
cviry,) which replaced Uic ancient doctrine of Four 
Klein cuts, and pn^partnl the way for a true science of 
chemistry. Put thc5 salt, sulphur, and mei'cury of 
Piimcelsus were not, lie tells his disciples, the visible 
bodies which we call by those names, but certain in- 
visible, astral, or sidereal elements. The astral salt k 
the basis of the solidity and iucombustible jiarta iu 
bodies; the astral suljihur is the source of combustion 


WTitton in 1526. calloil Pnracelsna Jilremita, bora at 

Pliilip AardluH Tlico]) 1 imHtua Eln^icdleu iu SwitserUiid, iu 1493, 
Pt^bttstus von Uolicnlieltu, oloo 



PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVJ5RY. 


Ob 

and vegetation; the astral mercury is the otigin of 
fluidity and volatility. Aud again, these three ele- 
ments are analogous to the three elements of man,-^ 
Body, Spirit, and Soul. 

A writer of our own country, belonging to this 
mystical school, is Robert Fliidd, or De Pluctibus, 
who was bom in 1571, in Kent, and after pursuing 
his studies at Oxford, travelled for several years.^ Of 
all the Tlieosophists and Mystics, ho is by much the 
most learned; and was engage<l in various controver- 
sies witli MfShaenne, Gassendi, Kepler, and others. 
He thus brings us in contact "vrith the next class of 
pliilosopliers whom we have to consider, the practical 
reformers of philosophy; — ^those who furthei’ed the 
cause of science by making, promulgating, or defend- 
ing the great discoveries which now began to occupy 
men. lie adopted the principle, which we have no- 
ticed elsewhere**, of the analogy of the Macrocosm and 
Microcosm, the world of nature aud the world of man. 
His system contains such a mixture and confusion of 
physical and metaphysical doctrines as might be ex- 
pected from his ground-plan, and from his schooL 
Indeed liis object, tlic gcneml object of iriystical specu- 
lator's, is to identity irhysical with .spiritual truths. 
Yet the influence of the practical experimental i)hilo- 
sophy which wtis now gaining ground in tlic world 
may be traced in him. Thus he refei-s to exporimeiits 
on distillation to prove the cjxisteiice and relation of 
the regions of water, air, and fire, and of the spirits 
which correspond to them; aud is conceived, by some 
persons®*, to have anticipated Torricelli in the inven- 
tion of the Barometer. 

Wo need no further follow the speculations of this 
schooL Wc see already abundant reason why the re- 
form of the methods of pursuing .science could not 
proceed from the Platonists. Instead of seeking know- 
ledge by experiment, they immersed themselves deeper^ 
tlviu even the Aristotelians had done in tmditionary 


Hut. Sc. Id. b. ix. c. 2. sect. x. Tbo Mystical School of Biology. 
Tennemaoi ix. aai. 




REVIVAL OF PLATO^JieSl. 89 

lore, or turned their eyes inwaixls in search of an in- 
ternal illuTKunation. Some attempts were made to 
i*emedy the defects of philosojjhy by a recourse to the 
doctrines of other sects of antiquity, when men began 
to feel more distinctly the nee4 of a more connected 
and solid knowledge of nature than tlio established 
system gave them. Among these attempts were those 
of Btaigard®®, Magernus, and especially Gassendi, to 
bring into repute the philosophy of the Ionian school, 
of Dernocritus and of Epicurus. But these emleavours 
were posttTior in time t<j the*new iiijjmlse given to 
knowledge by Copernicus, Kepler,- and Galileo, and 
were influc3riced by views arising f)ut of the success of 
these discoveries, and they must, therefore, be con- 
sidered hereiifter. In the mean time, some indepen- 
dent efforts (arising from speculative rather than prac- 
tical reformers) were made to cast off the yoke of the 
Aristotelian dogmatism, and to apprehend the true 
form of that new philosophy which the most active 
and hopeful niiuds saw to be needed; and we must 
give some account of these attempts, bcfoi’e we can 
commit ourselves to the full stream of progressive 
philosophy. 


Xcuucmau, ix. ^65. 



CHAPTER XIIL 


The Theouetical Reformers op Science. 


W E have %il ready* seen that Patricius, about the 
middle of the sixteenth century, announced his 
purpose of founding anew the whole fabric of philoso- 
))liy; but that, in tfixccuting this jdan, he ran into wide 
and baseless hypotheses, suggested by a priori concep- 
tifjns rather than by external observation ; and that he 
was fui-ther misled by fanciful analogies resembling 
those which tlie Platonic mystics loved to contemplate. 
The same time, and the period which followed it, pro- 
duced several other essfiys which were of the same 
nature, with the exception of their being free from the 
peculiar tendencies of the Platonic school : and these 
insurrections against the authority of the established 
dogmas, although they did not directly substitute a 
better positive system in the place of that which they 
assailed, shook the authority of the Anstotelian sys- 
tem, and led to its overthrow ; which took place as soon 
as these theoretical reformers Mrere aided by practical 
i-efbmiors. 

I. Bernardinus Tdedus, — Italy, always, in modem 
times, fertile in the beginnings of new systems, was 
the soil on which these innovators arose. The earli- 
est and most conspicuous of them is Bernardinus 
Telesiiis, who was bom in 1508, at Cosemsa, in the 
kingdom of Naples. His studies, carried on with 
great zeal and ability, first at Milan and then at 
Rome, made him well acquainted with the knowledge 
of Jiis times: but his own reflections convinced him 
that the basis of science, as then received, was alto- 
gether erroneons; and led him to attompt a reforip, 
with which view, in 1565, he published, at Romo^ 



THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 9I 

work’, Bemardinm TdesmSf of Goaenza, on ike Nor 
lure of Things, according to principles 6f hia own^ 
lu the preface of tliis work Jio gives a short account* 
of the ti*ain of reflection by which he was led to put 
hiniself in opposition to the Aristotelian philosophy. 
This kind of autobiography occui's not unfrequently 
in the writings of theoretical reformers; and shows 
how livcHly they felt the novelty of their undertaking. 
After the storm and sack of Kome in 1527, Tolrsius 
I'ctired to Padua, as a peaceful atnit of the muses; 
and there studied philosoj>hy and inatlMnatics, with 
great zeal, uudef the direction of Jerome Amalthaeus 
and Frederic Delphiuus. In these studies he ma<lc 
great progress; and the knowledga wdiich he thus 
acquired threw a new light upon his view of the 
Aristotelian philosophy. He undertook a closer ex- 
auiiriation of the Physical Doctrines of Anstotle; and 
as the result of tliis, he was astonished how it could 
have been po.ssil)lc that so many excellent men, so 
many nations, and even almost the %vholc human I’ace, 
should, for so long a time, have allowed themselves to 
bo (iai'riod away by a blind reverence for a teacher, 
who had committed errors so numerous and grave 
as he perceived to exist in “the philoso])hor.” 
Along with this view of the insufficiency of tin; xVris- 
t()telian philosophy, a7‘ose, at an early [)criod, the 
thought of erecting a better system in its place. W ith 
this purpose he left Padua, when ho had received the 
degree of Doctor, and went to Rome, where lie was 
encouraged in hia design by the ap2>roval and friendly 
exhortations of di.stiiiguished nnfii of letters, amongst 
whom were ITbaldino Bandinolli and Git'vanni della 
Casa. From Rome ho went to his native place, when the 
incidents and occupations of a married life for a while 
interrupted his philosophical project. But after his 


' B^maniinl TelesH Ooni^cniini i)o 
Rerwm A'o^ra jewfa propria rrUi‘ 
CipftL 

* I tak6 tbis account from Tonne- 


man : this Proom was omitted In mlh- 
Rcqucnt editions of Teleslus, and is 
not in the one which I have consult- 
ed. Teimeiuan, GesA, d Phil. ix. aSou 



92 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

'wife was dead, and bis eldest son grown to manhood^ 
be resumed with aidour the scheme of his youth; 
again studied the works of Aiistotle and other phi- 
losophers, and composed and published the first two 
books of Ins treatise. The oiKJiiing to this work suffi- 
ciently exhibits the spirit in which it was conceived. 
Its object is stated in the title to be to show, that 
“the construction of the world, the magnitude tuid 
nature of the bodies contained in it, are not to be 
investigated by re<uioiiing, which was done by tlie 
ancients, biiWire to He apprehended by the senses, and 
collected from the things themselves.” And the Proem 
is in the same strain. “ They who before us have in- * 
quired concern iivg the construction of this world and 
of the things w'hich it contains, seem indeed to have 
prosecuted their examination with protracted vigils 
and great labour, but never to ham looked at U'* And 
thus, he observes, they found nothing but erix)r. 
This he ascribes to their presumption. For, as it 
were, attempting to rival God in wisdom, and ven- 
turing to seek for the principles and causes of the 
world by the light of tlujii own reason, and thinking 
they had found what they had only invented, they 
made an arbitiury world of their own.*' “ }Ve then," 
he adds, *‘not relying on ourselves, and of a duller 
intellect than they, propose to ourselves to turn our 
regards to tlte world itself and its parts." 

The execution of the work, however, by no means 
corresponds to the announcement. Tlie docti-ines of 
Aristotle are indeed attacked; and the objections to 
these, and to other r<^eived opinions, form a large ])art 
of the work. But these objections are supjKjrtod by 
a priori reasoning! and not by experiments. And tliuw, 
rejecting the Aiistoteliiiu physics, he proposes a system 
at least equally baseless ; although, no doubt, gmteful 
to the author from its sweeping and apparently simple 
chanicter. He assumes three principles, H(3at, Cold,^ 
and Matter ; ’Heat is the principle of motion, Oojid of 
immobility, and Matter is tlie corporeal substratum^ in 
which these incorporeal and active principles produce 
their effects. It is easy to imagine lltat, by combining 



THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 03 

and separating these abstractions in various ways, a 
sort of account of many natural phenomena may be 
given ; but it is impossible to ascribe any real value to 
such a system. The merit of Tclerius must be con- 
sidered to consist in his rejection of the Aristotelian 
errors, in his perception of the necessity of a reform in 
the method of philosophizing, and in his persuasion that 
this reform must be founded on ox peri in cuts rather 
than on reasoning. When he said", “Wo projxjso to 
ourselves to turn our eyes to the world itself, and its 
parts, their passions, actions, operations,* and species,” 
liis view of the course to be followed was right; but 
his purpose remained but ill fulfilled, by the arbitrary 
edifice, of abstract conceptions which his system ex- 
hibits. 

Pi*ancis Bacon, who, alxmt half a century later, 
treated the subject of a reform of pliiloso])hy in a hir 
more penetrating and masterly mnnner, has given us 
his judgment of Telesius. In his view, he bikes 
Tele^siiis as the restorer of the Atomic philosophy, 
which Democritus and Parinoniclea taught among the 
ancients; and according to his custom, he presents an 
image of this philosophy in an adaptation of a jiortion 
of ancient mythology^ The Celestial Cnj»id, Mdio with 
Cadus, was the parent of the Gods and of the Uni- 
verse, is exhibited as a rejiresentation of matter and 
its properties, according to the Democritean philoso- 
phy. “Concerning Telesims,” says Bacon, “we think 
well, and acknowledge him as a lover of truth, a. use- 
ful contributor to science, an amendcr (»f some tenets, 
the first of recent men. But wq have to do with him 
as the restorer of the philosophy of Parmenides, to 
whom much reverence is due.” Witli regard to this 
philosophy, he pronounces a judgment which very 
truly expresses the cause of its ntshnesa and empti- 
ness. “It is,” he says, “such a system* as naturally 


•Troem. llemocriti ThUosopWa tractata*ln 

* **!>« PilnclpilA Btqtie Oilgliilbns Fabul.i de Cnpidlnc." 
fteeundam fibaliui Cupidiula ct C<ell ; ¦ “ Ttilia «\i«t qnalf n porantni 

ilr«Enftaetil4tsetTeleslletpnecipttd ea aun sb lutellectu slbi pernilsao, 



94 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY, 

proceeds from the intellect, abandoned to its own im- 
pulse, and hot rising from experience to theoiy con- 
tinuously and successively.” Accordingly, ho says that, 

“ Telesius, although learned in the Peripatetic philoso- 
phy (if that were anything), which indeed, he Inis 
turned agiiinst tlie teachers of it, is hindered by his 
affirmations, and is more successful in destroying thau 
in building.” " 

The work of Telesius excited no small notice, and 
was placed in the Index Expurfja torim. It made many 
disciples, a censequeiice probably due to its spirit of 
system-making, no less than to its promise of reform, 
or its acuteness of argument; for till trial and reflec- 
tion have taught juaii modesty and iiiodeiution, ho can 
never be content to receive knowledge in tlie small 
successive instalments in which nature gives it forth 
to him. It is the makers of large sy sterns, anunged 
with ’ an appearance of completeness and aynuiietry,. 
who, princi[»ally, give rise to Schoids of philosophy, 

2. {Thomas Campanella), — Accordingly, Telesius 
may be looked upon as the founder of a School. His 
most distinguished .successor was Thomas Camjianella, 
who was born in 1568, at Stilo, in Calabria. He showed 
great talents at an early age, prosecuting his studies 
at Cosenza, the birth-place of the grcjit opponent of 
ArLstotle and reformer of philosophy. He, too, has 
given us an account® of the course of thought by which 
he was led to become an innovator. “Being afraid 
tliat not genuine truth, but falsehood in the place of 
truth, was tlie tenant of the Peripatetic School, I ex- 
amined all the Greek, Latin, and Arabic comment 
tators of Ansto.tle, and hesitated more and more, as I 
sought to leam whether what they have said were also 
to be read in the world itself, wliich 1 had been taught 
by learned men was the living book of God. And aa 
my doctors could not satisfy my scruples, I resolved to 
read all the books of Plato, Pliny, Galen, the Stoia^^ 


Bce ab expcHmenttM eontlnenter at * Thom. Campanella tXhrU prth 
gradatbu eublevato, profecta viden* ai quoted 1& Tendaman, tiis 

tut* 




THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 95 


and the Democritearis, and especially those of Tclesiiis ; 
aqd to compare tlieiu with that first and orujinal 
writing, tlie world; that thus from the primary a\itc>- 
^’ai)h, I might learn if the copies contained anything 
false.” Campaiiclla prubahl}'’ refers hero iio an ex- 
pression of Plato, who says, “ the world is God’s e}»iptle 
to mankind.” And this image, of the natural world 
as an original manuscript, wliile human systems of 
philosophy arc but <;opies, and may be ' false ones, 
became a favourite thoiight of* the reformers, and ap- 
pears repeatedly in their writings frtftn this time. 
“ When I held my public disjiutation at Cosenza,” 
Campauella proceeds, “and .still more, when I con- 
versed privately with the brethren of the monastei’}*, 
I found little satisfaction in their answers ; but Telcsius 
delighted me, ou account of his frcvtjdoiu in philoso- 
phizing, and because he rested upon the nature of 
ihings, and not upon the Jissortions of men.” 

With these views and feelings, it is not wonderful 
that Campauella, at the early age of twenty-two (1590,) 
published a work remarkable for the bold promise of 
its title: Thomas Camjjanella^s Philosophy demun- 
stratedUi thr, semes, against tlwsewlu} have philosophized 
in an ao'hitrary and dogmatical manner, mft taking 
'nature for their guide; in which the errors of Aristotle 
and his followers are refuted from thir own asserliotis 
and the laws of nature: and all the ining-inations 
feigned in the place of nature hy the Peripatetics are 
altogether rejected ; ivith a true defence of Bcrnardin 
Tclesvns of Cosenza, the greatest of philosophers; cou- 
firnwd by the opinions of tiie ancients, here elucidated 
and defended, especially those of the PlatonistsP 

This work was wiitten in answer to a book pub- 
lished against Telesius by a Neaixilitan professor named 
Harta ; and it was the boast of the young author that 
he had only employed eleven months in the composi- 
,tiau of his defence, while his advem\ry had been 
eleven years in preparing his attack. Campa- 
nella. found a favourable reception in the house of the 
^rchese Iiavelli, and there employed himself in the 
composition of an additional work, entitled On the 



96 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

Sense, ef Things and Magic, and in other literary 
labours. These, however^ are full of the indications of 
ail enthusiastic temper, inclined to mystical devotion, 
and of opinions bearing the cast of pantheism. For 
instance, the title of the book last quoted sets forth as 
demonstrated in the course of the work, • that “the 
world is the living and intelligent statue of God ; and 
that all its parts, and particles of parts, are endowed some 
with a clearer, S(^me with a more obscure sense, such as 
suffices for the preservation of each and of the whole.” 
Besides these^ opinions, which could not fail to make 
him obnoxious to the religious authorities, Campa- 
nclla’ engaged in schemes of political revolution, which 
involved him in danger and calamity. He took part 
in a conspiracy, of which the object wras to civst off the 
tyranny of Spain, and to make Calabria a republic. 
Tins design was discovered; and (Jampanella, along 
with others, was thrown into prison and subjected to. 
torture. He was kejit in confinement twenty-seven 
yeai's ; and at last obtained his Hbei'ation by the intcr- 
])osition of Pope Urban VIII. He was, however, still 
in danger from the Neapolitan Inquisition; and escaped 
in disguise to Paris, where he received a peiision from 
the king, and lived in intercourse with the most emi- 
nent men of letter. He died there in 1639, 

Campanella was a contemporary of Francis Bacon, 
whom we must consider as belonging to an epoch to 
which the Calabrian school of innovators was only a 
prelude. I shall not therefore further follow the con- 
nexion of writers of this oi-der. Tobias Adami, a Saxon 
writer, an admirer of Campanella’s works, employed 
himself, about 1620, in adapting them to the Qermafi 
public, and in recommending them strongly to German 
])hilosopher3. Descartes, and even Bacon, may be con- 
sidered as successors of CampaneUa ; for they too 
theoretical reformers ; but they enjoyed the advantage 
of the light which had, in the mean time, been thrown, 
upon the philosophy of science, by the great practical 
advances of Kepler, Galileo, and others. To these 


’ £conomiifil IttUianii L t p. zxxlU. 




TnEOEETlCAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 97 

pi^ctioal reformers we must soon turn our attention ; 
but we may first notice one or two additional circum- 
stances beloiiging to our present subject. 

Oampanella remarks that both the Peripatetics and 
the Platonists conducted the learner to knowledge by a 
long and circuitous path, which he wished to shorten 
by setting out from the sense. Without speaking of 
the methods which he propascd, we may notice one 
maxim ** of considerable yalue which he propounds, and 
to wdiich we have already been led. “We begin to 
reason from sensible objects, and definition is the end 
aiul epilogue of science. It is not the beginning of our 
knowing, but only of our teaching.’* 

3. (Andrew Ccesalpinus ,) — The sajn<^ maxim had al- 
ready been announciid by Osesalpinus, a contempoiury 
of Telesius; (he was born at Arez2X> in 1520, and died 
at Rome in 1603). Oa^salpinus is a groat name in 
science, though professedly an Aristotelian. It has 
been seen in the llietory of Hcierice^^ that he formed 
the first great epoch of the science of botany by his 
systematic arrangement of plants, and that in this 
task he had no successor for nearly a century. He 
also approached near to the great discovery of the 
circulation of the blood He takes a view of science 
which includes the remark that we have just quoted 
firora Oampanella: “We roach perfect knowledge by 
three steps: Induction, Division, Definition By In- 
duction, we collect likeness and agreement fi'om ob- 
servation ; by Division, we collect unlikeness and dis- 
agreement; by Definition, we learn the proper sub- 
stance of each object. Induction makes uniyei*sals 
from particulars, and ofiers to the mind all intelligible 
matter; Division discovers the difference of univer- 
sals, and leads to species; Definition resolves species 
into their principles and elements”.” Without assert- 
ing this to be rigorously correct, it is incomparably 
^more true and pmlosophical than the opposite view» 


* Tennemiin, lx. 305. * Hint. Ind. Sc^ b. xri. e. UL Mct a. 

v’itidbrXvlie.ii.Mct I. a iVriiwt. i t. 

H 



98 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVJBRT. 

'which represents definition as the beginning of onr 
knowledge ; and the establishment of such a doctrine 
is a material step in inductive philosophy 

4. (Giordano Bruno,) — Among the Italian , innova- 
tors of this time we must notice .the unfortunate Gior- 
dano Bruno, who was bom at Nola about 1550, and 
burnt at Rome in 1600. He is, however, a reformer of 
a different school from Canipanella ; for he derives his 
philosophy from Ideas and not from Observation. He 
represents himself as the author of a new doctrine, 
which he terms the ^Kclan Philosophy/, Ho was a 
zealous pi*omuIgator and defender of the Coperaican 
system of the universe, as wo have noticed in the 
History of ScienQc'\ Campanella also wrote in de- 
fence of that system. 

It is worthy of remark that a thought which is 
often quoted from Francis Bacon, occui’s in Bruno’s 
Cena di Genere^ published in 1584 ; 1 mean, the notion 
that the later times arc more aged than the earlier. 
In the course of the dialogue, the Pedant, who is one 
of the interlocutors, says, “ In antiquity is wisdom 
to which the Philosojihical Character replies, If you 
knew what you were talking about, you would see 
that your principle leads to the opposite result of that 
which you wish to infer; — I mean, that we are older, 
and have lived longer, than our predecessors.” He 
then proceeds to apply this, by tracing tlie course of 
astmiiomy through the earlier astronomers up to Oo- 
phrnious. 

5. (Peter Riimms,) — I will notice one other reformer 
of this period, who attacked the A.ristotelian system on 
another side, on which it was considered to be most 
impregnable. This was Peter Ramus, (born in Picardy 
in 1515,) who ventured to denounce the Logic of Aris- 
totle as unphilosophical and uselesa After showtitg 
an extraordinary aptitude for the acquirement of know- 
ledge in his youth, when he [)roceeded to the degree, 
o( Master of Arts, he astonished his examiners by 


1* Teoneman, ix. 108. 


HiO. Xnd, Se, b. ?. e. lit Mct a 




THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 99 

choosing for tho subject of the requisite disputation 
the thesis*^, ‘Hhat what Aristotle has said is all 
wrong.” This position, so startling in 1535, he de- 
fended for the whole day, witliout l>eiiig defeated. 
I'liis was, however, only a formal academical exerci.'^e, 
which did not necessarily imply any j>ermanent con- 
viction of the opinion thus expressed. But his mind 
was ready labouniig to detect and remedy the ermrs 
which he thus proclaimed. From him, as from the 
other reformers of this time, we have an account of 
this mental struggle'*. He says, in work on this 
subject, “ I will candidly and simply explain how I 
was delivered from the darkness of Aristotle. When, 
according to the laws of onr university, I had spent 
three yearn and a half in the Aristotelian philosophy, 
and was now invested with the philosophical laurel as 
a Master of Arts, I took an account of tlie time which 
T luul consuiiied in this study, and considered ou what 
subjects I should employ this logical art of Aristotle, 
which I liad learnt with so much labour and noises, 
I found it made me not more versed in history or an- 
tiquities, more elocpient iu discourse, more ready in 
verse, more wise iu any subject. Alas for me ! how 
was I ovorpowenjd, how dee])ly did 1 gioan, how did 
I deplore my lot and my nature, how did 1 deem 
myself to bo by some unhappy and dismal fate an<l 
frame of mind abhon'ent fiom the Muses, when T 
found that 1 was one who, after all my })ains, could 
reap no benefit from that wisdom of wliich I heard so 
much, as being contained iu the Logic of Aristotle.” 
He then relates that lie was led to the study of the 
Dialogues of Plato, and was delighted with the kind 
of analysis of the subjects discussed which Soomtes is 
there represented os executing. ‘‘Well,’* he adds, “ I 
began thus to reflect within myself — (I should have 
thought it impious to say it to another) — What, I 


Tenneman, U. 43a “ Qiuscanaue Arirtotele dicte easent ooainienticta 
esse.” Firelgltut. Vita PM Jtami, p. la 

a Rami, Aniifuicrv. Ariitot L ir. 




100 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

pray you, prevents me from socratizinff ; and from ask^ 
ing, without regard to Aristotle’s authority, whether 
Aristotle’s Logic bo true and cori'ect? It may be that 
that philosopher leads us wrong ; and if so, no wonder 
that I cannot find in his books the treasure which is 
not there. What if his dogmas be mere figments? Do 
I not tease and torment myself in vain, trying to get 
a harvest from a barren soil ?’* He con^nneed himself 
that the Anstotelian logic was worthless: and con- 
structed a new system of Logic, founded mainly on the 
Platonic process of exhausting a subject by analytical 
classification of its parts. Both works, his Atiimad- 
versions on Aristotle^ and his Lotjtc, appeared in 1543. 
The learned world was startled and shocked to find a 
young man, on his first entranc e into life, condemning 
as faulty, fallacious, and useless, that part of Aris- 
totle’s works which had always hitherto been held as 
a masterpiece of philosophical acuteness, and as the 
Organon of scientific reasoning. And ui tnith, it 
must be granted tliat Ramus does not appear to have 
understood the real nature and object of Aristotle’s 
Logic; while his own system could not supply the 
]dace of the old one, and was not of much real value. 
This dissent from the established doctrines was, how- 
ever, not only condemned bat punished. The printing 
and selling of his books was forbidden through Frauce ; 
and Ramus was stigmatized by a sentence*® which 
declared him rash, arrogant, impudent, and ignorant, 
and prohibited from teaching logic and philosophy. 
He was, however, afterwards rastored to the office of 
professor: and though much attacked, persisted in his 
plan of reforming, not only Logic but Physics and 
Metaphysics. He made his position still more dan- 
gerous by adopting the refomod religion; and during 
the unhappy civil wars of France, he was deprived of 
his professorship, driven from Paris, and had his 
library plundered. He endeavoured, but in vain, to 
engage a German professor, Schegk, to undertake tlie 


Jlitt hid, Se, b. Iv, c. iv. sect, 4 . 


THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. lOI 


roform of the Aristotelian Physics ; a portion of know* 
ledge in which he felt himself not to be strong. Un- 
happily for himself, ho afiborwards returned to Paris, 
where he perished in the massacre of St. Bartholomew 

ltamus\s main objection to the Aristotelian Logic 
is, that it is not the image of the natural process of 
tliought; an objection which shows little philosophical 
irisiglit ; for the course by which we obtain knowledge 
may well differ from the ordof in winch our know- 
ledge, wlifjn obtained, is exhibited. We have already 
seen that llamus’s contempoi-avies, C^esalpinus and 
Campaiiella, had a wiser view; placing definition os 
the last step in knowing, but the* fimt in teaching. 
But the effect whicli Ramus produced was by uo 
moans slight, lie aided powerfully in turning the 
minds of men to questi(»n the authority of Aristotle 
on all j>oiuts; and luui many followers, especially 
among the Protestants. Among the rc^st, Milton, our 
great poet, j)ublished Aitis Logicas plenior Institu- 
tio ad Petri Rami imtlmlum cominnala but this 
work, appearing in 1672, belongs to a succeeding 
period. 

6. {The Reformers Iti gem red ). — It is imjxissible not to 
be struck with the seruis of misfortunes which assailed 
the reformei's of philosophy of the i>erif»d we have had 
to review. Roger Bacon was repeatedly (Hmdeumed 
and imprisoned; and, not to speak of others who suf? 
fered under the iinputiition of inagiciil arts, Telesius ia 
said*’ to have been driven from Naples to his native 
<5^ty by calumny and envy ; Oiesalpinus was accused 
of athoLsm**'; Campanella was impri.soned for twentyi^ 
seven years and tortured ; Giordano Bruuo was burnt 
at Rome as a heretic ; Ramus was persecuted during 
his life, and finally murdered by his personal enemy 
Jacques Charpentier, in a massacre of whioh the plea 
was religion. It is true, that for the most part these 
misfortunes were not priiicipxUy due to the attempts 


17 Tean^msD, ix. 


w /bidLxoS. 



102 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 


at philosophical reform, but were connected rather 
with politics or religion. But we cannot doubt that 
the spirit which led men to fissail the received philo- 
sophy, might readily incline them to reject some tenets 
of the established religion; since the boundary line of 
those subjects is difficult to draw. And as we have 
seen, there was in most of the persons of whom we 
have spoken, not only a well-founded persuasion of 
the defects of existing systems, but an eager siurit of 
change, and a .^nguina anticipation of some wide and 
lolly j)hilosophy, which was soon to elevate the minds 
and conditions of men. The most unfortunate were, 
for the most part, the least temperate and judicious 
reforn\ers. Patricius, who, as we have seen, declared 
himself against the Aristotelian philosophy, lived and 
died at Rome in peace and honour**. 

7. (Melancthon .) — It is not easy to |>oint out with 
precision the connexion between the effoAs at a Reform 
in Philosophy, and the great Reformation of Religion 
in the sixteenth century. The disposition to assert 
(practically at least) a freedom of thinking, and to 
reject the corruptions which tradition had introiluced 
and authority maintained, naturally extended its in- 
ducnce from one subject to another; and especially in 
subjects so nearly connected as theology and philoso- 
phy. The Protestants, however, did not reject the 
Aristotelian system; they only reformed it, hy going 
back to the original works of the author, and by re- 
ducing it to a conformity with Scripture. In this 
reform, Melancthon was the chief author, and wrote 
works on Logic, Physics, Morals, and Metaphysics, 
which were used among Protastants. On the subject 
of the origin of our knowledge, his views contained a 
very philosophical improvement of the Aristotelian 
doctrines. He recognized the importance of Ideas, as 
well as of Experience. "We could not,” he says*®, 
"proceed to reason at all, except there were by nature 


<• Tesncnui, ix, 

MeUncthoOi De Anknia, p. 207, <{Uot6d In TeDnemin, ix. 12c. 



THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. IO3 

innate in man certain fixed points, that is, principles 
of science;— as Number, the recognition of Order and 
Proportion, logical, geometrical, physical and moral 
Principles. Physical principles are such as these, — 
everything which exists proceeds from a cause, — a 
body cannot be in two places at once,— time is a con- 
tinued series of things or of motions, — and the like.” 
It is not difficult to see that such Principles pai*take 
of the nature of the Fundamental Ideas which wc 
have attem[)ted to arrange aujjl enumerate in a pre- 
vious part of this work. * 

Before we proceed to the next chapter, which treats 
of the Pi*actical Beforrners of Scientific Method, let 
UH for an instant look at the strong perauasion implied 
in the titles of the works of this period, that the 
time of a philosophical revolution was at hand. Tele< 
sius fmblished De Rerum Natura juxta propria prin- 
cipia; Francis Helmont, Philosophta vulgaris refu- 
lata; Patricius, Nova de Universis Philosophta; Cam- 
{Vinella, Philosophia sensihus demonstratay adv&rsus 
errores Aristotelis; Bruno professed himself the author 
of a Nolan Philosophy; and B^imus of a New Logic, 
The age announced itself pregnant; and the eyes of 
all wlio t(K)k an interest in the intellectual fortunes of 
the luce, were looking eagerly for the expected off- 
spring. 



CHAFrER XIV. 


Thk Peactxcal Reforbiers of Sciexce. 


T. Character of the Practical Peformers. — We now 
come to a class of speculators who had perhaps a 
"reater share in bringing about the change from sta- 
tionaiy to progressive knowledge, than those writora 
who so loudly announced the revolution. The mode 
in which the philosophers of whom we now speak 
pixxluced their impressions on men’s minds, was very 
clilierent from the procedure of the theoretical re- 
formers. What these talked of, they did ; what these 
promised, they performed. WJuie the theorists con- 
cerning knowledge proclaimed tliat great advanecH 
were to be made, the practical discoverers went stead- 
ily forwards. While one cla«s spoke c»f a complete 
lieforiu of scientific Methods, the other, boasting little, 
and often thinking little of Method, proved the novelty 
of their instimment by obtaining new results. While 
the metaphysicians were exhorting men to consult ex- 
perience and the senses, the physicists were examining 
nature by such md&ns with unparalleted success. And 
while the former, even when they did for a moment 
refer to facts, soon rushed back into their own region 
of ideas, anfd tried at once *to seize the widest generali- 
zatioQiB^ the latter, fastening their attention upon the 
phenomena, and trying to reduce them to laws, were 
carried forwards by steps measured and gradual, such 
as no conjectural view of scientific method had sug- 
gested; but leading to .truths as profound and com- . 
prehensive ,as any which conjecture had dared -to 
anticipate. The ^eoretioal reformers were bold, self--^ 
confident, hasfy, contemptuous of antiquity, ambitious 
of ruling fdl foture speculations, as tiiey ^hom they. 



PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIEKCE. JQ5 

sought to depose had ruled the past, ^e^j^rac^ical 
reformers were cautious, modest, slow, despisiog no 
knowledge, whether borrowed from tradition or obser- 
vation, confident in the ultimate triumph of science, 
but imjireHsed with the conviction that each single 
person could contiibute a little only to its progress. 
Yet though thus working mther than speculating, — 
dealing with particulars more than with generals, — 
employeil mainly in adding to knowlalge, and not in 
defining what knowledge ia or Jiow additions are to 
be made to it, — these men, thoughtful, dbrious, and of 
comprehensive minds, were constantly le<l to important 
views on the nature and methods of science. And 
these views, thus suggest<xl V>y reflections on their own 
mental activity, were gradually incorporated with the 
more ab.s tract doctrines of the metaphysicians, and 
liad a most important influence in (jsttiblisliing an im- 
proved philosophy of science. The indications of such 
view., we must now endeavo\ir to collect from the 
wiitings of the discoverers of the times preceding the 
seventeenth century. 

Some of the earliest of these indications arc to be 
found in those who dealt with Art retlier than with 
Science. I have already endetivoured to show that the 
advance of the ai*ts which give us a command over the 
powers of nature, is generally prior to the foi'mation 
of exact and sjieculative knowledge concerning those 
powers. But Art, which is thus the predecessor of 
^Science, is, among nations of acute anti twtive intellects, 
usually its parent. There operates, in such a cuse, a 
speculative spirit, leading men to seek for the reasons 
of that which they find theiifeelves able to do. How 
slowly, and with what repeated deviations men follow 
this leading, when under the influence of a partial and 
dogmatical philosophy, the late birth and slow growth 
of sound physical theory shows. But at the period of 
•which we now speak, we find men, at length, proceed- 
iftg in obedience to the impulse which thus drives them 
from practice to theory ; — from an acquaintance wjth 
phenomena to a free and intelligent inquiry coimemiug 
their cattses, . ' 



I06 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOV8ET. 

2. Letmmdo da Vind — b&ve already noted, in 
the History of Science, that the Indistinctness of Ideas, 
which was long one main impediment to the progress 
of science in the middle ages, was first I'emedied among 
architects and eugineeis. These men, so fiur at least as 
mechanical ideas were concerned, were compelled by 
their employments to judge rightly of the relations and 
properties of the materials with which they had to deal ; 
and would have been chastised by the failure of their 
works, if they had vio^p.te<l the laws of mechanical truth. 
It was not wobderful, therefore, that these laws became 
known to them first. We have seen, in the 
that Leonardo da Vinci, the celebrated painter, who 
was also an cnghicer, is the fimt writer in whom we 
find the true view of the laws of equilibnum of the 
lever in the most general case. This artist, a man of 
a lively and discursive mind, is led to make some re- 
marks' on the formation of our knowledge, which may 
show the opinions on that subject that already offered 
themselves at the lieginning of the sixteenth century*. 
He expresses himself m follows : — “Theory is the gene- 
ral, Ex{)eriments are the soldiers. The interpreter of 
the artifices of nature is Experience : she is never de- 
ceived. Our judgment sometimes is deceived, because 
it expects effects which Experience refuses to allow.” 
And again, *‘We must consult Experience, and vary 
the circumstances till we have drawn from them gene- 
i-al rules; for it is she who furnishes true rules. But 
of wliat use, you ask, are these rules ; I reply, that 
they direct us in the researches of nature and the 
operations of art. They prevent our impoedng upon 
ourselves and others b^ jiromising ourselves results 
which we cannot obtain. 

“ In the study of the sciences which depend on mathe* 
mattes, those who do not consult nature but authors, 
are not the children of nature, they are only her grand- 


"i Hlfl works have sever been piSEK Mmi sur tea Ouwagea da 
lUbedfOndexlstln iiiantiseril»tin the VincL Vaa\M,tyg7. 
lU>rair of the Institute home * Leonardo died In x$ae, st tbs 

eetnuits wore imblished by Venittri, ofya ^ 




PRACTICAL REFORMERS OP SCIENCE. iQf 

children. She is the true teacher of men of genius* 
But see the; absurdity of men I They turn up their 
noses at a man who prefers to Icam from nature her- 
self rather than from authors who are only her clerks.” 

In another place, in I’eference to a particular ease, 
he says, “Nature begins from the Reason and ends in 
Experience ; but for all that, we must take the opposite 
course; begin from the Experiment and tiy to discx>ver 
the Reason.” 

Leonardo was bom forty-six years before Tclesius ; 
yet we have here an estimate of tfie valucft)f exj)erieuce 
far more just and substantial than the Calabrian school 
ever reached. The expressions contained in the above 
extracts, are well worthy our notice ;->~that experience 
is never deceived ; — that we must vary our experi- 
ments, and draw from them general rules ; — that na- 
ture is the original source of knowledge, and l)Ooks 
only a derivative sulistitute; — ^with a lively image of 
the sons and grandsons of nature. Some of these 
assertions have been deemed, and not without reason, 
very similar to those made by Bacon a century later. 
Yet it is probable that the import of such expressions, 
in Ijeonaixlo^s mind, was less clear and definite than 
tliat which they acquii-ed by the pi'ogress of sound phi- 
losophy. When he says that theory is the general 
and experiments the soldiers, he probably meant that 
theory directs men what experiments to make; and 
Lad not in his mind the notion of a theoretical Idea 
ordering and brigading the Facts. When be says that 
Experience is the intei*pretcr of Nature, we may recol- 
lect, that in a more correct use of this image, Expe- 
rience and Nature are the writing, and the Intellect 
of man the interpreter. We may add, that the clear 
apprehension of the importance of Experience led, in 
this as in other cases, to an unjust depreciation of the 
value of what science owed to booka Leonardo would 
•have made little progress, if he had attempted to master 
a complex science, astronomvfor instance, by means gf 
observation alone, without the aid of books. 

But in spite of such criticism, Leonardo’s maxima 
show extraordinaiy sagacity and insight; and they 



io8 


PHILOSOPHT OP DISCOVERY. 


appear to us the more remarkable, when we .see how 
rare such views are for a century after his time, 

3. Copernicus . — For we by no means find> even in 
those practical discoverers to whom, in reality, the re- 
volution in science, and c<jnsequently in the philosophy 
of science, was due, this prompt and vigorous recognition 
of the supreme authoiity of observation as a ground of 
belief; this bold estimate of the probsible worthleasness 
of trtulitioiial knowledge; and this plain assertion of 
the reality of theory founded upon experience. Among 
such discoverers, Copcriiicus must ever hold a most 
distinguished pLicc. The heliocentric theoi*y of the 
universe, established by him with vast labour and 
deep knowledge, .was, for the succeeding centuiy, the 
field of discipline and exertion of all the m(^t active 
speculative minds. Men, during that time, proved 
their frecdojn of thought, their hopeful spirit, aaid 
their comprehensive view, by adopting, inculcating^ 
and following out the philosophy which this theory 
suggested. But in the first promuigation of the theory, 
ill the works of Copernicus himselt^ we find a tar 
more cautious and reserved temper. He does not, 
indeed, give up the leality of his tlieoiy, but lie ex- 
presses himself so as CO avoid shocking those who might 
(as some aft<3iwards did) think it safe to speak of it as 
an hypothesis lather tlxan a truth. In his preface ad- 
dressed to the Pope®, after speaking of the difiicultics 
in the old and received doctrines, by which he was led 
to his own theory, he says, Hence I l>egan to think 
of the mobility of tlie earth ; and although the opinion 
seemed absurd, yet because I know that to othero l3e- 
fore me this liberty had been conceded, of imagiiiing 
any kinds of circles in order to explain the phenomena 
of the stars, I thought it would also be readily granted 
me, that 1 might try whether, by supposing the earth 
to 1)0 in motion, I might not anivo at a better expla- 
nation than theirs, of the revolutions of the celestial, 
o|‘bs.’* Nor does he anywhere assert that the seeming 


1111543. 




PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. I09 

absurdity had become a ceiiain truth, or betray any 
feeling of triumph over the mistaken belief of his 
predecessors. And, as I liave elsewhere shown, his 
disciples* indignantly and justly defended him from 
the charge of disrespect towaixls Ptolemy and other 
ancient astronomers. Y et Copernicus is fiir from com- 
promising the value or evidence of the great truths 
whicli he introduced to general acceptance; and from 
sinking in liis exposition of his discoveries below tbe 
temper which had led to them. His quotation from 
Ptolemy, that “He who is to follow phflosopliy must 
be a freeman iu mind,” is a grand and noble maxim, 
which it well became him to utter. 

4. Fabneins . — In another of the<great discoverers 
of this period, though employed on a veiy diifercnt sub- 
ject, we discern much of the Siinie temper. Fabricius 
of Acquapendeiite*, the tutor and forerunner of our 
Harvey, and one of that illustrious series of Paduan 
))rofe^8oi‘» who were the fathers of anatomy®, exhibits 
something of the same respect tor antiquity, in the 
midst of his original speculations. Thus in a disscT- 
tjition’ On ifie Action of ike JointSy he quotes Aris- 
totle’s Mechanical Problems to prove that in all ani- 
mal motion there must be some quiescent fulcrum ; 
and finds merit even in Aristotle’s ignorance, “Aris- 
totle,” he says", “did not know that motion was 
produced by the muscle; and after staggering aliout 
from one supposition to another, at last is compelled 
by the facts themselves to recur to an innate spirit, 
which, he conceives, is contrasted, and which pulls 
and pushes. And here we cannot help admiring the 
genius of Aristotle, who, though ignorant of the ixius- 
ole, invents something which produces nearly the same 
effect us the muscle, namely, oontmetion and pulling,” 
He then, with great acuteness, points out the dis- 
tinction between Aristotle’s opinions, thus favourably 
jnterpreted, and those of Qalen. In all this, we see 


^ Riti. Ind, b. V. c, U. * Bora 1537, died 1619, 

* Ritt Ituf. Sc, b, XVlt. c. U. sect t. 

* Fabriclos, De Ifo^u hoeaXi, * p. 199. 




no 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCO VEllY. 


somethiDg of the wish to find all truths in the wiitings 
of the ancients, but nothing which materiall3r inter- 
feres with ii-eedom of inquiry. The anatomists have 
in ail ages and countries been practically employed in 
seeking knowledge from observation. Facts have ever 
been to them a subject of careful and profitable study ; 
while the ideas which enter into the wider truths of 
the science, are, as we have seen, even still involved 
in obscurity, doubt, and contest. 

5. jtlfrtwoZycies.— Francis Maurolycus of Messana, 
whose mathematical works were published in 1575, was 
one of the gi*eat improvers of the science of optics in his 
time. In his Preface to his Treatise on the Spheres, 
he speaks of previous writers on the same subject : anil 
observes that as they have not superseded one another, 
they have not rendered it unfit for any one to treat 
the subject afresh. ‘‘Yet,” he says, “it is impossible 
to amend the errors of all who have preceded us. 
This would be a task too hard for Atlas, although he 
supports the heavens. Even Copernicus is tolerated, 
who makes the sun to be fixed, and the earth to move 
round it in a circle, and who is more worthy of a 
whip or a scourge thuji of a refutation.” The mathe- 
maticians and astronomei's of tliat time werte not the 
persons most sensible of the progress of physical know- 
ledge ; for the basis of their science, and a great part 
of its substance, were contained in the writings of the 
ancients; and till the time of Kepler, Ptolemy^s work 
was, very justly, looked upon as including all that was 
essential in tlie science. 

6. Benedelti , — But the writex’s on Mechanics were 
naturally led to pi-asent themselves as innovators and 
experimenters; for all that the ancients had taxight 
concerning the doctrine of motion was erroneous; 
while those who sought their knowledge from experi- 
ment, were constantly led to new truths. John Bap- 
tist Benedetti, a Venetian nobleman, in 1599, pub; 
Ushed his Spemlationum Liberj containing, among other 
matter, a treatise on Mechanics, in wliich several of 
the Aristotelian errors wei*e refuted. In the Preface 
to this Treatise, he says, “ Many authors have written 



PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. Ill 

much, and with great ability, on Mechanics ; but since 
nature is constantly bringing to light something either 
new, or before unnoticed, I too wished to put forth a 
few things hitherto unattempted, or not sufficiently 
explained.’’ In the doctrine of motion he distinctly 
and at some length condemns and ai'gues against all 
tlio Aristotelian doctrines concerning motion, weight, 
and many other fundamental principles of physics. 
Benedotti is also an adherent of the Coperniean doc- 
trine. He states^ the enormous velocity which the 
heavenly bodies must have, if tfto eartl^be the centre 
of their motions; and adds, “ which difficulty does not 
occur according to the beautiful theory of tlio Saiiiiaii 
Aristarchus, expounded in a divine manner by Nicolas 
Copernicus; against which the reasons alleged by Aris- 
todo are of no w'eight” Bcnedctti throughout shows 
no want of the coumge or ability w^hich were needed 
in order to rise in opposition against the dogmas of 
the Peripatetics. He docs not, however, refer to ex- 
periment in a very direct manner; indeed most of the 
facts on wliich the elementary truths of mechanics 
i-est, were known and admitted by the Aristotelians; 
and tlierefore could not be adduced as novelties. On 
the contrary, he begins with d priori maxims, which 
experience would not have confirmed. “Since^” he 
says’**, “we have undertaken the ttisk of proving that 
Aristotle is wrong in his opinions concerning motion, 
there ai'e certain absolute truths, the objects of the 
intellect known of themselves, w’^hich we must lay 
down in the first place.” And then, as an example of 
these truths, he states this : “ Any two bodies of equal 
sue and figure, but of different materials, will have 
their natiu^ velocities in the same proportion as their 
weights ;” where by their natural velocities, he means 
the velocities with which they naturally fall dowH'* 
wanis. 

7. Gilbert , — ^Tho greatest of these practical reform- 
ers of science is our countryman, William Gilbert; |f, 


> X/iUr, {». 195. 


RrW. V, 169. 




112 PHILOSOPHY OF DlSOOYlilbr, 

indeed, in Tirtiie of the ole&r views of,. tW prospecte 
which were then o])ening to soipnoe, and oi ihe, 
methods by which lier futtu^ progress was to be se^ 
cured, while he exemplified those views by physical 
discoveries, be docs not rather deserve the still higher' 
praise of being at the same time a theoretical and a 
practical reformer. OilbeH’s physical researches and 
sj^eculations were employed principally upon 8ub|ccrh| * 
on which the ancients had known little or noth|^ng; 
and on which therefore it could not be doubtful whe- 
ther tradition*or obsefvation was the source of know- 
ledge. Such was magnetism; for the ancleTcts were 
barely acquainted with the attractive property of the 
iTiiigiiet Its }>olarity, including repulsion as well as 
attraction, its direction towards the north, its limited 
variation from this direction, its declination from the 
horizontal position, were all modem discoveries. Gil- 
l^ei-t’s work" on the magnet and on the magnetism of 
the earth, appeared in 1600; and in this, he repeatedly 
nuiintains the superiority of experimental knowledge 
over the physical philosophy of the ancients. His 
preface opens thus: Since in making discoveries and 
searching out the hidden causes of things, stroiig^^r 
reasons are obtained from trustworthy experiments 
and demonstrable argumeiits, than from prol^ble con- 
jectures and the dogmas of those who philosophize in 
the usual manner,” he has, he says, endeavoured to 
proceed from common magnetical experiments to the 
inward constitution of the earth.” As I have stated 
in the History of Magnetism**, Gilbert’s work Con- 
tains all the fundamental facts of that science, so miy , 
stated, that we have, at this day, little to add to them. { 
He is not, however, by the advance which he thus 
made, led to depreciate the ancients, but only to claim 
for himself the same liberty of philosophizing which 


GuUelml OUberti, OoUusstrUnsiii Mediti L(mAinnn$i»j De Moffnete, Afoff- 
ffeHnsque Corpontnis, et de Magno MagneU Tetture, ^hyaiolodia Nwa, plurU 
mU et Aryumenlis et Experimmiie demumetrata. 

» JfirutJ)uf.Sc.l).xU.c. L 




PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. II3 

tliey liad enjoyed To those ancient and first parents 
of philosophy, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Ptolemy, Hip- 
pocrates, Galen, be all due honour; from them it was 
that the streatn of wisdom has been derived down to 
posterity. But our age has discovered and brought 
to light many things which they, if they were yet 
alive,, would gladly embrace. Wherefore we also shall 
not hesitate to expound, by probable hypotheses, those 
things which by long experience we have ascortairied.’' 

In this work the author not only adopts the Ooj)er- 
nican doctrine of the earth’s motion, bat speaks** of 
the contrary supposition as “utterly" absurd, founding 
his argument mainly on the vast velocities which such 
a supposition requires us to ascribe to the celestial 
bodies. Dr. Gilbert was physician to Queen Elizabeth 
and to James the First, and died in] 1603. Some time 
after his death the executors of his brother published 
another work of his, De Mundo ruysiro Svhlunari Fhi- 
loBophia Nova, in which similar views are still more 
compreheusively presentecL In this he says, “The 
two lords of philosophy, Aristotle and Galen, are held 
in worship like gods, and rule the schools; — ^the for- 
mer by some destiny obtained a sway and iufiuence 
among philosophei's, like that of his pupil Alexander 
among the kings of the earth ; — Galen, with like suc- 
cess, holds his triumph among the physicians of Eu- 
rope.” This comj)arison of Aristotle to Alexander 
was also taken hold of by Beeon, Nor is Gilbert an 
unwbrthy precursor of B^on in the view he gives of 
the^ jftistory of Science, which occupies the first three 
fdiapters of his Philosophy. He traces this history 
from “ the simplicity and ignorance of the ancients,” 
through “ the fabrication of the fable of the four ele- 
ments,” to Aristotle and Galen. He mentions with 
due disapproval the host of commentators which suc- 
ceeded, the alchemists, the “shipwreck of science in 
the deluge of the Goths,” and the revival of letters 
and genius in the time of “ our grandfathers.” “ Th^i 


Pret M De MagwU, lib. tL a 3, 4. 

Z 



II4 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


later age,*’ lie says, “ has exploded the Barhtarians^ and 
restor^ the Greeks and Latins to theii*^ pristine grace 
and honour. It remains, that if they have written 
aught in error, this should be remedied by better and 
more productive processes {frugiferi^ instifcutis), not 
to be contemned for their novelty ; (for nothing which 
is true is really new, but is perfect from eternity, 
though to weak man it may bo unknown ;) and that 
tlins Philosophy may bear her fruit.” The reader of 
Bacon will not fail to recognize, in these references to 
‘^fruit-bearing” know*ledge, a similiirity of expression 
with the Novum Oryawn. 

Bacon docs not appear to me to have done justice to 
his contempirary. He nowhere rccogtiizea in the la- 
bours of Gilbert a community of purpose and spirit 
with his own. On the other hand, he casts upon him 
a reflection which he by no means deserves. In the 
Advancement of Learning he says, “ Another error 
is, that men have used to infect their meditations, 
opinions, and doctrines, with some conceits which they 
lAve most admired, or some sciences to which they 
have most applied; and given all things else a tinc- 
ture according to them, utterly untrue and improper... 
So have the alchemists made a philosophy out of a 
few experiments of the furnace; and Gill>crtus, our 
countiyman, Lath made a philosophy out of the ob- 
servations of a loadstone,” (in the Latin, philosopliiam 
etiam e magneto olicuit). And in the same manner 
he mentions him in the Novum Organon^'^, as afford- 
ing an example of an empirical kind of philosophy, 
which appears to those daily conversant with the ex- 
periments, probable, but to other persons incredible 
and empty. But instead of blaming Gilbert for dis- 
turbing and narrowing science by a too constant re- 
ference to magnetical rules, we might rather censm^e 
Bacon, for not seeing how important in all natural 
philosophy are those laws of attraction and repulsioi^ 
of which magnetical phenomena are the most obvious 


» Nw, Org. b. L 


M]|.l..Aph.64. 




PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. I15 


illustration. We may find ground for such a judg- 
ment in another passage in which Bacon speaks of 
Gilbert In the Second Book” of the Novum Orga- 
non, having classified motions, he gives, as one kind, 
what he calls, in hia figurative language, motion for 
gain, or motion of need, by which a body shuns hete- 
rogeneous, and seeks cognate bodies. And he adds, 
“The Electrical operation, conceimiiig which Gilbert 
and others since him have made up such a wonderfhl 
story, is nothing less than thev appetite of a body, 
which, excited by friction, does not. well tolerate the 
air, and prefei’s another tangible body if it be found 
near.” Bacon’s notion of an appetite in the body is 
certainly much less philosophical thdn Gilbert’s, who 
speaks of liglit bodies as drawn towards amber by 
certain material radii*®; and we might perhaps ven- 
ture to say that Bacon here manifests a want of clear 
mechanical ideas. Bacon, too, showed his inferior 
aptitude for physical research in rejecting the Copei*- 
uicari doctrine which Gilbert adopted. In the Ad- 
vancefnent of Learning^^, suggesting a history of tfie 
opinions of pliilosopliers, he says that he would have 
inserted in it even recent theories, as those of Para- 
celsus; of Telesius, who restored the philosophy of 
Parmenides; or Patricius, who resiiblimed the fumes 
of Platonism ; or Gilbert, who brought back the dog- 
mas of Philolaus. But Bacon quotes*® with plea.sure 
Gilbert’s ridicule of the Peripatetics’ definition of 
heat. They had said, that heat is that which sepa- 
rates heterogeneous and unites homogeneous matter ; 
which, said Gilbert, is as if any one were to define 
¦man as that which sows wheat and plants vines. 

Galileo, another of Gilbert*a distinguished contem- 
poraries, had a higher opinion of him. He says**, “I 
extremely admire and envy this author. I think him 
worthy of the greatest praise for the many now and 
4;ni6 observations which ho has made, to the disgiuce 


VoL ix. 185. Be MaqneU, p. 60. 

» B. UL c. 4. » Nov. Orp. b. U. Aph. 48. 

Si ]>riiikwftter*8 ^fOoJLUeo, p. i8. 



Il6 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEttT. 

of 8Q many vain and fabling authors; who writer not 
from their own knowledge only, but repeat everything 
they hear from the foolish and vulgar, yithout at- 
tempting to satisfy themselves of the same by experi- 
ence ; perhaps that they may not diminish the size of 
their books.” 

8. Galileo , — Galileo was content with the active and 
successful practice of experimental inquiry; and did 
not demand that such researches should be made ex- 
pressly subservient tq that widei* and more ambitious 
philosophy, on which the author of the Novum Organon 
employed bis powers. But still it now becomes our 
business to trace those portions of Galileo^s views which 
have reference td the theory, as well as the practice, 
of scientific investigation. On this subject, Galileo did 
not think more profoundly, perhaps, than several of his 
contemporaries; but in the liveliness of expression and 
illustration with which he recommended lik opinions 
on such topics, he was unrivalled. Writing in the lan- 
guage of the people, in the attractive form of dialogue, 
mth clearness, grace, and wit, ho did far more ^an 
any of his predecessors had done to render the new 
methods, results, and prospects of science familiar to a 
wide circle of readers, fii’st in Italy, and soon, all over 
Europe. The piincipal points inculcated by him were 
already becoming familiar to men of active and inquir- 
ing minds; such as, — that knowledge was to be sought 
from observation, and not from books; — ^that it was 
absurd to adhere to, and debate abou^ the physical 
tenets of Aristotle and the rest of the ancients. On 
persons who followed this latter course, Galileo fixed 
the epithet of Paper Philosophers”; because, as he 
wrote in a letter to Kepler, this sort of men fancied 
that philosophy was to be studied like the jEneid or 
Odyseee^ and that the true reading of nature was to bo 
detected by the collation of texts. Nothing so much 
shook the authority of the received system of Physics 
as the experimental discoveries, directly contradicting 





PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. II 7 

it, which Galileo made. By experiment, as I have 
elsewhere stated^, he disproved the Aristotelian doc- 
trine that bodies fall quickly or slowly in pi^oportion 
to their weight. And when he had invented the tele- 
scope, a number of new discoveries of the most striking 
kind (the inequalities of the moon’s surface, the spots 
in the sun, the moon-like phases of Venus, the satel- 
lites of Jupiter, the ring of Saturn,) showed, by the 
evidence of the eyes, how inadequate were the concep- 
tions, and how erroneous the doctrines of the ancieui^, 
respecting the constitution of the nnivers^v How severe 
the blow was to tlie disciples of the ancient schools, we 
may judge by the extraordinary forms of defence in 
which they tried to intrench themselves. They would 
not look through Galileo’s glasses ; they umiiitained 
that what was seen was an illusion of witchcraft ; and 
they tried, as Galileo says" with logical arguments, as if 
with magical ineantatious, to charm the new planets 
out of the sky, No one could bo better fitted than 
Giilileo for such a warfare. His great knowledge, clear 
intellect, gaiety, and light irony, (with the advantage 
of being in the right,) enabled him to play with his 
adversaries as he pletised. Thus when an Aristotelian" 
rejected the discovery of the irregularities in the moon’s 
surface, because, according to the ancieut doctrine, her 
form was a perfect sphere, and held that the appai'ent 
cavities were filled with an invisible crystal su^tance, 
Galileo replied, that lie had no objection to assent to 
this,*but that then he should require lus adversary in 
return to believe that there were on the same sur- 
face invisible crystal mountains ten times as high as 
those visiblo ones which he had actually observed and 
measured. 

We find in Galileo many thoughts which have 
since become established maxims of modern philoso- 
phy. ‘‘Philosophy,” he says", “is written in that 
great book, I mean the Universe, which is constantly 
*open before our eyes; bat it cannot be understood, 


« in«t. Sc. U.VLC.U. sects. " aaiaeo,p.a9. 
JbkL p. 33 . “ iZSfffliriatow, it 347, 



tl8 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 

unless we first know the language and loam the 
characters in which it is written.” With this thought 
he combines some other lively images. One of his 
interlocutors says concerning another, <‘Sarsi perhaps 
thinks that philosophy is a book made up of the fan- 
cies of men, like the Iliad or Orlando Furioso^ in 
which the matter of least importance is, that what 
is written bo true.” And again, with regard to the 
system of authority, he says, “I think I 'discover in 
him a firm belief that, in philosophizing, it is necessary 
to lean upoii«the opihion of some celebrated author; 
as if our mind must necessarily remain unfruitful and 
barren till it be married to another man^s reason.” — 
“N'o,” he says, ‘ithe case is not so. — When we have 
the decrees of Nature, authority goes for nothing; 
reason is absolute*’.” 

In the course of Galileo’s controversies, questions of 
the logic of science camo under discussion. Vincenzio 
di Grazia objected to a proof from induction which 
Galileo aflduced, because all the particulars were not 
enumerated; to which the latter justly replies***, that if 
induction were required to pass through all the cases, 
it would be either useless or impossible; — impossible 
when the cases are innumerable; useless when they 
have each already been verified, since then the general 
proposition adds nothing to our knowledga 

One of the most novel of the character which 
Science assumes in Galileo’s hands is, that she becomes 
cautious. She not only proceeds leaning upon Ex|)eri- 
ence, but she is content to proceed a little way at a 
time. She already begins to perceive that she must 
nse to the heights of knowledge* by many small and 
separate steps. The philosopher is desiroi^ to know 
much, but resigned to be ignorant for a time of that 
which cannot yet be known. Thus when Galileo dis- 
covered the true law of the motion of a falling body**, 
tliat the velocity incr<^es proportionally to the time 
If om the beginning of the ^1, he did nrft insist npan 


^ n8aogiat(>re,]l, TOO. « ilKd^L 501. 

* JtuL Jnd. b. tL e. iL sect. a. 




PUACllCAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE, lip 

immediately assigning the cause of this law. ‘‘The 
cause of the accelemtion of the motions of falling 
bodies is not,” he says, “a necessary part of the in- 
vest! gation-” Yet the conception of this acceleration, 
as the resuit of the continued action of the force of 
gravity upon the falling body, could hardly fail to 
.sugg(*.st itself to one who had formed ihe idea of force. 
In like manner, the tnith that the velocities, acquired 
by bmlies falling ‘down planes of equal lieights^ are all 
f*qual, Avas known to Galileo and his disciples, long 
before be accounted for it*^, t»y the ifuiuciple, ap- 
parently so obvious, that the momentum geriemtcd 
is iuj the moving force wljich generates it. lie was 
not tempted to laish at once, from* an experimental 
truth to a universal system. 8cienoe had learnt that 
she must move ate]) by step; and the gravity of her 
l)acc already indicated her appmaching maturity and 
her consciousness of the long path which lay befuro 
lier. 

But besitles the genuine philosophical prudence which 
thus Avithheld Galileo fi'om leaping hastily from one 
inference to another, he had perhaps a preponderating 
inclination towards facts; and did not feel, so much as 
some other peraons of his time, the need of reducing 
them to ideas. He could bear to contemplate laws of 
motion without being urged by an uncontrollable desire 
to refer them to conceptions of force. 

9. Kepler , — In tliis respect his friend Kepler differed 
from him ; for Kepler was restless and unsatisfied till 
he had I’educed facts to laws, and laws to causes ; and 
never acquiesced in ignorance, though he tested with 
the most rigorous scrutiny that which presented itself 
in the shape of knowledge to fill the void. It may be 
seen in the History of Astronomy with what per- 
severance, energy, and fertility of invention, Kepler 
pui*sued his lalmurs, (enlivened and relieved by the 
^ most curious freaks of fancy,) with a view of discover- 
*iMg the rules which regulate the motions of the planpt 


HUi. Ind. Se, h,^± e. li. sect 4- 


IM(L b. ?. a Iv. sect I. 




120 . PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


Mars. He represents this employment under the image 
of a war&re; and describes his object to be to 
triumph over Mars, and to pivpare for him, as for ono 
altogether vanquished, tabular prisons and equated . 
eccentric fetters;” and when, **the enemy, left at 
home a despised captive, had burst all the chains of 
the equations, and broken forth of the }>rison8 of tlie 
tables;” — when was buzzed here and there that the 

victory is vain, and that the w»ir is raging anew as 
violently as before;” — that is, when the rules which 
he had proposed did^ot coincide with the facts; — he 
by no means desisted from his attempts, but “suddenly 
sent into the field a reserve of new physical reasonings 
oil the rout and. dispei-sion of the vetenins,” that is, 
tried new suppositions su^ested by such views as he 
then entertained of the celestial motions. His effc»rts 
to obtain the formal laws of the planetaiy motions 
resulted in .some of the most iuqiortant discoveries 
ever made in astronomy ; and if his j>hysical reason- 
ings were for the time fruitless, this arose only from 
the want of that discipline in mechanical ideas which 
the minds of mathematicians bad still to undergo; for 
the great discoveries Newton in the next generation 
showed that, in reality, the next step of the advance 
was in this direction. Among all Kepler's fantastical 
expressions, the fundamental thoughts were sound and 
true ; namely, that it was his business, as a physical 
investigator, to discover a mathematical rule which 
governed and included all the special &cts; and that 
the rules of the motions of the planets must conform 
to some conception of causation. 

The same oharacteristics, — the conviction of rule and 
cause, perseveMaee in seeking these, inventiveness in 
devising hypotheses, love of truth in trying and re- 
jecting them, and a lively Fancy playing with the 
Heasou without interrupting her, — appear also in his 
work on Optics; in which he tried to discover the^ 
e^met law of optical refraction". In this undertaking* 


•» J>e Stell, MaH, p. iv. c. 51 IMnkwater’t KepUr^ p, 33. 
>3 FttUlAhtdiOH* 




. PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 121 

he did not i^uooeed entirely; nor does he profess to 
have done so. Ho ends his numerous attempts by 
saying, “Now, reader, you and I liave been detained 
suiHciently long while 1 have been attempting to collect 
irUo om forgot the measures of difforent refractions^” 

In this and in other expressions, we see how clearly 
he apprehended that colliyation of facta which is the 
main business of^the practical discoverer. And by his 
])oculiar endowments and habits, Kepler exliibiU an 
essential portion of this process, which hardly appeal's 
at all in Galileo. In order tft bind together facts, 
theory is requisite as well as obser\atioii, — the cord as 
well as the fagots. And the true theory is often, if 
not always, obtained by trying several and selecting 
the right. Now of this portion of the discoverer’s 
exertions, Kepler is a most conspicuous examples His 
fertility in devising suppositions, his undaunted indus- 
try in calculating the results of them, his entire honesty 
and candour in resigning them if these results dis- 
agreed with the facts, are a very instructive spectacle ; 
and are fortunately exliibited to us in the most lively 
manner in his own garrulous narratives. Galileo uiged 
men by precept os well as example to begin their phi- 
losophy from observation ; Kejder taught them by his 
practice that tliey must proceed from ol)servation by 
means of hypotheses. The one insistcil upon facts; 
the other dealt no leas copiously with ideas. In the 
practical, as in the speculative ‘poiiiion of our history, 
this antithesis shows itself; although in the practical 
part we cannot have the two elements separated, as in 
the speculative we sometimes have. 

In the Ui$tory of I hav^ devoted several 

pages to the iutellectucd character of JEepler, inasmuch 
as his habit of devising so great a multitude of hypo- 
thesesy so &ncifully expressed, had led some writers to 
look upon him as an inquirer who transgressed the 
, most fixed rules of philosophical inquiiy. This opi- 
uion has arisen, I conceive, among those who haye 


M Jitd. Sc. b. V. c. Iv. nect. x. 




J22 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCO VERT. 

foi^otten the necessity of Ideas as well as JPacts for 
all theory ; or who have overlooked the impossibility 
of selecting and explicating ^our ideas without a good 
deal of spontaneous play of the mind. It must, how- 
ever, always be recollected that Kepler^s genius and 
fancy derived all their scientific value fi-om his genuine 
and uiimingled love of truth. These qualities appeared, 
not only in the judgment he passed upon hypotheses, 
but also in matters which more immediately concerned 
Ilia reputation. Thus when Galileo’s discovery of the 
telescope dispioved acVoral opinions which Kepler had 
publi.shcd and strenuously maintained, he did not hesi- 
tate a moment to retract his assertions and range him- 
self by the side gf Galileo, whom he vigorously sup- 
ported in his warfare? against those who were incapable 
of thus cheerfully acknowledging the triumph of new 
facts over their old theories. 

10. Tycho . — There remains one eminent astronomer, 
the friend and fellow-labourer of Kepler, whom we must 
not separate from him as one of the ]u*actical reformers 
of science. I speak of Tycho Brahe, who is, I think, 
not justly appreciated by the litemry world in genera], 
in consequence of his having made a retrograde ste^) 
in that ]Jortion of astronomical theory which is most 
familiar to the popular mind. Though he adopted the 
Copemican view of the motion of the planets about 
the sun, he refused to acknowledge the annual and 
diurnal motion of the earth. But notwithstanding 
this mistake, into which he was led by his interpreta- 
tion of Scripture rather than of nature, Tycho must 
ever be one of the greatest names in astronomy. In 
the philosophy of science also, the influence of what 
he did is &r fix)m inconsiderable; and especially its 
value in bringing into notice these two points : — that 
not only are observations the beginning of science, Imt 
that the progress of science may often depend upon 
the observer’s pursuing his task regularly and c^refially ^ 
for a long time, and with well devised instruments; 
and again, that observed facts offer a mcceti$von of 
laws which we disccjver as our observations become 
better, and as our theories are better adapted to the 



PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 12$ 

observations. With regard to the former point, Tycho’s 
observatory was far sujKjrior to all that had preceded 
it^^, not only in the optical, but in the mechanical 
arrangements; a matter of almost equal consequence. 
And hence it was that his observations inspired in 
Kepler that confidence which led him to aU his la- 
bours and all his discoveries. “Sinc^,” he says®®, “the 
divine goodness has given us in Tyclio Br%he an exact 
ol>server, from whose observations this error of eight 
minutes in the calculations of the Ptolemaic hypothesis 
is detected, let us acknowledge '%nd make use of this 
gift of Cod : and since this error cannot be neglected, 
these eight minutes alone have prepared the way for 
an entire relbrm of Astronomy, a^^d are to be the 
main subject of this work.” 

With n^gard to Tycho’s discoveries respecting the 
moon, it is to be recollected that besides the* fii'st in- 
fH^uality of the moon’s motion, (the equation of the 
centre^ arising from the elliptical form of her orbit,) 
Ptolemy had discovered a second inequality, tlie evec- 
tion^ wliich, as wti have observed in the Histoiy of 
this subject might have naturally suggested the sus- 
picion that there were still other ineijualities. In the 
middle .ages, however, such suggestions, implying a 
constant progress in science, were little attended to ; 
and, we have seen, that when an Arabian astrono- 
mer"" had really discovered another inequality of the 
moon, it was soon forgotten, because it had no place in 
the established systems, Tycho not only rediscovered 
the lunar inequality, (the variation^) thus once before 
won and lost, but also two other inequalities; namely"®, 
the change of inclination of the moon’s orbit as the 
line of nodes moves round, and an inequality in the 
motion of the line of nodes. Thus, as I have else- 
where said, it appcoi'ed that the discovery of a rule 
is a step to tlie discovery of deviations from that 
rule^ which require to bo expressed in other rules. It 


^ Iftit Tmi Se. b. vil. o. vL seot i. ^ DeSteU Mari, p. x), e. 
JENit/iKi.So.b.il.q.iT.ieot6. 

M Motttucla, L s66i 



124 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


became manifest to astronomers, and through them to 
all philosopher, that in the application of theory to 
observation, we find, not only the stated phenomena, 
for which the theory does account, but also residuaZ 
phenamenaf which are unaccounted for, and remain 
over and above the calculation. And it was seen fur- 
ther, that these residual phenomena might be, alto- 
gether or i%part, exhausted by new theones. 

* These were valuable lessons ; and the more valuable 
inasmuch as men were now trying to lay down maxims 
f^ud methods ibr the cfinduct of science. A revolution 
was not only at hand, but had really taken place, in 
the great body of real cultivators of science. The 
occasion now I'oquired that this revolution should be 
foimally recognized ; — that the new intellectual power 
shotild be ch)thed with the forms of government; — 
that the* new philosophical republic should be acknow- 
ledged as a sister state by the ancient dynasties of 
Aristotle and Plato. There was needed some great 
Theoretical Reformer, to speak in the name of the 
Experimental Philosophy; to lay before the world a 
declaration of its rights and a scheme of its laws. And 
thus our eyes are turned to Francis Bacon, and others 
who like him attempted this great office. quit 

tliose august and venerable names of discoverers, whose 
appearance was the prelude and announcement of the 
new state of things then opening ; and in doing so, we 
may apply to them the language which Bacon applies 
to himself^: — 

KijpvK^t Attf dyycXoi koI dvSpw, 

Hail, Heralds, Messengers of Gods and Men ! 


40 De Anffm, Ub. ir. c. i. 



CHAPTER XV. 


Eranois Bacon. 


(I.) I. General ItennarlpB , — ^jftp is a rAatter of some 
difliculty to speak of the character and merits of this 
illustrious man, as regards his place in that philosophical 
history with which we are here engaged. If we were to 
content ourselves with estimating him according to the 
oihce which, as we have just seen, he claims for himself*, 
as merely the harbinger and announcer of a sounder 
method of scientific inquiry than that which was i-e- 
cognized before him, the task would be comparatively 
easy. For we might select from his writings those 
passages in which he has delivered opinions and point- 
ed out processes, then novel and strange, but since 
confirm^ by the experience of actual discovercre, and 
by ’the judgments of the wisest of succeeding philoso- 
phers ; and we might pass by, without disi^spect, but 
without notice, maxims and proposals which have not 
been found available for use; — ^views so indistinct and 
vague, that we are even yet unable to pixmounce upcm 
their justice ; — and bouudless anticipations, dictated by 
the sanguine hopes of a noble and comprehensive in- 
tellect. But if we thus reduce the philosophy of 
Bacon to that portion which the subsequent progress 
of science has rigorously verified, we shall have to pass 
over many of those declarations which have excited 
most notice in his writings, and shall lose sight of 
many of those striking thoughts which his admirers 
« most love to dwell upon. For he is usually spoken 


> And in oih«r pusases: thus, **Ego enini liuooliiAtor tantum pugnam 
son inaa" Noa. Orp. lilb. Iv. c. x. 



126 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

t 

ofy at least in this country, as a teacher who not only 
commenced, but in a great measure completed, the 
Philosophy of Induction. He is considered, not only 
as having assci^ted some general piinciples, but laid 
down the special rules of scientific investigation; as 
not only one of tlie Founders, but the supreme Legis- 
lator of the modern Republic of Science; not only tho 
Hercules ^o slew the monsters that obstructed the 
earlier traveller, but the Solon who established a con- 
stitution fitted for all^future time. 

2. Nor i^it our purpose to deny that of such 
praise he deserves a share which, considering the i)e- 
riod at which he lived, is truly astonishing. But it is 
iiecessaiy for us in tliis place to discriminate and select 
that portion of his system which, bearing n'pon physical 
science, has since been confirmed by the actual history, 
of science. Many of Bacon^s most impressive and caj)- 
tivfl^ting passages contemplate the extension of tho new 
methods of discovering truth to intellectual, to moral, 
to political, as well lus to physical science. And how 
far, and how, the advantages of tho inductive method 
may be secured for those important branches of specu- 
lation, it will at some future time be a highly inter- 
esting task to examine. But our plan requu*cs us at 
present to omit the consideration of these ; for our 
purpose is to learn what the genuine course of the for- 
mation of science is, by tracing it in those poi’tions of 
human knowledge, which, by the confession of all, ai'e 
most exact, most certain, most complete. Hence we 
must here deny ourselves the dignity dnd interest 
Which float about all speculations in which the great 
moral and political concerns of inen are involved. It 
cannot be doubted that the commanding position which 
Bacon occupies in men’s estimation arises from his 
Yiroclaiming a reform in philosophy of so comprehen- 
sive a nature; — a reform which was to infiise a new 
spirit into every part of knowledge. Physical^Science , 
has tranquilly and noiselessly Copied many of his 
suggestions; which were, indeed, her own natorid, im- 
pulses, not borrowed from him; and she is too deisfly 
and satisfiictorily absorbed, in contemplating 



FRANCIS BACON. 


127 


suits, to talk much about the methods of obtaining 
tiiem which she has thus instinctively pursued. But 
the philosophy which deals with mind, with manners, 
with morals, with polity, is conscious still of much ob- 
scurity and perplexity; and would gladly borrow aid 
from a system in which aid is so confidently promised, 
^he aphorisms and phrases of the Novum Organon are 
tar more frequently quoted by metaphysical, ethical, 
and even theological writers, than they are by the au- 
thors of works on physics. 

3. Again, even siS regai*ds fdiysics, •Biicon’s fame 
rests upon something besides the novelty of the max- 
ims which he promulgated. That a revolution in the 
method of scientific research was going on, all the 
greatest physical investigatc»i-s of the sixteenth century 
were fully awaiH?, as we have shown in the last chap- 
ter. But their wiitings conveyed this conviction to 
thfe public at large somewhat slowly. Men of letters, 
men of the worltl, men of rank, did not become fa- 
miliar with the abstruse works in wliich these views 
were published ; and al)ove ail, they did not, by such 
occasional glimpses as they took of the state of physi- 
cal science, become aware of the magnitude and conse- 
quences of this change. But Bacon’s lofty eloquence, 
wide learning, comi>rehensive views, bold pictures of 
the coming state of tilings, wore fitted to make men 
turn a far more general and earnest gaze ujion the 
passing change. When a man of his acquirements, of 
hi^ talents, of his rank and position, of his gravity and 
caution, poured forth the strongest and loftiest expres- 
sions and images which his mind could supply, in 
order to depict the ?‘Great Instauration” which he 
aDiiouiice4; — in order to contnist the weakness,, the 
blindnesi^ the ignorance, the wretchedness, under 
which men hod laboured while they followed the long 
beaten track, witli the light, the power, the privileges, 
^ which they were to find in tlie paths to which he 
pointed; — it was impossible that* readers of all classes 
should not have their attention arrested, their minds 
stirred, , their hopes warmed { and shoidd not listen 
wifli wonder and with pleasure to the strains of 



128 


PHILOSOPHY OP BISCOYBRT. 


proplietio eloquence in vrhidi so great ^ sttlilaot imi 
presented. And when it found that pro- 
phecy was verified ; when it appeared that animnnense 
change in the methods of scientific research really Aad 
occuiTed; — that vast additions to man’s knowledge 
and power had been acquired, in modes like them 
wliicli had been spoken of; — that further advancq|» 
might be constantly looked for; — and that a progress, 
seemingly boundless, was going on in the direction in 
which the seer had thus pointed; — it was natured that 
men should hail him^as the leader of the revolution; 
that they should identify him with the event which he 
was the first to announce; that they should look upon 
him as the authoa of that which he had, as they per- 
ceived, so soon and so thoroughly comprehended. 

4. For wc must remark, that although (as we 
have seen) he was not the only, nor the earliest 
wiiter, who declared that the time was come for such 
a change, he not only proclaimed it more emphatically, 
but understood it, in its general character, much more 
exactly, than any of his contemporaries. Among the 
maxims, suggestions and anticipations which he threw 
out, there were many of which the wisdom and the 
novelty were alike striking to hie immediate succes* 
sors ; — ^thore are many which even now, from time to 
time, we find fresh reason to admire, for their acute- 
neSs and justice. Bacon stands for above the herd of 
loose and visionary speculators who, before a^nd about 
his time, spoke of the establishment of new {foUoeo- 
phiea If we must select some one philosopher as the 
Ilero of the revolution in scientific method, b^ond all 
doubt Francis Bacon must occupy the place of honour. 

We shall, however, no longer dwell npon these 
general considerations, but shall proceed to notice some 
of the more peculiar and cha^acterietic features of 
Bacon’s philosophy; and especially those views, which, 
occurring for the firrt time in his writings, have been 
fidly illustrated and ^nfirmed by the subsequent pro- 
gress of science, and have become a portion of the per* 
manent philosophy of our times. 

(IT.) 5. A New JEra mimwieed . — ^The first great 



FBA-^rCIS BACON. 


129 


fefUiure whicli ^trikes us in Bftcon’s philosophical views 
is that whi(^ we have already noticed*; — ^his confident 
tuid emphatic announcement of a New JSra in the pro- 
gress of science, compared with which .the advances of 
former times were poor and trifiing. ,This was with 
Bacon no loose and shallow opinio^, taken up on light 
g)X)un(}s and involving only vague, general notioua 
lie liad satisfied lamself of the juhtict‘ of such a view 
by a laborious course of res(»arcb and refiectiom In 
1605, at the age of forty-four, hc^publish^ hi^ Trea- 
tise of the Advancement of Leamimj, m which he 
takes a oompi*ehcnsivo fuid spii’itiHl survey of the con- 
dition of all brandies of knowledge which had been 
cultivated up to that time. This work was comi^»sod 
with a view to that reform of the existing philosopliy 
which Bacon always had before his (yes; and in the 
Latin edition of liis works, forms the First l^aH of the 
Instavratio Magna- In the St‘cond Part of the Jn- 
btauratio, th(‘ Nwnim Organon, published in 1620, he " 
mow explicitly fiiiid confidently states his expectations 
on this subject Ifo points out how slightly and feebly 
tho examination of natuw had been pursucxl up to his 
time» and with what scanty fruit He notes the indi- 
cations of this in the very limited knowledge of tlie 
Greeks who had till then been the teacUei-s of Europe, 
in the coraplrtints of autliow concemiug the subtilty 
and oliseunty of the h^cvcis of nature, in tlie dissen- 
sions of sect«^ in the absence of \mM inventions i-e- 
suiting firoift theory, in the fixed form which the sci- 
ences had retted for two thousand years. Nor, he 
adds’*, wonderful ; for how little of his thought 

and labour lias man b^wed upon science 1 Out of 
twenty-five contnriee scarpe six have boon fiiyoumble' 
to the progfesR of kiiowledge. And even in those 
favoured times, natoral^hilosophy receivc<Utlie small- 
est share of man’s attention; while the portic^u so 
gjlven Was marred by controversy and dogmatism; and 
even those who boito bestowed a little thought upon* 


* Ub. X. A(h«r. 78 ce teq. 


K 



130 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

this philosophy, have never made it their main study, 
but have used it as a passage or <lrawbridge to serve 
other objects. And thus, he says^ the great Mother of 
the Sciences is tlirust down with indignity to the of- 
fices of a handmaid ; is made to minister to the jabours 
of medicine or mathematics, or to give the first prepa- 
ratory tinge to the immature minds of youth. For 
these and similar considerations of the errors of past 
time, he draws hope for the future, employing the 
same argument whieji Demosthenes uses to the Athe- 
nians : “ That which is worst in the events of the p^ist, 
is the best as a ground of trust in thf3 future. For 
if you had dfuie all tliat became you, and still had 
been in this condition, your ciise might bo desperate; 
but since your failure is the result of your own mis- 
takes, there is good hope that, correcting the eiwr of 
your course, you may reach a prosperity yet unknown 
to you.” 

(III.) 6. A change of existing Metiml . — All Bacon’s 
hope of improvement indeed was placed in an entire 
change of the Method by whicli science was pursued; 
and the boldness, and at the same time (the then 
existing state of science being considered), the definite- 
ness of Ids views of the change that was rcKiuisitc, are 
truly remarkable. 

That all knowledge must begin with observation, is 
one great principle of Bacon’s philosophy) but I hardly 
think it necessary to notice the inculcation of this 
maxim as one of his main services to the caiuse of sound 
knowledge, since it had, as wc have seen, been fiiUy 
insisted upon by others before him, and was growing 
rapidly into general acceptance without his aid. But 
if he was not the first to tell men that they must eol- 
lect their knowledge from observation, he had no rival 
ill his peculiar office of teaching them how science 
must thus be gathered from experience. 

It appears to me that by far the most extraordins^ 
•parts of Bacon’s works are those in which, with extteme 
earnestness and clearness, he insists upon a gmiiMsiod 
and successive indve^ion, as opposed to a ha^y transit 
from sjiecial facts to the highest generalissatiotm l!he 



FEAKCIS BACON. 


I3I 

nineteeiitli Axiom of the First Book of the Novum 
Orgauotb contains a view of the nature of true science 
most exact and profound, and, so far as 1 am aware, 
at the time perfectly new. “ Thej*e are two ways, and 
(Km only bo two, of seeking and finding truth. The one, 
from sense and particulai*s, takes a flight to the most 
gonemi axionus, and from those principles and their 
truth, settled once for all, invents and judges of inter^ 
mediate axioms. The other method collects axioms 
from sense and particnlai‘s, ai^iccndiiig con^mwusfy <md 
hy degrees^ so that in the end it arrives at the most 
general axioms; this hitter way is the true one, but 
hitherto untried.’’ 

It is to 1)0 remarked, that in this passage Bacon 
employs the term axioms to express any proi>ositions 
collected from facts by induction, and tlius fitted to 
become the starting-])oiut of deductive reasonings. 
Ifow far propositions so obtfiined may approach to the 
character of axioms in the more rigorous sensi^ of the 
term, we have already in some measure examined; 
but that question does not here immediately concern 
us. The truly 1 ‘eniarkable circumstance is to find this 
I'ecommendation of a coiitinnous advance from observa* 
tiou, by limited steps, through successive gradations of 
gouemlity, given at a time when speculative men in 
general had only just begun to ]>erceive that they must 
begin their bourse from exj)erienco in some way or 
other. How exactly this description represents the 
general structure of the soundest and most compre- 
hensive physical theories, all persons who have studied 
the progress of science up to modem times can bear 
testimony; but perhaps this structui’c of science can- 
not in any other way be made so apparent os by those 
Tables of successive generalissatious in which we have 
exhibited the history and constitution of some of the 
principal physical sciences, in the Chapter of a pre- 
pttding work which treats of the Logic of Induction. 
And the view which Bacon thus took of the true pro^ 
gross of science was not only new, but, so far os I am 
aware, has never been adequately illustrated up to the 
pi'ostmt day. 



132 , PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


. 7. It is true, as I obsoi'ved in the last chapter, that 
Galileo had been led to see the neccasity, not only of 
proceeding from experience in the pursuit of know- 
ledge, but of proceeding cautiously and gradually; and 
he had exemplified this rule more than once, when, 
having made one step in discoveiy, he held back his 
foot, for a time, from the next step, however tempting. 
But Galileo had not reached this wide and command- 
ing view of the successive subordination of many ste]x*, 
all leading u^ at last^to some wide and simple general 
truth. In catching sight of this principle, and in 
ascribing to it its due importance, Bacon’s sagacity, so 
far as I am aware, wrought unassisted and unrivalled. 

8. Nor is there any wavering or vagueness in Bacon’s 
assertion of this important tmth. lie repeats it over 
and over again; illustrates it by a great number of 
the most lively metaphors and emphatic expressions. 
Thus he speaks of the siiccessivo floor n (tahulaUC) of 
induction; and sixsaks of each science as a pyramid^ 
which has observation md exj^orience for its basis. 
No images can better exhibit the relation of general 
and particular truths, as our own Inductive Tables 
may serve to show. 

(IV.) 9. Comparison of tlve Nev) and Old Method. 
Again ; not less remarkable is his contrastiug this 
true Method of Science (while it was alino.st, as he 
says, yet untried) with the ancient and vidmis Method^ 
which began, indeed, writh facts of observation, but 
rushed at once and with no gradations, to the most 
general principles. For this was the course which had 
been actually followed by all those si)OCulative re- 
formers who had talked so loudly of the necessity of 
beginning our philosophy from experience. All these 
men, if they attempted to frame physical doctrines at 
all, had caught up a few facts of observation, and had 


, ^ Awji. Sc. Lib. iii. a 4. ih T94. 80 
in other xAaceft, as Nov. Org. i Aph. 
X04. “ t)e Hclentiin turn deinum bene 
8i>eranf1iim eet qnando por ecalam 
veram et per gradua continuocf, ot 


non intermifisos ant hiulcos a parti-* 
culaii ufl aanendeinr ad axiomata 
minora, et dclnde ad media, aUa 
aliJs superlora, et postmno deomtn 
ad genendisalina.’* ^ 




FRANCIS BACON. 


. 133 

ei'ected a universal theory upon the suggestions which 
these olFerecL This process of illicit generalization, or, 
as Bacon terms it, AntIci{>atiQn of Nature {afUicipatio 
Tia^turce), in opposition to the Intei^iretation of Nature, 
he depicts with singular acuteness, in its character and 
causes. “These two ways,” he says^ “Iwth begin from 
sense and particula.i*s 3 but their discrepancy is immense. 
The one merely skims over experience and particulars 
in a cursory transit 3 the other deals with them in a. 
due and orderly manner. The gne, at its very outset, 
frames certain general abstract principlSs, but useless 3 
the other gradually nses to those principles w^hich have 
a real existence in nature.” 

“The former path,” he adds^ “that of iEicit and 
hasty gcnei*alization, is one which the intellect follows 
w'hen aliandoned to its own impulse ; and this it does 
from the requisitions of logic. For the mind has a 
yearning which makes it dait forth to genendities, 
tliat it may have something to rest m3 and after a 
little dallying with experience, becomes weary of it 3 
and all these evils are augmented by logic, which re- 
quii^s these generalities to make a show with in its 
disptitations.” 

“In a sober, patient, grave intellect,” he further adds, 
“the mind, by its own impulse, (and more especially if 
it be not impelled by the sway of established opinions) 
attempts in some measure that otlier and true way, of 
giudual genemlization ; but this it does with small 
profit 3 for the intellect, except it be regiilated and 
aided, il a iaculty of unequal operation, and altogether 
un^t to master the obscurity of things.” 

Tlie profound and searching wisdom of these remarks 
appears more and moi'e, as we apply them to the vaii- 
ous attempts which men have made to obtain know- 
ledge; when they begin with the contemplation of a 
few &ctS| and pursue their speculations, as upon most 
Subjects they have hitherto generally done; for Almost 
all such attempts have led immediately to some process 


* Nov, Org, 2. Aph. aa. 


* Ib. Apti« aa. 




134 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

of illicit generalization, n^liich introduces an intermin- 
aide course of controversy. In the physical sciences, 
however, we have the ftirther inestimable advantage 
of seeing the other aide of the contrast exemplified: 
for many of them, as our inductive Tables show na, 
have gone on according to the most ligorous conditions 
of gradual and successive generalization; and in con- 
sequence of this circumstance in their constitution, 
2)ossess, in each part of their structure, a solid trutli, 
which is always ready to stand the severest tests of 
reasoning and experiment. 

We see how justly and clearly Bacon judged con- 
cerning the mode in which facte are to be employed in 
tlie construction of science. This, indeed, has ever 
been deemed his great merit: insomuch that many 
persons a2)pear to aj>prehend the main substance of 
his doctrine to reside in the maxim that facts of obser- 
vatioii, and such facts alone, are the essential elements 
of all true science. 

(V.) 10. Idem are meessary , — Yet we have en- 
deavoured to establish the doctrine that facts are 
but one of two ingredients of ^nowle<lgo both equally 
necessary; — that Ideas are no less indispensable than 
facts themselves; and that except these be duly un- 
folded and applied, facts are collected in vain. Has 
Bacon then neglected this great portion of his subject? 
Has he been led by some partiality of view, or some 
peculiarity of circumstances, to leave this curious and 
essential element of science in its 2>nstine obscurity? 
Was he unaware of its interest and importancdl 

We may reply Aat Bacon’s philoao2>hy, in its effect 
upon his readers in general, does not give due weight 
or due attention to the ideal element of our know-"* 
ledge. He is considered as peculiarly and eminently 
the asserter of the value of experiment and observar 
tioin He is always understood to belong to the ex- 
]>eriential, as oppo^ to the ideal school* He is held « 
up in contiast to Plato and others who love to dwell 
upon that part of knowledge which has its origin in 
the intellect cS man. 

ix. Kov can it be denied that Bacon has, in the 



FRANCIS BACON. 


135 

fiuLshod part of his Novum Organon^ put promineutly 
forwards the necessary dependence of all our know- 
ledge ujK)!! Experience, and said little of its depend- 
ence, equally necessary, upon the Conceptions which 
the intellect itself supplies. It will appear, how;ever, 
on a close examination, that he was by no means in- 
sensible or careless of tliia internal element of all con- 
nected speculation. He held tJie balance, with no 
j)artial or feeble liand, l>etween phenomena and ideas. 
Ht'. urged the Colligation of Fiicts, but ho was not the 
less awtu*e of the value of the* Expliditioii of Con- 
ceptions. 

12. This appears plainly from some romaikahle 
Aphorisms in the Now/m Orgaaoa, Thus, in noticing 
the causes of the little progress then made by science 
he states this: — '‘In the current Notions, all is un- 
sound, whether they bo logical or physical. Svhstaiice, 
quality^ action^ paasion, even bemg^ are not good Con- 
ceptions; still less arc heacy^ Ught^ dense^ rarCy ttwisty 
drijy generodioriy corrupthay aliractiony repulsion^ efe- 
menty matter y form, and others (d* that kind ; all are 
fantastical and ill-dchned.” And in his attempt to 
exemplify his own sys^hin, he hesitates^ in accepting 
or rejecting the notions of eUnv&tUary, celestud, rare, 
as belonging to fire, since, as ho says, tliey are vague 
and ill-defined notions (pMioties vagm nec hem termi- 
nate), In that part of his work which appears to bo 
completed, there is not, so far as I have noticed, any 
attempt to fix and define any notions thus complained 
of as lobse and obscure. But yet such an undertaking 
appears to have formed part of his plan ; and in the 
Abecedarium Naturce^ which consists of the heads of 
^luious ^>oiiion 8 of his great scheme, marked by letters 
of the alphabet, we find the titles of a series of dis- 
sertations “ On the Conditions of Being,” which must 
have had for their object the elucidation of divers 
^Notions essential to science, and which would have 


* 1 Az. 15. 7 Nod. Org. Ub. IL Aidw^ 

» JfMi Mag, par. UL (voL p. 344). 



,136 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

been conitibiitionB to tbe Explication of Conceptions, 
sock M wo have attempted in a former part of this 
jrdrki ? Thus some of the subjects of these disserta- 
;^Ons are; — Of Much and Little; — Of Durable am! 
Traufidtoiy;^ — Of Natural and Monstrous; — Of Natu- 
ral and Artificial When the philosopher of induction 
vCame to discuss these, considered as catbSUions of ex- 
i 8 te)ice, he could not do otherwise than develope, limit, 
methodize, and define the Ideas involved in these 
Notions, so as to make them consistent with them- 
selves, and a«fit basirf^of demonstiative reasoning. His 
task would have been of the same nature as ours has 
been, in that part of this work which treats of the 
Fundamental Ideas of the vaiioiis classes of sciences. 

13. Thus Bacon, in his speculative philosophy, 
took firmly hold of both the handles of science ; and 
if he had completed his scheme, would probably have 
given due attention to Ideas, no less than to Facts, as 
an element of our knowledge; while in his view of 
the general method of ascending from facts to princi- 
ples, he displayed a sagacity truly wonderful But 
we cannot be surprised, that in attempting to ex- 
eikplify the method which he^ccoiiimended, he should 
have failed. For the method could be exemplified 
only by some important discovery in physical science ; 
and great discoveries, even with the most perfect 
meth^s, do not come at command. Moreover, al- 
though the general structure of his scheme was cor- 
rect, the precise imi>ort of some of its details could 
hardly bo understood, till the actual i)rogress of science 
had made men somewhat familiar with the kind of 
stejis which it included. 

(VI.) 14* Bacon' 8 Example, — ^Accordingly, Bacon’# 
Inquisition ItUo ike Naiwre of which is given in 
the Second Book of the Novum Organon as an ex- 
ample of the mode of interrogating Nature, cannot be 
looked upon otherwise tlian as a complete failure.^ 
> Tins will bo .evident if we consider that, although the** 
exact nature of heat is still an obscui'c and contro- 
verted matter, tbe science of Heat now consists of 
many important truths; and that to none of these 



FRANCIS BACON. 


137 

traths is there "any approximation id ]^od*s essay. 
Prom his process he at this, as*thcf or 

i;nie definition” of heat that it is an ex^eiis^Ve, 

restrained motion, modified in certain ways, and e^s> 
crted ill the smaller particJes of the* body.” But the 
steps by which the science of Heat really advanced 
were (as may be seen in ^tho history® of the subject) 
these; — The discovery of a measrure of heat or tem- 
perature (the thermometer); the establishment of the 
laws of conduction and radiation ; of the laics of sptj- 
cific heat, latent heat, and the like. Shch steps have 
led to Am^i^re’s hypotliesis^^ that heat consists in the 
vibrations of an imf>onderable fluid ; and to Laplace^s 
hppotluisisy that tem}.>erature consishs in the internal 
radiation of such a fluid. These hypotheses cannot 
yet be said to bo even .probable ; but at least they are 
so modifled as to include some of the preceding laws 
which are firmly established ; whereas Bacon’s hypo- 
thetical motion includes no hiws of phenomena, ex- 
plains no process, and is indeed itself an example of 
illicit generalization. 

ig. One main gi'ound of Bacoii’s ill fortune in this 
undertaking appears tb be, that ho was not aware of 
an important maxim of inductive science, that we 
iiiu^ first obtain the measure and ascertain the laws 
of phenomena, befoi-o we endeavour to discover their 
causes. The whole history of thcrinotics up to the 
I>resent time has been occupied with the fomwr steji, 
and the task is not yet comJ)leted: it is no wonder, 
therefore, that Bacon failed entirely, when he so pre- 
maturely attempted the secoud. His sagacity had 
taught him that the progress of science must be gra- 
- dual; but it had not led him to judge adequately how 
gradual it must be, nor of what different kinds of 
inquiries, taken in due order, it must needs consist, 
in order to obtain success. 

Another mistake, which could not fail to render 
it unlikely that Bacon sliould really ^exemplify bis 


» BUS. Jnd. b. 1. Cl L 


1® It. c, Iv, 




PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


138 

precepts by any actual advance in science, was, that 
lie did not justly appreciate the sagacity, tlie inventive 
genius, wliich all discovery inquires. He conceived 
that he could supersede the necessity of such peculiar 
eudowments. “ Our method of discoveiy in science,” 
he says^’, “is of such a nature, that there is not much 
left to acuteness and strength of genius, but all de- 
grees of genius and intellect are brought nearly to the 
same levcjl.” And he illustrates this by comparing 
his method to a pair of coinpiisses, by irieans of which 
a person witlf no manual skill may draw a perfect 
circle. In the same spirit he speaks of proceeding by 
dm rejectiom; and appears to imagine that when we 
have obtained a collection of facts, if we go on suc- 
cessively rejectnig what is falsi\ we shall at last find 
that we have, left in our liands, that scientific truth 
which we seek. 1 need not observe how far this view 
is reinoved from the real state of the case. The ne- 
cessity of a conception which must be furnished by the 
mind in order to bind together the facts, could hardly 
have escaped the eye of Bacon, if ho had cultivated 
more carefully the ide^U side qf his own philosophy. 
And any attempts which ho could have made to con- 
struct such conception.^ by mere rule and method, 
must have etuled in convincing him that nothing; but 
a peculiar inventive talent could supply that wliich 
was thus not contained in the facts, and yet was needed 
for the discovery. 

(Vll.) 16. Hvi FaUit/re . — Since Bacon, with all his 
acuteness, had not divined circumstances so important 
in the formation of science, it is not wonderful that 
his attempt to reduce this prcKJcss to a Technical Form 
is of little value. In the first place, he says**, we 
must prepare a natural and ex]>erimental history, good 
and sufficient; in the next place, the instances thus 
collected are to be arranged in Tables in some orderly 
way; and then we must apply a legitimate and true 
induction. And in his eicample**, he first coUeots a 


n JVw.Wnb.rAplL6i, 
*«^w.afgi.Ub,ltAph.ip. 




FRANCIS BACON. 


139 


great number of cases in "which heat appears uniler 
various circumstances, which he calls Muster of 
Instances before the intellect,” {compa/rentia instan- 
tiwrmn ad iiUellectuin^ or a Table of Oie Preseifhce of 
the thing sought. He then fields a Table of its Ab- 
sence in proximate cases, containing instances where 
heat doas not appear; then a 2 \ible of Degrees^ in 
which it appears with greater or less intensity. He 
then adds^\ that we must try to exclude several ob- 
vious supjKwitious, which ho doo^ T)y‘ reference to some 
of the instances he has collecte<l ; and thfe step he calls 
the Af’tic/imVe, or the Rejecium of Natures. He then 
observes, (and justly,) that whei-eas truth emerges more 
cjUiily from error than from confusion, we may, after 
this prepaiutiijn, give play to the intellect^ (fiat }V3rmis- 
sio iiitellectus,) and make an attempt at induction, 
liable afterwards to lie corrected; and by this ste]), 
which he terms his First Vindemlation^ or Inchoate 
Induction^ he is led to the proposition concerning 
heat, which we have stated above. 

17. Ill all th(5 details of his example ho is unfortu- 
nate. By proposing himself to examine at once 
into the nature of heat, instead of the laws of special 
classes of pliciiomena, he makes, as wc have said, a 
fundamental mistake; which is the less sui*])rising 
since he ha<l before him so few examples of the right 
coui*se in the previous histoiy of science. But fur- 
ther, liis collection of instances is very loosely brought 
togetluT; for he includes in his list the lu)t ti\st.e of 
aromatic plants, the caustic effects of acids, and many 
other facts which cannot be ascribed to heat without a 
studious laxity in the use of the word. And when he 
comes to that point where ho permits his intellect its 
mnge, the concejition of motion upon which it at once 
fastens, appears to be selected with little choice or 
skill, the suggestion being taken from flame boiling 
. liquids, a Vilown fire, and some other cases. If fiom 
such examples we could imagine heat to be motion, two 

— ¦ ¦’ ' ' ¦ — T- 


H X 5 » P* 105. 


Fttge xia 



140 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY, 


ought at least to have some gradatiou to oases of heat 
whore no motion is visible^ as in a red-hot iron. It 
would seem that, after a large collection of instances 
had been looked at, the intellect, even in its first at- 
teihpts, ought not to have dwelt upon such an hyjK>- 
thesis os this. 

i8. After these steps, Bacon speaks of several 
classes of instances which, singling them out of the 
general and indiscriminate collection of facts, he terms 
Imtances with FrerogaMve : and these he points out as 
peculiar aids^and guides to the intellect in its task. 
These Instances with Prerogative have generally been 
much dwelt upon by those who have commented on 
the Abvwwi Organon, Yet, in reality, such a classifi- 
cation, as has been observed by one of the ablest 
wiiters of the present day**, is of little service in the 
task of induction. For the instances are, for the most 
pait,' classed, not according to the idetis which they in- 
volve, or to any obvious circumstance in the facts of 
which they consist, but according to the extent or 
manner of their influence upon the inquiry in which 
they are employed. Thus we have Solitary Instances, 
Migrating Instiinces, Ostensive Instances, Clandestine 
Instances, so termed according to the degree in which 
they exhibit, or seem to exliibit, the property whose 
natui-e we would examine. We liave Guide-Post In- 
stances, {hiatantim Crucial Instances of the Parted 
Bead, of the Doorway, of the Lamp, according to the 
guidance they supply to our advance. Such a dassi- 
ficatioQ is much of the same natui*e as if, having to 
teach the art of building, we were to describe tools 
with reference to the amount and jdace of the work 
which tliey must do, instead of pointing out their con- 
struction and use : — as if we were to i^orm the pupil 
that we must have tools for lifting a stone up, tools 
for moving it sideways, tools for laying it square, 
tools for cementing it firmly. Such an enumeration of ^ 
cg;ids would convey little instruction aa to the raeansk 


Hetsohel, On theSiudp cifNtA. FkU, Ark 




FRAKCIS BACOX. 


I4I 

Moreover, many of fiiicon’s claHses of instances are 
vitiated by the assumption that the ‘‘form,” that is, 
the general law and cause of the property which is the 
subject of investigation, is to be looked for directly in 
the instances ; which, as we have seen in his inquiry 
concerning heat, is a fuiidaiiiontal error. 

19. Yet his phraseology in .some cases, aa in the 
imtantia erucis, serves well to mark the pl|ice which 
certain experiments hold in ijiir reasonings : and many 
of the special examples wbicli he gives are full of 
acuteness and sagacity. Thus he suggelts swinging a 
pendulum in a mine, in order to determine whether 
tlie attraction of tiie eaHh arises fi'om the attraction of 
its parts; and observing the ti<le at the same moment 
in (lifTeveut parts of the world, in order to ascertain 
whether *the motion of the water is expansive or pro- 
gressive; with other ingenious proposals. Th(^S(^ marks 
of genius may serve to counterbalance tlie unfavour- 
able judgment of Bacon’s aptitude foi’ physical science 
which we arc sometimes tem]>ted to fonn, in conse- 
quence, of his false views on other points; as his rejec- 
tion of the Copernicun system, and his undervaluing 
C3lill>ert’8 iiiagnotical s]iec\ilations. Most of these ciTors 
arose from a too ambitious habit of intellect, which 
would not be contmited with any excej)t very wide 
and general truths ; and from an indistinctness of 
mechanicaJ, and perhaps, in general, of mathematical 
ideas : — detects which J 3 acoii’s own philosophy was di- 
rectexl to remedy, and which, in the progress of time, 
it has remedied in others. 

(VIII,) 20. His Mofo.— Having thus freely given 
our judgment concerning the most exact and definite 
portion of Bacon’s precepts, it cannot be necessaiy for 
us to discuss at any leugtli the value of those more 
vogue and geneml Wmmings against jirejudice and j>ar- 
tiality, against intellectual indolence and presumption, 
with wliich his works abound. His advice and exhor- 
tations of this kind are always expressed with energy 
and jwint, often clothed in the happiest fontis of ima- 
gery; and hence it has come to pass, lhat such pas- 
sages are perhaps more familiar to the general reader 



PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 


142 

thita any other part of his writings. Nor are Bacon’s 
counsels without their impoi'tance, when we have to 
do with those subjects in which prejudice and ]>ar- 
tiality exercise their peculiar sway. Questions of pt*li* 
tics and morals, of maunei*s, or history, cannot 

be subjected to a scheme of idgorous induction; and 
though on such matters we venture to assert geueral 
principles, these are commonly obtained with some de- 
gree of insecnrity, and depend upon special habits of 
thougbt, not upon mere logical connexion. Here, 
therefore, tho^intellerit may be pervei*ted, by mixing, 
with the pure reason, our gregarious affections, or our 
individual propensities; the false suggestions involved 
in language, or the imposing delusions of received 
theories. In these dim and complex labyrinths of 
human thouglit, tJte Idol of the Tribe ^ or of tJii Den^ of 
the Foruniy or of the Theatre, may occupy ‘men’s minds 
with' delusive shapes, and may obscure or pervert their 
vision of truth. But in that Natural Philosophy with 
which we are here concerned, there is little oppor- 
tunity for such influences. As far as a physical theory 
is completed through all the steps of a just induction, 
there is a clear daylight diffused oyer it which leaves 
no lurking-place for prejudice. Each part can be ex- 
amined separately and repeatedly; and the theory is 
not to be deemed perfect till it will bear the scrutiny 
of all sound minds alike. Althongli, therefore, Bacon, 
by warning men against the idols of fallacious images 
above spoken of, may have guaixled them from danger- 
ous error, his precepts have little to do with Natural 
Philosophy : and we cannot agree with him when he 
says*^, that the doctrine conceining these idols bears 
the same relation to tho interpretation of nature as 
the doctrine concerning sophistical paralogisms bears 
to common logic. 

(IX.) 21. HU Aim, UtUUy , — There is one very 
prominent feature in Bacon’s speculations which we 
n^ust not omit to notice; it is a leading and constant 


n Nov. Org, lib. L Apti. 4ck 




I'RANCIS BACON. 


143 


object with him to apply his knowledge to Use, The 
insight which he obtains into nature, he would employ 
in commanding nature for the service of mam He 
wishes to hav^ not only principles but works. The 
jihinse which best describes the aim of his philosophy 
is his own “ Ascendeiido ad axiomafa^ descendendo 
ad openi,^^ This disposition appears in the first apho- 
rism of the N ire am and nms tlirough the 

work. Man, the minister and interpreter of nature, 
does and understands, so far as he has, in fact or in 
thought, observed the coumc of nature /and he cannot 
know or do more tliau this.” It' is not necessary for 
us to dwell much upon this tiim of mind; for the 
whole of onr present inquiry goes upon tins suppo- 
sition that an atxjuaintance with the laws of natui-e is 
worth our having for its own sake. It may be uni- 
versally true, that Knowledge is Power ; but we have 
to do w’ith it not as Power, but as Knowledge. It is 
the formation of Science, not of Art, with which we 
are here concerned. It may give a peculiar interest 
to the history of science, to show how it constantly 
tends to provide better and better for the wants and 
comforts of the bi^dy; but ilmt is not the interest 
which engages us in, our present inquiry into the na- 
ture and course of philosophy. The consideration of 
the means wliich promote man’s material well-being 
often apimars to be invested with a kind of dignity, by 
the discovery of general laws wliich it involves; and 
the satisfjiction wliich rises in our minds at the con- 
templation of such cjises, men sometimes ascribe, with 
a false ingenuity, to the love of mere bodily enjoy- 
ment. * But it is never difQcult to see that this baser 
and coarser element is not the real source of our ad- 
miration. Those who hold that it is the main business 
of science to constinict instruments for the uses of Ufe, 
appear sometimes to be willing to accept the conse- 
quence which follows from such a doctrine, that the 
mt dioemaker was a philosopher worthy of the high^t 


Nun, Org, lib. i. Ax. 103. 




144 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


admiVatlon'*.. But those who maintam such para- 
doxes, often, by a happy inconsistency, make it their 
own aim, not to devise some improved covering for the 
feet, but to delight the mind wit\i acute speculations, 
exhibited in. all the graces of wit and fancy. 

It hits been said^ that the key of the Baconian 
dotrinc consists in two words, Utility 'and Progress. 
With regard to the latter point, we have already seen 
that the hope and prosj^ect of a Iwundlest progress in 
huhiJin knowledge had sprung up iu men’s minds, even 
in the early thnes of fmperial Rome ; and were most 
emphaticiilly expressed by that very Seneca who dis- 
dained to reckon the worth of knowledge by its value 
in food and clothing. And when we say that Utility 
was the great business of Bacon’s philosophy, we forget 
one-half of his characteristic plu'asc : “ Ascendcudo ad 
axiinomata,” no less tlian ^^descendeiido ad opera,” was, 
he repeatedly deckred, the scheme of liis path. He 
constantly spoke, wo arc told by his secretary of two 
kinds of experiments, experinmita fructifora, and eacj- 
jpefiimuta lucifera, 

^ Again ; when we are told by modem 'wiiters that 
Bacon merely recommended such induction as all toon 
instinctively practise, we ought to recollect his "own 
earn(3st and incessant declarations to the contrary. The 
induction hitheii;o piuctised is, he says, of ho use for 
obtaining solid science. There are two ways*®, *‘h»c 
via ill usu est,” ‘‘ altem vera, sod intentata.” Men 
have constantly been employed in anticipaiio7i ; in illicit 
induction. The intellect left to itself rushes on in this 
road*®; the conclusions so obtained are persuasive 
far moi*e persuasive than inductions made with due 
caution But still this method must be. rejected if 
wo would obtain tnie knowledge. We shall then at 
length have ground of good hope- for science when w© 


Ediipib. RifK Nd. exxxU. p. 65. VJU, 

Pref. to the Not. Biri. 1. 243. 

"*» Noff. Qrg. Uh. 1 . Aph. 

» IbUI, Ub. L Aph. 90 . •* Aph. W. . V ** ^ 



FRA^SCIS BACON, 


145 

proceed in another manner". We must rise, not ty a 
leap, but by small steps, by successive advances, by a 
gradation of ascents, trying our facts, and clearing our 
notions at every interval The scheme o^ true philoso- 
phy, according to Bacon, is not obvioas and simple, but 
long and teclmiciil, requiring constant care and serf- 
deuial to follow it. And we have seen that, in this 
opinio^, his judgment is confirmed by the past history 
and present condition of science. ' • 

Again ; it is by no means a just view of Bacon’s 
character to place him ii| contrast to Plkto. Plato’s 
philosophy wtis the philosophy of Ideas; but it was 
not Icffc for Bacon to set up the philosophy of Facts in 
opposition ip that of Ideas. That had been done fully 
by the speculative reformers of the sixteenth cent^iry. 
!l^oii had the merit of showing that Facts and Ideas 
must l)e combined ; and not only so, Imt of divining 
many of the special rules and forms of tliis combinio- 
tion, when* as yet there were no examples of them, 
with a sagacity hitherto quite uuparalleled. 

(X.) 22. Ilia Fersecerancii , — With Bacon’s un- 

happy pcditical life we have here notliing to do. But^ 
we cannot but notice with pleasure how faithfully, 
how pcrseveringly, how energetically he discharged 
his great philosoj)liical office of a Reformer of Aletluxls. 
He had conceived the purpose of making this his ob- 
ject at an early period. When meditating the con- 
tinuation of lus Nqvuth Organon, and spda-king of his 
reasons for trusting that his work will reach some 
completeness of effect, he says*’, “I am by two argu- 
ments thus persuadei First, I think thus from the 
zeal and constancy of my mind, which has not waxed " 
old in this design, nor, alter so many years, grown cold 
and indifferent; 1 remember that about forty years ago 
I composed a juvenile work about these things, which 
with great contrivance and a pompous title I called 
Ifpraporia partuni maximum,, or the most considerable 


^ Aph. X04. So Apli. 105. “ In conRtltiiendo uiomate forma indwUonii 
oUa quam adhuc In usti Ciit exoogitanila est,'* Ac. 

VI Ep, ad J\ EuiffenHum, Qp. z. 33a 


L 




146 PinLOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. ' 

birth of time; Next, that on account of its usofulness, 
it may hope the Divine blessing.” In stating the 
grounds of hope for future progress in the sciences, he 
says*®: “Some liopc may, we conceive, be ministered 
to men by our own example : and this we say, not for 
the sake of boasting^ but because it is useful to be said. 
If any despond, let them look at me, a man among all 
others of my age most occupied with civil affairs, nor 
of very sound health, (which brings a great loss of 
time;) also in this attempt the first explorer, following 
the footsteps^’of no nViii, nor communicating on thes<3 
subjects with any mortal: yel, having steadily fintcrcd 
upon the true road knd made my mind submit to 
things themselves, one who has, in tliia underbiking, 
made, (as we think,) some progress.” He then pro- 
ceeds to speak of what may be done by the combined 
and more prosperous lal)Ours of othei*s, in that stmin 
of noble hope and confidimce, which rises again and 
again, like a chorus, at intervals in every part of his 
writings. In the AdvanceniesU of Learning he had 
said, “ I could not be true and constant to the argu- 
ment I handle, if I were not willing to go beyond 
others, but yet not more willing than to liave others 
go beyond me again.” In the Preface to the Instau- 
ratio MagnUy bo had placed among his postulates those 
expn^ssions which have more than once warmed the 
breast of a philosophical reformer*®. “ Concerning our- 
selvc.s we speak not; but as touching the matter which 
we liavc ill hand, this wc ask; — that men be of good 
hope, neither feign and imagine to themselves this 
our Reform as something of infinite dimension and 
beyond the grasp of mortal man, when in truth it 
is the end and true limit of infinite en^or; and is, by 
no means unmindful of the condition of moi-tality anij 
humanity, not confiding that such a thing can be 
carried to its perfect close in the space of a single age^ 
but assigning it as a task to a 3ucces.sion of genera*^ 
tions.” In a later portion of the Instauratio he* 


w Nw. Org, L Aph. XX3. 

See the motto to Kaot's KriWt ({er Rui/ntn remuf|/t 



FKANCIS BACON. 


H7 

flays : ‘‘We Lear the strongest love to the hurmm re- 
’pvhlic our common country; and we by no means 
abandon the hope that there will arise and come forth 
some man among posterity, who will be able to receive 
and digest aJ] that is best in wliat we deliver; and 
whose care it will be to cultivate and perfect such 
things. Therefore, by the blessing of the Deity, to 
tend to this object, to open up the founta.ins, to dis- 
cover the useful, to gather guidance for the way, shall 
be our task ; and from this we «ihall neyer, while we 
lornain in life, desist.” 

(XI.) 23. His Hieiy , — ^Wc may add, that the spint 
of piety as well as of hope which is seen in this passage, 
appears to have been habitual to Bacon at all periods 
of his life. ,We find in his works several drafts of por- 
tions of his great scheme, and several of them begin 
with a prayer. One of these entitled, in the edition 
of his works, “ The Student’s Prayer,” appears to me 
to belong probably to his early youth. Another, en- 
titled “The Writer’s Prayer,” is inserted at the end 
of the Preface of the Imtaiiralio^ as it wtxs finally pub- 
lished. I will conclude my notice of this wonderful 
man by inserting here these two j)rayers. 

“To God the Father, God the Word, God the Spirit, 
wo pour forth most humble and hearty supplications ; 
that he, remembering the calamities of mankind, and 
the pilgrimage of this our life, in which w'e wear out 
days few and evil, would please to open to us new 
refreshments out of the fountains of his goodness for 
the alleviating of our miseries. This also wo humbly 
and earnestly beg, that human things may hot preju- 
dice such as are divine ; neither that, from the unlock- 
ing of the gates of sense, and the kindling of a greater 
natutal light, anything of incredulity, or intellectual 
night, may arise in oiu* minds towards divine mysteries. 
But rather, that by our mind thoroughly cleansed and 
purged from fancy and vanities, and yet subject and 
perfectly given up to the Divine oracles, there may be* 
given \mto faith the things that are faith’s.” 

“Thou, 0 Father, who gavest the visible light as 
the iirst-bom of thy creatures, and didst pour into 

I. 2 



148 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

man the intellectual light as the top knd consumma- 
tion of thy workmans] lip, bo pleased to protect and 
govern this work, which coming from thy goodness, 
retumeth to thy glory. Thou, after thou hadst re- 
viewed the works which thy hands had made, be- 
lieldest that everything was veiy good, and thou didst 
rest with complacency in them. But man, reflecting 
oil the works which he had made, saw that all was 
vanity and vexation of spirit, and could by no moans 
acquiesce in them. ^Wherefore, if yre labour in thy 
works with t'iie sweat of our brows, tlioii wilt make 
us partakers of thy vision and thy Sabbath. We 
humbly beg that this mind may be steadfastly in us ; 
and that thou, by our hands, and also by the hands of 
others on whom thou shalt bestow the same spirit, wilt 
please to convey a, lai'gess of new aims to thy family of 
mankind. These things wo commend to thy everlasting 
love, by our Jesus, thy Christ, God with us. Amen.” 



CHAPTER XVL 

Additiokal Remarks on Francis Bacon. 


F rancis bacon and hi£> works »bave recently 
been discussed and examined by various writers 
in Prance and Germany as well as England Not to 
mention smaller essays, M. Boiiillet has published a 
valuable edition of his philosophical works; Count 
J oseph de Maistre wrote a severe critique of his philo- 
which has been published since the death of 
the author; M. Charles Remusat has written a lucid 
and discriminating Essay on the subject; and in Eng- 
land we have had a new edition of the works pu^ 
lished, with a careful and thoughtful examination of 
the philosophy which they contain, written by one of 
the editors : a person especially fitted for such an ex- 
amination by an acute intellect, great acquaintance 
with philosophical literature, and a wide knowledge 
of modern, science. Robert Leslie Ellis, the editor 
of whom 1 speak, died during the publication of the 
edition, and before he had done full justice to his 
powers; but he had already written various disserta- 
tions on Bacon’s philosophy, which accompany the 
different Treatises m the new edition. 

Mr. Ellis has given a more precise view than any of 
his predecessors had done of the nature of Bacon’s 

1 (Suvres PhihuopMgfltea de BaaeUt efe FrnnfoitBaamt par J. B. d 6 Vaa- 
dsc. par M. N. Bonlllet, 3 TomeSL geUea. 

E2mnmdela PhilotopkUdeBacm Franz Baoo van Verukui^ von 
* {(Suvrea PoeUwmee da Comte J. de Kmio FUtcher. 

Maistre). The FTwhe of Frande Baem^ oft- 

Roeon, m Vie, sen Tmpe, eaPhiUh lected and edited by James Siding, 
par Oharfes de Remu s at. Robert Ledie Ellis, and Douglas 

JUiatoire de la Vie et dee Ottvragei Denon Heath. 




150 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 


inductio^ and of his philosophy of discovoiy. Bacon^s 
object was to discover the ‘natures^ or ei^Tices of 
things, in order that he might reproduce these natures 
or essences at will; he conceived that these natures 
were limited in number, and manifested in various 
combinations in the bodies which exist in the uni- 
yerae; so that by accumulating . observations of them 
in a multitude of cases, we may learn by induction in 
what they do and in what they do not consist the /n- 
duction which is to be used for this purj)ose Coniidsts 
in a great mbasure of excluding the cases which do 
not exhibit the ‘nature’ in (question; and by such 
exclusion, duly repeated, we liave at last left; in our 
hands the elements of which the proposed nature con- 
sists. And the knowledge which is thus obtained may 
be applied to reproduce the things so analysed. As 
exliibiting this view clearly we may ttike a pjtvssage in 
the Sylva Sylvarum : “ Gold has tlu^sc natures : great- 
ness of weight, closeness of parts, fixation, pliantness or 
spftness, immunity from rust, colour or tincture of 
yellow. Therefore the sure way, thuugli most alwiit, to 
make gold, is to know the causes of the several na- 
tures before rehearsed, and the axioms concerning the 
same. Eor if a man cim make a metal, that hath all 
these properties, let men dispute whether it be gold 
or no.” He means tliat however they dispute, it is 
gold for all practiced purposes. 

For such an Induction as this, Bacon claims the 
merit both of being certain, and of being nearly inde- 
pendent of the ingenuity of the inquirer. It is a 
method which enables all men to make exact dis^ 
coveries, as a pair of compasses enables all men to 
draw an exact circle. 

Now it is necessary for us, who are exjdoring the 
progress of the true philosophy of discovery, to say 
plainly that this port of Bacon’s speculation is ertro- 
neoua and valueless. No scientific discovery ever has 
been m^e in this way. Men have not obtained truths 
concern] Dg the natural world by seeking for the na^ 
tures of thing^ and by extracting them from pheno- 
mena by rejecting the cases in which they were not. 



ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON FRANCIS BACON. 1 51 

On the contr^iry, they have begun by ascertaining the 
lawB of Hie phenoTmna; and have then gone on, not 
by a mechanical method which levels all intellect, but 
by special effbrts of the brightest intellects to catch 
hold of the ideas by which these laws of phenomena 
might be interpreted and expressed in inoT*e general 
terms. Those two steps, the finding the laws of phe- 
ixoniena, and finding the conceptions by which those 
laws can be expressed, are really the course of dis- 
covery, as the hish'ny of science t^xhibits it to us. 

Bacon, therefore, according to the view now pre- 
sented, was w'rong both as to his object and as to his 
method. He was wrong in taking for his object the 
essences of things, — the causes of abstract propeHies : 
for these man cannot, or can veiy rarely discover; 
and all Bacon’s ingenuity in enumerating and classify- 
ing these essences and abstract properties has led, and 
could lea^l, to no result. The vast results of modem 
science have been obtained, not by seeking and finding 
the essences of things, but by exploring the laws of 
phenomena and the causes of those laws. " 

And Bacon’s method, as w’ell as his object, is titlatcd 
by a pervading eiTor : — the en*or of supposing that to be 
done by method which must be done by mind; — that 
to be done by rule w’hich must be dojic by a flight 
beyond rule; — that to be mainly negative which is 
eminently positive; — that to depend on other men 
which must depend on the discoverer himself; — ^that 
to be mere prose which must have a dash of poetry; — 
that to be a work of mere labour which must be also ' 
a work of genius. 

Mr. Ellis has seen very clearly and explained very 
candidly that this method thus recommended by Bacon 
lias not led to discovery, It is,” he says, “ neither to 
the technical part of his method npr to the details of 
his view of the nature and progress of science, that Ms 
. gimt fiime is justly owing. His merits are of another 
kind. They belong to the spirit rather than to the 
positive precepts of bis philosophy.” 

As the reader of the last chapter will see, this 
amounts to much the same as the account which I 



152 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 


had gWen of the positive results of Bacon’s method^ and 
the real value of that portion of his philosophy which 
he himself valued most. But still there romam, as I 
have also noted, portions of Bacon’s speculations which 
have a great and enduring value, namely, his doctrine 
that Science is the Interpretation of Nature, his dis- 
tinction of this Interpretation of Nature from the 
vicious and premature Anticipation of Naiture which 
had generally prevailed till then; and the recom- 
mendation of a graduated and successive induction by 
which alone ‘the highest and most general truths were 
to be reached. These are points which he urges with 
great cloai'ncss and with gi'< 3 at earnestness ; and these 
are important points in the true i>hilosc>phy of dis- 
covery. 

1 may add that Mr. Ellis agi*ces with me in noting 
the invention of the conception by whicli the laws of 
plieuomena are interpreted as something additional to 
Inductioay both in the common and in the Baconian 
sense of the word. He says (General Px*eface, Art. 9 ), 
*‘In all cases this process [scientific discovery] in- 
volves an element to which nothing corresponds in the 
Tables of Comparcuce and Exclusion; namely the 
application to the facts of a principle of arrangement, 
ail idea, existing in the mind of the discoverer an- 
tecedently to the act of induction.” It may be said 
that this principle or idea is aimed at in the Bacoman 
analysia ^^And thk is in one sense true: but it 
must be added, that this analysis, if it be thought 
right to call it so, is of the essence of the discovery 
i^hich results from it. To toh^ for gnmted that it 
has been already eftected is simply a petitib principiu 
In most cases t^e mere act of induction follow as a 
matter of ^course as soon as the etpproprujUe idea has 
been introdaoecL” And as an example he takes E^ep- 
lerV invention of the ellipse as the idea by which 
Mars’s motibns 'could be reduced to law; making the^ 
same use ot tins example which we have repeatedly 
made of it. 

Mr. Ellis may at first sight appear to express him* 
self more favourably than I have done, witli regal'd to 



ADDITIONAL REMAUKS ON FRANCIS BACON. 1 53 

the value of Bacon^B Inqaidbio m Naiuram Caf.idi in 
the Second Book of the Novum Organon, He says of 
one |3art of it‘: Bacon here anticipates not merely 
the essential character of the most recent theory of 
heat, but also the kind of evidence by which it has 
been established:... The merit of having perceived the 
true significance of the production of heat by friction 
belongs of right to Bacon.” 

But notwithstanding this, Mr. Ellis’s general judg- 
ment on this specimen of Baepn’s application of hia 
own method does not differ essentially from mine. 
He examines the Inquiaitio at sotne length, and finally 
says: “If it wei'e affirmcid that Bacon, after having 
had a glimpse of the truth suggested by some obvious 
phenomena, had then I'ecourse, as he himself expresses 
it, to certain ‘ differeiitue inanes* in order to save the 
phenomena, I think it would be hard to dispute the 
truth of tlie censure.” 

Another of the Editors of this edition (Mr. Sped- 
ding) fixes his attention upon another of the features 
of the method of discovery proposed by Bacon, and is 
disposed to think that the proposed niethod has never 
yet hod justice done it, bectiuse it has not been tried 
in the way and on the scale that Bacon proposes^. 
Bacon recommended that a gi-eat collection of facts 
should be at once made and accumulated, regarding 
every branch of human knowledge ; and conceived 
that, when this had been done by common observers, 
philosophers might extract scientific truths’ from this 
mass of fiicts by the application of a right method. 
This separation of the offices of the observer and dis- 
coverer, Mr. Bpedding thinks is shown to be possible 
by such practical examples as meteorological observa- 
tions, made by ordinary observers, and reducM* to 
tables and laws by a central calculator; by hydrogra* 
pMcal observations made by ships pxbvid^ with pro- 
per instructions, and reduced to general laws by the 


iNotetoAidi-xviJl. 

* FnL to Ute Yol. 1 38s. 




154 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT* 


jiLQiL of science in his study; by magnetical observa- 
tions made by many persons in every part of the world, 
and reduced into subservience to theory by mathema- 
ticians at home. 

And to this our reply will l)e, in the terms which 
the history of all tlie Sciences has tiiught us, that such 
methods of procedure as this do not belong to the 
Epoch of Discovery, but to the Period of verificatwn 
and applicaiion of the discovery which follows. When 
a theory has been estjjblislied in its general form, our 
knowledge of* the distribution of its phenomena in 
time and space can be much ])romoted by (irdinary ob- 
servers scattered over the earth, and succeeding each 
other in time, providcMl they are furnished with instru- 
ments and methods of observation, duly constructed 
on the principles of science; but such observei*s can- 
not hi any degree snpei*sede the discoverer who is finit 
to establish i-he theory, and to introduce into the facts 
a new principle of order. When the laws of nature 
have been caught sight of, much may be done, even 
by ordinniy observers, in verifying and exactly deter- 
niiuing them ; but when a real discovery is to be made, 
this sepai’ation of the observer and the theorist is not 
possible. In those cases, the questioning temper, the 
busy suggestive mind, is needed at every step, to di- 
rect the oiierating hand or the opeti gaze. No possible 
accumulation of facts about mixture and heat, collected 
in the way of blind trial, could have led to the doc- 
trines of chemistry, or crystallography, or the atomic 
theory, or voltaic and chemical and magnetic polaiity, 
or physiology, or any other science. Indeed not only 
is an existing theory requisite to supply the observer 
with instruments and methods, but without theory lie 
cannot even describe his observations. Ho says that 
ho mixes an acid and an. alkali ; but what is an acid ? 
What is an alkali? How does ho know them? He 
classifies crystals according to their forms: but till he 
has learnt what is distinctive in the form of a crystal, 
he cannot distinguish a cube from a S(]uai*e prism, even 
if he h^ a goniometer and could use it. And the like 
impossibility hangs over all the other subjects. To 



ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON FRANCIS BACON. 1 55 


report facts for scientific purposes without some aid- 
from theory, is not only useless, but impossibc. 

When Mr. Spedding says, “ I could wish that men 
of science would apply themselves earnestly to the 
solution of this practical problem: "What measures 
are to bo taken in order that the greatest variety of 
judicious observations of nature all over the world 
may bo carried on in concert ui)an a common pllin and 
bi*ought to a common centre:’* — he is urging upon men 
of science to do what they have always done, so fiir as 
they have had any power, and in prop*ortion as the 
state of science rendered such a procedure possible and 
profitable to science. In Astronomy, it has been done 
from the times of the Greeks and even of the Chal- 
deans, having been begun as soon as the heavens were 
reduced to law at all. In meteorology, it has been 
done extensively, tbough to little purpose, because the 
weather has not yet been reduced to rule, M en of sci- 
ence have shown how barometers, thermometers, hy- 
grometers, and the like, may be constructed ; and those 
may bo now re^id by any one as easily as a clocks but 
of ten thousand meteorological registers thus kept by 
ordinary observers, what good lias come to. scienco 
Again: The laws of the tides have been in a great 
measure determined by observations in all parts of the 
globe, theory ] jointed out what was, to be ob- 

served. In like manner the facts of terrestrial mag- 
netism were ascertained with tolerable eomplcteness 
by extended observations, and then only, when a 
most I'econdite and profound branch of mathematics 
had jiointed out what was to be observed, and most 
ingenious instruments ha<l been devised by men of 
science fgr observing. And even witli these, it re- 
quires an educatmn to use the instruments. But in 
many cases no education in the use of instruiuents de- 
vised by others can supersede the necessity of n theo- 
.rotical and suggestive spirit in the inquirer himself. 
He must devise liLs own instruments and his own me^ 
thods, if ho is to make discovery. ‘What chomist, 
or inquirer about polarities, or about optical laws yet 
undiscovered, can make any progress by using another 



156 PHH.OSOPHT OP DISCOVERT. 

man's experiments and observations? He must invent 
at every step of bis observation ; and the observer and 
theorist can no more be dissevered, than the body and 
soul of the inquirer. 

That persons of moderate philosophical powers may, 
when duly educated, make observations which may 
used by greater discoverera than themselves, is true. 
We have examples of such a subordination of scientific 
offices, in astronomy, in geology, and in many other 
departments. But still, as I liave said, a very con- 
siderable degi^oe of scientific education is needed even 
for the subordinate labourers in science ; and tlie more 
considerable in proportion as science advances further 
and further ; since every advance implies a knowledge 
of what has already been done, and requires a new 
precision or generality in the new points of inquiry. 



CHAPTER XVII. 
Fuom Bacon to Xewton. 


I. Harvey. — We liavo already seen tliai Bacon 
was by no moans tlie first mover or principal author of 
the revolution in the method of philosophizing which 
took pL'ice in his time; but only the writer who pro- 
clainied in the most impressive and comprehensive 
manner, the scheme, the profit, the dignity, and the 
proai)ects of the new philo.soj)hy. Those, therefore, 
who after him, took up tho same views are not to be 
considered as his successors, but as his felh)w-labourcrvS; 
and the line of histoiical succession of opinions must 
be ijuiwed without special reference to any one lead- 
ing character, as tho principal figure of the epoch. I 
resume this line, by noticing a contemporary and 
fellow-countryman of Bacon, Ilarvey, the discoverer of 
the circulation of the blood. This discovery was not 
published and generally accepted till near the end of 
Bacon’s life; but tlie anatomist’s reflections on the 
method of pursuing science, though strongly mai'ked 
with tho character of tho revolution that was taking 
place, Wong to a very dificront school from tho Chan< 
oellor’s. Haiwey was a pupil of Fabrioius of Acqua- 
pendente, whom we noticed among the practical re- 
formers of tho sixteenth century. He entetlmiied, 
like his master, a strong reverence for the great name^ 
which had ruled in philosophy up to that time, Aris- 
totle and Galen; and was disposed rather to reco^i- 
mend his owm method by exhibiting it as the true 
interpretation of ancient wisdom, than to boast of its 
novelty. It is true, that he assigns, as his reason for 



158 PHILOSOPHY OP diucoveky. 

publidiing some of his researches ^ ‘‘that by revealing 
the method I use in searching into things, I might 
propose to studious men, a new and (if I mistake not) 
a surer path to the attainment of knowledge*;” but 
he soon proceeds to fortify himself with the authority 
of Aristotle. In doing this, however, he has the very 
great merit of giving a living and practical character 
to truths which exist in the Aristotelian works, but 
which liad hitherto been barren and empty professions. 
We have seen that Aristotle had asserted the im- 
poi*tance of e-^perieiicJ as one root of knowledge ; and 
in this had been fallowed by the schoolmen of the 
middle ages: but this assertion came with very dif- 
ferent force and effect fi*om a man, the wliole of whose 
life had been spent in obtaining, by means of expe- 
rience, knowledge which no man had possessed before. 
Ill Harve/s general reflections, the necessity of^both 
the elements of knowledge, sensations and ideas, ex- 
perience and rtsason, is fully brought into view, and 
rightly connected with the metaphysics of Aristotle. 
He puts the antithesis of these two elements with 


1 Anatcmicdl EsoercUaciona con- 
cerning the Oimeration of Living Orta- 
iureSf 1653. Preface. 

2 lie need Rimilar cxpressionii in 
conversation. George Ent, who edit- 
ed his Oencration of Animals, visited 
him. **at that time residing not far 
from the city; and found him very 
intent upon the persemtation of 
nature’s works, and with a counte- 
nance as cheerfhl, as mind imper* 
turbed; Democritus - lik^ chiefly 
searching into the cause of natural 
things." In the course of Gonversa- 
lion the writer said, **lt hath always 
been your choice about the secrets of 
NiAttre, to consult Xature herselt" 
“ ’Tis true ” replied he ; "and I have 
constantly been of opinion that from 
thence we might acqu^ not only the 


knowledge of those less considerable 
secrets of Xature, but eveu a certain 
admiration of tlmt Supreme Essence, 
the Creator. And though i have 
ever been ready to acknowledge, that 
many things have been discovered 
by learned men of former times ; yet 
do 1 still Ijelieve tliat the number of 
those which remain yet concealed in 
the darkness of Iropervestlgable Xa- 
tuTo Is mudi greater. Xay, I cannot 
forbear to wonder, and sometimes 
smile at those, who persuade them- 
selves, that aU things were bo con- 
summately and absolutely delivered 
by Aristotle^ Galen, or some other 
great name, as that nothing was left 
to the superaddltion of any that suc- 
ceeded." 




FROM BACON TO NEWTON, 1 59 

great clearness. ITniversals are chieilj known to us, 
for science is begot by reasoning from universaJs to 
Xiarticulars; yet that very comprehension of universals 
in the uudej’standing springs from sthe perception of 
singulars in oui: sense/* Again, he quotes Aristotle’s 
ai>parently opposite asseitions : — that made in his /*%- 
sic8\ ‘^that we must advance from things which are 
first known to us, though confusfidly, to things more 
distinctly intelligible in themselves; from the wliole 
to the pai*t; from the univemil to the particular;” 
and tliat made in the A mdytlcs^; that ^ Siiigulai's are 
more known to us and do fii'st exist according to 
sense : for nothing is in the iinderstiinding which was 
not before in the sense.” Both, he says, ai*o true, 
thougli at first they seem to clash : for “ thougli in 
knowledge we begin with se.iise, sensation itself is a 
uiiiveiml thing.** This he further illustrates; and 
quotes Senecji, who says, tlnit “Art itself is nothing 
but the rmso7i of the work, implanted in tlie Artist's 
mind and tulds, “ the same w’ay by which W'c gain 
an Ai*t, by the very same >vay wo attain any kiml of 
science or km »w ledge whatever; for as Art is a habit 
wlioso object is sometliiiig to be done, so Science is a 
habit whose object is something to be known ; and as 
the former proceedeth from the imitation of examples, 
so this latter, from tlie knowdedgo of things natural. 
The source of both is from sense and experience; since 
[but?] it is impossible that Ai*t sliould be nghtly pur- 
chased by the one or Science by the other without 
a dii-ection ffom ideas.” Without here dwelling on 
the relation of Art and Science, (very justly stat^ by 
Haiwey, except that ideas exist in a very difieront 
form in the mind of the Artist and the Scientist) it will 
be seen .that this doctrine, of science springing from 
exi>erience with a direction from ideas, is exactly that 
which we have repeatedly urged, as the true view of 
the subject. From this view, Harvey proceeds io infer 
the im|K>rtftnce of a reference to sense in his owa 


V mi), t c» 3* 


« Anal. Post it 



l6o FHIJiOSOPHY OP DISCOVEET. 

subject, not only for first discovering; but for teodring 
knowledge : “Without experience, ^not other mm^s bui 
our own, no man is a proper disciple of any mrt of 
natural knowledge; without experimental skill in ana- 
tomy, he will no better apprehend what I shdl deliver 
concerning generation, than a man bom blind can 
judge of the nature and diffei'ence of colours, or one 
born deaf, of sounds.” “ If we do otherwise, we may 
get a humid and floating opinion, but never a solid 
and infallible knowledge: as is happenable to those . 
who see foi*eigfi count A es only in maps, and the bowels 
of men falsely described in anatomical tables. And 
hence it comes about, that in tins rank age, we have 
iminy sophisters and bookwrights, but few wise men 
and philosophers.” He had before declared “how 
unsafe and degenerate a thing it is, to bo tutored by 
other men’s commentaries, without making trial of the 
things themselves; osjiecially since Nature’s book is 
so open and legible.” We are here reminded of Gali- 
leo’s condemnation of the paf)er philosophers.” The 
train of thought thus expressed by the practical dis- 
coverers, spread rapidly with the spreml of the new 
knowledge that had .suggested it, and soon became 
general and unquestioned. 

2. Descartes , — Such opinions are now among the 
most familial* and jK)pular of those which are current 
among writers and s|)eakers ; but wc should eiT much 
if we were to imagine that after they were once pro- 
pounded they were never resisted or contradicted. In- 
deed, even in our own time, not only are such maxims 
vetjr often practically neglected or forgotten, but 
the opposite opinions, and views of science quite in- 
consistent with those we have been explaining, are 
often promulgated and widely accepted. The.philoso-^ 
phy of pure ideas has its commonpla(;es, aa well as the 
philosophy of experience. And at the time of which 
we speak, the former philosophy, no less than the 
latter, had its gi*eat asserter and ex^ioundef a man in 
his own time more admired than Bacon, regarded 
with more doferenije by a large body of disciples all 
over Europe, and more powerful in stirring up men’s 



PROM BACON TO NEWTON. l6l 

minds to a new activity of inquiry^ I speak of Des* 
carter whose labonrisi, considered as a philosophical 
system, were an endi^vour to revive the method of 
obtaining knowledge by reasoning from onr own ideas 
only, and to erect it in opposition to the method of 
observation and experiment. The Cartesian philoso- 
phy contained an attempt at a counter-revolution. 
Thus in this author’s Principia Philosophioi^^ he says’ 
that “he will give a short account of the principal 
phenomena of tlie world, not that lie may use them as 
reasons to ju'ove anything; for, adds he, “we desire 
to deduce effects from causes, not causes from effects; 
but only in order that out of the innumerable eflects 
which wc loam to bo capable of resulting from tlie 
same causes, we may determine our mind to consider 
some rather than others.” lie had before said, “ The 
principles which we have obtained [by pure d priori 
reasoning] arc so vast and so fruitful, that many more 
consf'qucnces follow from them than wc se<j contained 
in this visible world, and oven many more than our 
mind can ever take a fall survey of.” And be pro- 
fesses to apply this method in detail. Thus in at- 
tempting to state the three ftindainental laws of mo- 
tion, ho employs only d reasonings, and is in 

fact led into error in the third law which he thus ob- 
tains^ And in his Dioptrics’’ he pretends to deduce 
the laws of reflection and rcfnictmn of light from cer- 
tain comparisons (which are, in truth, arbitrary,) in 
which the radiation of light is I'epreseiited by the mo- 
tion of a ball impinging upon the reflecting or refract- 
ing body. It might he rejiresentcd as a curious in- 
stance of the caprice of fortune, which appeals in sci- 
entiflo as in other history, that Kepler, professing to 
derive all his knowledge from experience, and exert- 
ing himself "with the greatest energy and perseverance, 
failed in detecting the law of reftaction; while Des- 
^cartes, who professed to be able to despise experiment, 
*obtained the true law of sines. But as wc have stated 


* t’ftraiu.ik4s. <8Q0jri'«f.rn<tS6.lKvLc.iL ^ Csp.l\L 

M 



1 62 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

in the Ili^tory^, Descartes appears to have leamt this 
law from Snell's papers. And whether this be so or 
not, it is certain that notwithstanding the profession of 
independence which his philosophy made, it was in 
reality constantly guided and instnicted by experience. 
Thus in explaining the Rainbow (in which his portion 
of the discovery merits great praise) he speaks® of 
taking a globe of glass, allowing the sun to shine on 
one side of it, and noting the colours produced by rays 
after two refractions qnd one reflection. And in many 
other instances, indeed in all that relates to jAysics, 
the reasonings and explanations of Descaites and his 
followers were, consciously or unconsciously, directed 
by the known facts, which they had observed them- 
selves or learnt from others. 

But since Descartes thus, speculatively at least, set 
himself in oj^position to the great reform of scientifle 
method which was going on in his time, how, it may 
be asked, did he acquire so strong an infiiience over 
the most active minds of his time? How is it that he 
became the founder of a large and distinguislied school 
of philoso]>hoi’s? How is it that he not only was 
mainly instrumental in deposing Aristotle from his in- 
tellectual thrrme, but for a time appeared to have esta- 
blished himself with almost equal powers, and to have 
rendered the Cartesian school as firm a body as the 
Perijiatctic liad been^ 

The causes to be assigned for this l emarkablo result 
are, I conceive, the following. In the first place, the 
ph}^icists of the Cartesian school did, as I have just 
stated, found their philosophy upon experiment, and 
did not practically, or indeed, most of them, theo- 
retically, assent to tlieir master's boast of sii^owing 
what the phenomena must instead, of looking to s^ 
what they are. And as Df^cartes ^had really incotjK>- 
rated in his philosophy all the chief physical disco- 
veries of bis own and preceding times, and had de-. 
Kvered, in a more general and systematic shape than 




* JiSeU&rumt c. vUL p. tSf, 




FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 163 

any one before him, the principles which he thus esta- 
blished, the physical philosophy of his school was in 
reality far the best then cun^ent ; and was an immense 
improvement upon the Aristotelian doctrines, which 
had not yet been displaced as a sj'stem. Another cir- 
cumstance which gained him much favour, was the 
bold and ostentatious manner in which he pixifessed 
to begin his philosophy by liberating hinpelf from all 
preconceived i)rcjudice. The first sentence of his phi- 
losophy coritiiina this celebrated »declaratioii ; “Since,” 
ho says, “ wo begin life as infants, and have contracted 
various judgments concerning sensible tilings before 
we possess the entire use of our reason, we are turned 
aside from the knowledge of truth by many prejudices : 
fi*oin which it does not ajipcai* that we can be any 
otherwise delivered, than if once in our life wo make 
it our business to doubt of everything in which we 
discern the smallest suspicion of uncertainty.” In the 
face of this sweeping rejection or unhesitating Scrutiny 
of all preconceived opinions, the power of the ancient 
authorities and masters in philosophy must obviously 
shrink away; and thus Descartes came to be con- 
sidered as the gi'cjit hero of the overthrow of the Aris- 
totelian dogmatism. But in addition to these causes, 
and perhaps more powerful than all in procuring tho 
assent of men to bis doctrines, came tho deductive and 
systeniatic chanicter of his philosophy. For although 
all knowledge of tho external world is in resility only 
to be obtained from observation, by inductive steps, — 
minute, slow, and many, as Galileo and 

Bacon had already taught; — ^the human mind conforms 
to these conditions reluctantly suid unsteadily, and is 
over ready to rush to general principles, and then to 
employ itself 2ai deducing conclusions from these by 
synthetical reasonings; a task grateful, from the dis- 
tinctness and certainty of the result^ and the accom- 
• panying feeling of our own st^ciency. Hence men 
readily overlooked the precarious character of Des- 
cartes* fundamental assumj^tions, in their admiration 
of the skill with which a varied and complex Universe 
was evolved out of them. And the complete and 



164 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

« 

systematic chai-acter of this philosophy attracted meu 
no Jess tlian its logical connexion, I may quote here 
what a philosoj)her^“ of our own time has said of another 
writer: “Ho owed liis influence to various causes; at 
the head of which may be jdaced that genius for sys- 
tem whicli, though it cramps the growth of know- 
ledge, perhaps Anally atones for that mischief by the 
zeal and activity which it rouses among followers and 
opponents, who discover truth by acciilent wlien in 
pursuit of weppous fop* their warfare. A system .which 
attempts a task so hard iis that of subjecting Viist pro- 
vinces of human knowledge to one or t^ro principles, 
if it presents some striking instances of conformity to 
superficial appearances, is sure to delight the framer ; 
and for a time to subdue and captivate the student too 
entirely for sober reflection and rigorous examination. 
In the first instance consistency passes for truth. \V hen 
principles in some instances have proved suflicient to 
give atl unexpected explanation of facts, the delighted 
reader is content to accept m true all otlicr deductions 
from the principles. Specious premises being assumed 
to bo true, nothing more can be required than logical 
inference. Mathematical forms pjis.s current an the 
equivalent of mathematicfal ccrfciinty. The unwary 
admirer is sfitisfied with the coiaplctcness and sym- 
metry of the plan of his house, unmindful of the need 
of examining the firmness of the foundation and the 
soundness of the materials. The system-maker, like 
the conquei*or, long dazzles and overawes the world; 
but when their sway is psist, the vulgar herd, unable 
to measure their astonisliiug faculties, take revenge 
by trampling on fallen gieatiiess.” Bacon showed 
his wisdom in his reflections on this subject, when 
he said that “Method, carrying a show of total and 
perfect knowledge, liath a tendency to generate ac- 
quiescence.” 

The main value of Descartes’ physical doctrines* 
consisted in their being arrived at in a way inodii- 


MiicWtnto^b, I)i$9er(a:i7nofiJ^thkalSitience, 




FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 1 65 

sistent ¦witt his own professed method, namely, by a 
reference to observation- But though he' did in reality 
begin from facts, his system was nevertheless a glaring 
example of that error which Biicon had called Anti- 
cipatUm; tliat illicit generabzation which leaps at once 
from special facts to princijdes of the widest and 
remotest kiudj such, for instance, as the Cartesian 
tloctrine, that the world is an absolute plenum^ evtjry 
part being full of matter of some kind, and that all 
natural eifccts depend on the laws of motion. Against 
this liiult, to wluch the human mind is sd prone, Bacon 
had lifted Ids waridng voice in vain, so far as the 
Cai*tesians were concerned ; as indeed, to this day, one 
theorist after another pursues his course, and turns 
a deaf ear to the Verulairiian injunctions; pcrliaps 
even com])lacently boasts that he founds his theory 
upon observation; and forgets that there are, as the 
aphorism of the Noimm Organon declares, two ways 
by which this may be done ; — the one hitherto in 
use and suggested by our common tendencies, but 
barren and worthless ; the other almost untried, to 
bo pui-sucd only with effort and self-deniiU, but alone 
capable of pix>ducing true knowledge. 

3. Gassendi. — Thus the lessons which Bacon 
taught were far from being generally accepted and 
applied at first. The amoimt of the influence of these 
two men, Bacon and Descartes, upon their age, has 
often been a subject of discussion. The fortunes of 
the Cartc^sian school have been in some measure traced 
in the History of Science. But I may mention the 
notice taken of these two philosophers by Gassendi, 
a contemporai'y and countryman of Descartes. Gas- 
sendi, as I have elsewhere stated was associated with 
Descartes in public opinion, os an opponent of the 
Aristotelian dogmatism j but was not in fact a follower 
or profound admirer of that writer. In a Treatise 
^ on Logic, Gassendi gives an account of the Logic of 
varioua sects and authors; treating, in order, of the 





1 66 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVBHT. 


Logic of Zeno (the Eleatic), of EucliS (the Megarean), 
of Plato, of Aristotle, of the Stoics, of EpicTims, of 
Lullius, of Bamus; and to these he adds the Loji^c 
of Ve^ulam, and the Logic of Cartesius. “We must 
not,” he says, “on account of the celebrity it has 
obtained, pass over the Organon or Logic of Francis 
Bacon Lord Verukm, High Chancellor of England, 
whose noble purpose in our time it has been, to make 
an Instauration of the Sciences.” He then gives a 
brief account of the Novum Organon^ noticing the prin- 
cipal features ib its rules, and especially the distinction 
between the vulgar induction whicli leaps at once from 
pai-ticulaf experiments to the more gcnei’al axioms, 
and the chastised and gradual induction, which the 
author of the Organon recommends. In his account 
of the Cartesian Logic, he justly observes, that “ He 
too imitated Verulam in this, that being about to build 
uj) a new philosoi)hy from the foundation, he wished 
in the first place to lay aside all prejudice : and 
having then found some solid principle, to make that 
the ground-wQrk of his whole structure. But he pro- 
ceeds by a very different path from that which Veru- 
lam follows ; for while Verulam seeks aid from thbigs, 
to perfect the cogitation of the intellect, Cartesius con- 
ceives, that when we have laid aside all knowledge of 
things, there is, in our thoughts alone, such a resource, 
that the intellect may by its own power arrive at a per- 
fect knowledge of all, even the most abstruse things.** 
The writings of Descartes have been most admired, 
and his metliod most commended, by those authors 
who have employed themselves upon metaphysical ra- 
ther than physical subjects of inquiiy. Perhaps we 
might say that, in reference to such subjects, this 
method is not so vicious as at first, when contrasted 
with the Baconian induction, it seems to be: for it 
might be urged that the thoughis from which Descartes 
begins Ms reasonings are, in reality, experimenta of the 
kind which the subject requires us to consider : each 
such thought is a ^t in the intellectual world ; and 
of such facts, the metaphysician seeks to discover the 
laws. I shall not here examine the validity of iim 



PROM BACON TO NEWTON. . 1 67 

plea; but shall turn to the consideration of the actual 
progress of physical science, and its effect on men’s 
minds. 

4. Actual progresa in Science, — ^The practiciil dis- 
coverers were indeed very active and very successful 
during the seventeenth century, which opened witli 
Bacon’s suiwcy and exhortations. The laws of nature, 
of which men had begun to obtain a glimpse in the 
preceding century, were investigated with zeal and 
sagacity, and the consequence was that the foundations 
of most of the modern physical scieubes were laid. 
That mode of research by experiment and observation, 
which had, a little time ago, been a strange, and to 
many, an unwelcome innovation, was now become the 
habitual cf>urse of philosophera The revolution from 
the philosophy of tradition to the philosophy of ex- 
perience was completed. The gi-eat discoveries of Kep- 
ler belonged to the j)receding century. They are not, 
I believe, noticed, either by Bacon or by Descartes; 
but they gave a strong impulse to astronomical and 
mecluvuical spocidators, by showing the necessity of a 
sound science of motion. Such a science Galileo had 
already begun to construct. At the time of which I 
speak, his disciples*® were still labouring at this task, 
and at other problems which rapidly suggested them- 
selves. They had already convinced themselves that 
air had weight; in 1643 Torricelli proveil this pi'acti- 
cally by the invention of the Barometer; in 1647 
cal proved it still further by sending the Barometer to 
the top of a mountain. Pascal and Boyle brought into 
clear view the fundamental laws of fluid equilibrium ; 
Boyle and Mariotte determined the law of the com- 
pression of air as regulated by its elasticity. Otto 
Guericke invented the air-pump, and by his “ Madge- 
burg Experiments” ou a vacuum, illustrated still fur- 
ther the effects of the air. Guericke pursued what 
Gilbert had begun, the observation of electrical pheno- 


Oaitelll, To»toel^ TItIadI, BalUal, Gassendi, Mianenne, Borein, Ca- 



1 68 PHILOSOPHY OP HISCOVBHT. 


tnena; q.B<l thjese two physicists made an important 
step, by detecting rcpt^cm as well as attraction in 
these" phenomena. Gilbert had already laid the foundar 
tions pf the science of Magnetism. The law of refrac- 
tion, at which Kepler laboured in vain,' was, as 
we have seen, discovered by Snell (about 1621), and 
published by Descartes. Merseune had discovered 
some of the more important pirts of the theory of 
Harmonics. In sciences of a different kind, the same 
movement was visible. Chemical doctrines tended to 
assume a propfer degree of generality, when Sylvius in 
1679 tiiught the opposition of acid and alkali, and 
Stahl, soon after, the phlogistic theory of combustion. 
Steno bad remaiked the most impoTtaut law of eiystal- 
lography in 1669, that the angles of the same kind of 
crystals are always equal. In the sciences of classifi- 
cation, about 1680, itay and Morison in Englimd 
resumed the attempt to form a systematic botany, 
which had been interrupted for a liundred years, from 
the time of the memorable essay of Otesalpinus, The 
grand discoveiy of the circulation of the blood by 
Ilarvey about 1619, was Mlowed in 1651 by Pec(|ueffB 
discovery of the courae of the chyle. There could now 
no longer be any question whether science wob pro- 
gressive, or whether observation could lead to new 
truths. 

Among these cultivators of science, sucli sentiments 
as have been already quoted became very familiar;-*- 
that knowledge is to be sought from nature horself by 
observation and experiment; — that in such matters 
tradition is of no force when opposed to experience, 
and that more reasonings without facts cannot lead to 
solid knowledge. But 1 do not know tliat we find in 
these writers any more special rules of induction and 
scientific research which have since been confirmed 
and universally adopted. Perhaps too, as was natuml 
in so great a revolution, the writers of this time, espe- 
cially the second-rate ones, were somewhat too prone 
to disparage the labours and talents of Aristotle and[ 
the ancients in general, and to overlook the ideal 
element of our ImoiviOdge, in thexr zealous study of 



FEOM BACON TO NEWTON, 1 69 

pBcDomena. They tit^ged, sometimes in an exagge- 
rated manner, the superioi*ity of modern times in all 
that regards science, and the supreme and sole im- 
portance of fisLcts in scientific investigations. There 
prevailed among them also a lofty and dignified tone 
of speaking of the condition and' prospects of science, 
such as we are accustomed to admure in the Verula- 
miaii witiitgs; for this, in a less degree, is epidemic 
among those who a little after his time &.pi'^k of the 
new philosophy. , ^ * 

5. Otto Guericke, <C"c. — I need not illustrate these 
characteristics at any great length. I may os an ex- 
ample notice Otto Guericke’s Preface to his Experi- 
m^nta Magiiebnrgica (1670). He quotes a iiassaga 
from Kircher’s Treatise on tho Magnetic Art, in which 
the author says, “Hence it ajqiears how all philosophy, 
except it be sui)ported by experiments, is empty, M- 
lacious, and useless ; what monstrosities philosophers, 
in other respects of the highest and subtlest genius, 
may produce in philosojdiy by neglecting experiment 
Thus Experience alone is tho Dissolver of Doubts, the 
Keconciler of Difficulties, the sole Mistress of Truth, 
who holds a torch befi»re us in obscurity, unties our 
knots, teaches us the true causes of things.” Guericke 
himself reiterat^ the same imnark, adding tliat “ plii- 
losophors, insisting u])on their own thoughts and argu- 
ments merely, cannot come to any sound conclusion 
respecting the natural constitution of the world.” JSTor 
were the Cartesians slow in taking up the same tiain 
of reflection. Thus Gilbert Clark who, in 1 6 A 0 , pub- 
lished^ a defence of Descartes’ doctrine of a phnum 
in tiie universe!, speaks in a tone which reminds us 
of Bacon, and indeed was very probably caught from 
him : “Natural philosophy foraierly consisted entirely 
of loose and moat doubtful controversies, carried on in 
high-sounding words, fit rather to delude than to in- 
struct men. But at last (by the favour of the Deity) 

« - - - - - 


* Jifwidi,4»q!ua dtfendiiuf CwittkoM WXosoj^ia oonlfs 

unkHtiiU Frantitei JEtoeimi, 7X et Sethi Wardi 



170 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISOOVBEY- 


there shone forth some moi*e divine intd^Ieots, who 
taking as their counsellors reason and expeiience to- 
gether, exhibited a new method of philosophizing. 
Hence has been conceived a strong hope that philoso- 
phers may embrace, not a shadow or empty image of 
Truth, but Truth henself: and that Physiology (Physics) 
scattering these controversies to the winds, will con- 
tract an ^liance with Mathematics. Yet this is hardly 
the work of one ago; still less of one man. Yet let 
not the mind desponc^ or doubt not that, one party of 
investigators J&’ter an«jther following the same method 
of philosoi>hizing, at last, under good auguries, the 
mysteries of nature being daily unlocked as far as 
human feebleness will allow, Tnith may at last appear 
in full, and these nuptial torches may he lighted.’* 

As another instance of the same kind, I may quote 
the pref4ice to the First volume of the Transactions 
of the Academy of Sciences at Paris: “It is only 
since tlie jiresent centuiy,” says the writer, “ that we 
can reckon the revival of ^Mathematics and Physics, 
M. Descartes and other great men have laboured at 
this work with so much success, that in this depart- 
ment of literature, the whole face of things has been 
changed. Men have quitted a sterile system of physics, 
which for s<weral genenitioiis had been always at the 
same point; the reign of words and ^iins is passed; 
men will have things; they establish principles which 
they understand, they follow those principles; and 
thus they make progress. Authority has ceased to 
have more weight tlian Reason : that which was I'e- 
ceived without contradiction because it had been long 
received, is now examined, and often rejected: and 
pliilosophers liave made it their business to consult, 
respecting natural things, Nature herself rather than 
the Ancients*” These had now become the common^ 
places of those who spoke oonceming the course and 
method of the Sciences, 

• 6, Hooke, — jElngland, as might be expected^ the 
influence of Francis Bacon was more cUrectly visible. 
We find many writers, about this titfie, reputing the 
truths which Bacon had proclaimed, and in abmiet 



pAom bacon to newton. 171 

every case showing ihe same imperfections in their 
views which we have noticed in him. We may take 
as an example of this Hooke’s Essay, enlatl^ 
General Scheme or Idea of the pr^nt state of Natuial 
Philosophy, and how its defects may be remedied by a 
Methodical proceeding in the making Experiments and 
collecting Observations; whereby to compile a Natural 
History as a solid basis for the superstructure of 
true Philosophy.” This Essay may bo looked upon as 
an attempt to adapt the Novum Orgemon to the age 
wliich succeeded its publication. We* have in this 
imitation, as in the original, an eniimemtion of vari- 
ous mistakes and impediments which had in preceding 
times prevented the progiess of knowledge; exhorta- 
tions to experiment and observation as the only solid 
basis of Science ; very ingenious suggestions of trains of 
inquiry, and modes of pui*suing them ; and a promise 
of obtaining scientific truths when facts have been 
duly accumulated. This last part of his scheme the 
author calls a Hiilosophical Algebra; and he appeal's 
to have imagined that it might answer the purpose of 
finding unknown causes from known facts, by means 
of certain regular processes, in the same manner as' 
Common Algebra finds unknown from known quanti- 
titss. But this ]>art of the plan appears to have re- 
xnaiued unexecuted. The suggestion of such a method 
was a result of the Baconian notion that invention 
in a discoverer might be dispensed with. We find 
Hooke adopting the phrases in which this notion is 
implie<l : thus he speaks of the understanding as “being 
very prone to run into the affirmative way of judging, 
and wanting patience to follow and prosecute the nega- 
tive way of inquiiy, by rejection of disagreeing natures,*^ 
And he follows Bacon also in the error of attianpting 
at. once to obtain from the facts the discovery of a 
nature,” instead of investigating fitrst tlie measiu'es 
and the laws of phenomena. I return to more general 
notices of the course of in^’s thoughts on,„tfais subject. 

7. Royal Society* — Those who associated them- 
selves together for the prosecution of science quoted 
Bacon' as ^eir leader^ and exulted m the progress 



172 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVJ5BY. 

made by the philosophy which proceeded upon his 
principles.' Thus in Oldenburg^s Dedication of the 
Transaction^ of the Royal Society of London for 1670, 
to Robei*t Boyle, he says; “I am informed by such 
as well remember the best and worst days of the 
famous l>>rd Bacon, that though h6 wrote his Ad- 
vancemeM of Learning and his Imtauratio Magna in 
the time of his greatest power, yet his grejiteat re- 
putation rebounded first from the most intelligent 
foreigners in many p£^*ts of Christeinlom and after 
speaking of his pmctical talents and his public em- 
jdoyments, he adds, ‘‘ much more justly still may we 
wonder how, without any great skill in Chemistry, 
without much pretence to the Mathematics or Me- 
chanics, without optic aids or other engines of late 
invention, he should so much tianscend the philoso- 
phei's then living, in judicious and clear instructions, 
in so many useful observations and discoveries, I think 
I may say beyond the records of many ages.” And 
in the end of the Preface to the same volume, he 
speaks with great exultation of the advance of scieuco 
all over Europe, refening undoubtedly to facts then 
familiar. ^‘Aud now let envy snarl, it cannot stop 
the wheels of active philosophy, in no part of the 
known world;— not in France, either in Paris or in 
Coen : — not in Italy, cither in Rome, Naples, Milan, 
Florence, Venice, l^nonia or Padua; — in none of the 
Universities either on this or on that side of the seas, 
Madrid Lisbon, all the best spirits in Spain and 

Portugal, the spacious and remote dominions to 
them belonging; — the Imperial Court and the Princes 
of Germany; the Northern Kings and their best lumi- 
naries; and even the frozen Muscovite and Russian 
have all, taken the operative ferment : and it works 
high and every way, to the encouragemeiit 

of all sinc^e loVers of knowledge and virtue.” 

Again, in the Prelhee ibr 1673 , he pursues the 
same thought into detail: ^*We must grant that in. 
the last ag^ when oOeind/ive philosophy began ta re- 
eoyer ground, and tb on the h^s of triumphant 
Philology j; emorgent ^ventures and groat sucoesseA 



FROM Bx\CON TO NEWTON. 1 73 

were encountered by dangerous oppositions and strong 
ob8tructi(Mi& Galilaeuff and others in Italy suftered 
extremities for their celestial discoveries ; and here in 
England Sir Walter Kaleigli, when he was in Lis 
greatest lustre, was notoriously slandei*ed to have 
erected a school of atheism, because ho gave counte- 
nance to chemistiy, to practical arts, and to curious 
mechanical operations, and dcsigjied to form the best 
of them into a college. And Queen Elizabeth’s Gilbert 
was a long time esteemed exti*avagant for his magnet- 
isms ; and Harvey for his diligent resdhrehes in pur- 
suance of the circulation of the Viloo<l. But when our 
renowned Lord Bacon had demonstrated the methods 
for a perfect rcatoitition of all parts of real knowledge; 
and the genei'ous and philosophical Pciveskius had, 
soon after, iigitatod in all parts to redeem the most 
instructive antiquities, and to excite experimenkil 
essays and fresh discoveries; the success became on a 
sudden stupendous; and effective philosophy began to 
sparkle, and even to flow into beams of shining light 
all over the world/’ 

The formation of the Boyal Society of London and 
of the Academy of Sciences of Paz’is, from which pro- 
ceeded the declamations just quoted, were among many 
indications, belonging to this period, of tlu^ imjwrtance 
which stiites as well as individuals had by this time 
begun to attach to the cultivation of science. The 
English Society was established almost immediately 
when the restoration of the monarchy appeared to 
give a promise of tranquillity to the nation (in 1660), 
and the French Academy very soon afterwards (in 
1666). Tliese measures were very soon followed by 
the establishment of the Observatories of Pans and 
Greenwich (in 1667 and ifljs); 'vrhioh may be con- 
sidered to be a kind of public recognition of the astro- 
nomy of observation, as an object oil which it was the 
advantage and the duty of nations to bestow their 
wealth. • ^ 

8. Sacon^s New When philosophers 

had their attention turned to tho boundless prospect of 
increase to the knowledge and jpowers and pleasures of 



174 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


man whicli the cultivation of experimental philosophy 
seemed to promise, it was natural that they should 
think of devising institutions and associations hy which 
such benefits might be secured. Bacon had drawn a 
picture of a society organized with a view to such pur- 
pose, in his fiction of the “ New Atalantis.” ^Flie 
imaginary teacher who explains this institution to the 
incpiiring traveller, describes it by the name of Solo- 
mon^a Uouae; and aaya*^, “The end of our founda- 
tion is the knowledge^ of causes and secret motions of 
things ; and the enlarging the bounds of the human 
craj)ire to ofTecting of things possible.” And, as pai'ts 
of this House, he describes caves and wells, chiunbcrs 
and towers, l>athH and gardens, parks and pools, dis- 
pensatorich and furnjiccs, and many other conti-ivances, 

) provided for the purpose of making experiments of 
many kinds. He describes also the various employ- 
ments of the Fellows of this College, who bike a share 
in its researches. There are ^nerchaiUa of lights who 
bring books and inventioiis from foreign countries ; 
depredalora^ who gather the experiments which exist 
in books ; myaiery man^ who collect the experiments of 
the mechanical ajiis; pioneera or mwera^ who invent 
now experiments ; and compUera^ who draw the ex- 
periments of the former into titles and tables, to give 
the bettor light for the drawing of observations and 
axioms out of them,” There are also domry-mm, or 
henefactorsy that cast about how to draw out of the 
experiments of their fellows things of use and prao* 
tice for man’s life ; lamvpay that dii*eot new experiments 
of a more penetrating liglit than the former; in- 
oculaioraf tliat execute the exfieTimeuts so directed* 
Finally, there are the interpreters of naturey that raise 
the former discoveries by experiments into greater ob- 
servations (that k), more gentod truths), axioms and 
aj^horisms. Upon this scheme we may remark, that 
fictitious as it undisguisedly is, it still serves to exhibit 
Very clearly some of the main features of the author^s 


14 Bacon’s fToi ks, voL tL ii%w 




FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 


175 


philosophy : — namely, his steady view of the necessity 
of ascending from facts to the most general tmtlis by 
several stages; — an exaggerated opinion of the aid that 
could bo derived in such a tash from technical sepa- 
ration of the phenomena and a distribution, of them 
into tables; — a belief, pi’obably incon*ect, that the 
cilices of experimenter and interpreter may be entirely 
separated, and ijursued by different persons with a 
certainty of obtaining success! — and a strong determi- 
nation to make knowledge constantly subservient to 
the uses of life. 

9. Cowley , — Another project of the same kind, 
less ambitious but apparently more directed to prac- 
tice, was published a little later (1657) by another 
eminent man of letters in this countiy. I speak of 
Cowley’s “ Proposition for the Advancement of Experi- 
mental Philosophy.’’ He suggests that a College should 
be established at a short distance from Tjondon, on- 
dowetl with a revenue of four thousand pounds, and 
consisting of twenty professors with other membei*s. 
The objects of the laboui’s of these professors he de- 
scribes to be, first, to examine all knowledge of nature 
delivered to us from former ages and to pi'onounce it 
sound or worthless ; second, to recover the lost inven- 
tions of the ancients; third, to improve all arts that 
wo now have; lastly, to discover others tbit we yet 
have not. In this propossil we cannot help marking 
the visible declension from Bacon’s more philosophical 
view. For we have here only a very vague indication 
of improving old arts and discovering’ new, instead of 
the two clear Vendamiau antitheses, Experiments and 
Axioms deduced from them, on the one hand, and on 
the other an ascent to general Laws, and a derivation, 
from these, of Arts for daily use. Moreover the pro- 
mineixt place which Cowley has assigned to the verify- 
ing the knowledge of former ages and recovering fee 
lost inventions and drowned lands of the anci^ts^’^ 
implies a disposition to think too highly pf traditionary 
knowledge ; a weakness which Bacon’s scheme shows 
hXm to have fully overcome. And thus it hits been up 
to the present day, that with all Bacon’s mistakes, in 



176 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVBET. 

* 

the philosophy of scientific method few have come^up 
to him, and perhaps none have gone beyond him. 

Cowley exerted himself to do justice to the new 
philosophy in verse as well as prose, and his Poem to 
the Kf)ysd Society expresses in a very noble manner 
thos<' views of the history and prospects of philosophy 
which prevailed among the men by whom the Boyal 
Society was founded. The fertility and ingenuity of 
comparison which characterize Cowley’s poetry are 
well known ; and these qualities art* in this instance 
largely employed for Aic enibollishment of his subject. 
Many of the comparisons which he exhibits are apt 
anil striking, riiilosophy is a ward whose estate (hu- 
man knowledge) is, in his nonage, kept from him by 
his guardians and tutors; (a case which tht* ancient 
rhetoricians were fond of taking as a subject of dccIa-» 
luation;) and these wrong-doers retain him in unjust 
tutelage and constraint for their own purposes ; until 

Bhcoh at last, a mi^lity man, arose, 

^Wliom a wise King, end Nature, chose 
Lord Chancellor of both their laws,) 

* And boldly undertook the injured pupil's cause. 

• 

Again, Paeon in one 'who breaks a scarecrow Priapus 
¦which stands in the garden of knowledge. Again, 
Bacon is one who, instead of a picture of painted 
grapes, gives us real gmpos from which we press “ the 
thirsty soul’s refreshing wine,” Again, Bacon is like 
Moses, who led llie Hebrovis ff»rth from the barren 
wilderness, and ascimdcd Pisgah;— 

Did on the very border stand 
Of tho blest promised land. 

And from the mountain's top if his exalted wit 
Saw it himself and showed us it. 

The poet howpver adds, iha*t Bacon discovei^d, but 
did not conquer this new world; and that the men 
whom he addresses must subdue these regions. These 
‘‘champions” are thto ingeniously compared to Gi- 
ileon’s band; 

Their old and empty pitchers first they brake. 

And with tbdr baoM t^en lifted up the ^ht» 



FEOM BACON TO NEWTON. 177 

' ,Trhore were still at this time some who sneered at or' 
’iftdhdeinned the now philosophy; but the tide of popular " 
Opinion was soon strongly in its favour. 1 have else- 
where*® noticed a ^nisquinade of the poet Boileau in 
1682, directed against the Aristotelians. At this time, 
and indeed for long afterwards, the philosophers of 
i’ranc© were Cartesians, The English men of science, 
although partially and for a time they accepted some 
of Descartes’ opinions, for the most ptirt carried on 
the reform independently, .ond pi pursuance of their 
own views. And they very soon found a*much greater^ 
header than Descartes to place at their head, and to 
take as tlioir aiithority, so far as they acknowledged 
authority, in their speculations. T .speak of Newton, 
whose influence upon the philosophy of science I must 
now consider. 

Barrow . — I will, however, fii*st mention one other 
writer who may, in more than one way, he regarded 
as the predecessor of Newton. T speak of Isinic Bar- 
row, whom Newtx)n succeeded as Professor of Mathe-- 
matics in the University of Cambridge, ami wdio in hia 
mathematical specnlations approached very near to 
N ewton’a method of Fluxion A He afterwards (in 1673) 
became Ma,ster of Trinity College, which office he held 
till his death in 1677. But the passages which I 
shall quote belong to an earlier period, (when Barrow^ 
was about 22 years old,) and may be regarcled as ex- 
I)ressions of the opinion!|^ which were then current 
among active-minded and studious young men. They 
manifest a complete familiarity with the writings both 
of Bacon and of Descartes, and a very just appreciation 
of both. The discourse of which I speak is au aca- 
demical exercise delivered in 1652, 011 tlie thesis Car- 
tesians hypothesis hand satisfadt prceHpifiis nq^t^urm 
phcenovicnis. By the “ Cartesian hypothesis,” Tae does ^ 
not mean tho hypothesis that the planets are moved 
l>y voi*ticds of etherial matter : I believe that this Car- 
tesian tenet never had any disciples in England; 


i* Hist. Ind. Sc. lx vil. c. i. 



178 PHILOSOPHY OP mSCOVERY. . 

certainly never took any hold of Cambridge. By H;ho 
Cartesian hypotliesis, Barrow means tho doctrine that 
all the phenomena of nature can be accounted for by 
matter and motion ; and allowing that the motions of 
the planets are to be so accounted for, (which is New- 
tonian aa well as Cartesian doctrine,) he denies that 
the Oiirtesian hypothesis accounts for “ the generations, 
properties, and specific ojMiratioiis of animals, plants, 
Tiiiuorals, stones, and other natural bodies,” in doing 
which he shows a sound philosophical judgment. But 
among the pai'ts of this discourse most bearing on our 
present purpose are those where ho mentions Bacon. 
“Against Cartesius,” he says, “1 pit the chymists and 
others, but es])ecially as the foi'emost champion of this 
battle, our Venilam, a man of groat name and of great 
judgment, who condemned this philoso]>hy before it 
Wiis born.” “He,” adds Barrow, “seveiul times iu his 
OrganoUt warned men agiiinst all liypothcses of this 
kind, and noticed Ladbrehaiid that there was not much 
to be expected from those principles which are brought 
into being by violent efforts of argumentation from the 
brains of j)articiilar men : for that, as u])on the pheno- 
mena of the Stax’S, various constructions of the lieavena 
may be devised, so also upon the phenomena of the 
Universe, still more dogmas may be founded and con- 
structed ; and yet all sucli arc mere inventions : and as 
many pliilaso])hics of this kind as arc or shall be ex- 
tant, so many fictitious and theatrical worlds are made.^’ 
The reference is doubtless i9A phorism LXii. of the lii-st 
B<x)k of the Novum Organon, iu which Bacon, is 
speaking of his “ Idols of the Theatre.” After making 
the remju’k whicli Bari'ow has adopted, ,Bacon adds, 
“ Such theatrical fables have also this in common with 
tliose of dramatic poets, that tho dnimatio story is 
more regular and elegant than truo histories are,^ and 
is made so as to be agreeable.” Barrow, having this 
in his mind, goes on to say: “And though Curtesius 
Jias diiissed up the stage of his theatre more prettiljf 
than any other person, and made his drama more like 
history, still he is not exempt from the like censure.” 
And he then refers to Cartesius’s own declaration, that 



FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 


179 

he did not leam his system from things themselves, 
bat tried to impose his own laws upon th^gs; thus in- 
vei*ting the order of true philosophy. 

Other parts of Bacoii’s w<SL‘k to which Barrow refers 
are those where he speaks of the Form, or Fonnal 
Cause of a body, and says that in comparisori with 
that, the lifficient Cause and the Material Cause are 
things xin important and superficial, and con tribute 
little to true and active science**^. And again, his 
classification of the various kinds of motions^’, — ^the 
Tiiotus libertatis, motus nexus, * motus •contin.nitatis, 
inotus ad lucrum, fuga^, nnionis, cougregatioiiis; and 
the explanation of electrical attraction (about W'Jiich 
Gilbert and otliei’s had written) as moiiis ad lucrnrn. 

Those pjissages show that Barrow had read the 
jN^ovv/n Organon, in a cp-reful and intelligent manner, 
and presumed liis Cambri4lge hearers to he acquainted 
with the work. Nor i.s liLs judgment of Do-scartes 
IcAS wise and philosophical. He rejects, its we have 
soon, his system as a tnie scheme of the universe, and 
i'ondeinns altogether liLs d prion mode of philosophiz- 
ing; but this dues not prevent his accepting I)es(;arte8* 
real discoveries, and admiring the boldness and vigour 
of his attempts to reform jdiilusophy. There is, in 
Ihirrow’s works, academic verse, sis well as j»rosc, on 
the subject of the Cai-tesiaii hypothesis. In this, Des- 
cartes iiiinself is highly pmised, tliough his doctrines 
are very partially accepted. The writer Siiys: “Par- 
don us, great Cartesius, ii the Muse re.sists you. Par- 
don ! Wo follow you, Inquiring Spirit that you are, 
while we reject your system. As you have taught us 
free thought, and bn^ken down the rule of tyranny, 
we undauntedly speculate, even in opposition to you.” 

Descartes is oven yet s|>oken of, especially by French 
writers, as the person who first asserted and estab- 
lished the freedom of inquiry which is the boast of 
modem philosophy ; but this is said wdth reference to 
metajibysicfl, not to physics. In physietd philosophy. 


i7Z&,Ub.U.Ai)b.4s. 

V 2 


w yow Org. Ub. il. Aph. 2, 


l80 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

though he caught hold of some of the discoveries 
which were then coming into view, the method in 
which he reasoned or professed to reason was alto- 
gether vicious; and wass^as 1 have already said, an 
attempt to undo what the reformers, both theoretical 
and practical, had been doing : — ^to discredit the philo- 
sophy of experience, and to restore the reign of d priori 
systems. 

It was, however, now, too late to make any such 
attempt ; and nothing ci\me of it to interiupt the pro- 
gress of a better philosophy of discovery. 



CHAPTER XVIIL 


Newton. 


I. "DOLD and extensive as fiad been tlie antici- 
pations of those whose minds were excited 
by the promise of the ncAv philosophy, the discoveries 
of Newton respecting tlie mechanics of the imi verse, 
brought into view truths more general and profound 
than those earlier jdiilosophers had hoped or imagined. 
With these vast a,ccessions to human knowledge, men's 
thoughts w'cre again set in action; and philosophers 
made earnest and various attempts to draw, from these 
extiuordiaary advances in science, the true moral with 
regard to the conduct and limits of the human under- 
standing. Tliey not only endeavoured to verify and 
illustrate, by these new portions of science, what had 
recently been taught concerning the methods of ob- 
taining sound knowledge; but they were also led to 
speculate concerning many new and more interesting 
questions relating to this subject.. They saw, for the 
lirst time, or at least far more clearly than before, the 
distinction between the inquiry into the lauosy and into 
the catiees of phenomena. They were tempted to ask, 
how far the discovery of causes could be carried; and 
whether it would soon reach, or clearly point to, the 
ultimate cause. They "were driven to consider whether 
the properties which they discovered were essential 
pro|>erties of all matter, necessarily and primarily in- 
volved in its essence, though revealed to us at a late 
jperiod by their derivative effects. Tliose questions 
even now agitate the tlioughts of speculative mem 
Some of thorn have already, in this work, been dis-r 
cussed, or amingcd in^the places which our view of the 
philosophy of these subjects assigns to them. But we 



1 82 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

must here notice them as they occurred to Newton 
himself and his immediate followei*s. . 

2, The general Baconian notion of the method of 
philasopLizing, — that it consists in ascending fi’om phe- 
nomena, through various stages of generalization, to 
truths of the highest order, — ^received, in Newton’s dls- 
coveiy of the universal mutual gi*avitation of every 
j)article of matter, that pointed actual exemplification, 
for want of which it had hitherto been almost over- 
looked, or at least Very vaguely undcsratood. That 
great truth, and tlie stej>s by whicli it was established, 
atford, even now, by far the best example of the suc- 
cessive ascent, from one scientific truth to another, — 
of the repeated transition from less to more general pro- 
positions, — which we can yet produce; as may be seen 
in the Table which exhibits the relation of these steps 
in Book ii. of the Novum Organon Renovatuvn, Newton 
himself did not fail to recognize this feature in the 
truths vrhich he exhibited. Thus ho says', “By the 
way of Analpis wo proceed from compounds to ingre- 
dients, as from motions to the forces producing them ; 
and in general, from effects to tlieir x;auses, and from 
particular causes to more general ones, till the argument 
ends in the most general.” And in like manner in ano- 
ther Query*: “The main business of natural philoso- 
phy is to argue from phenomena without feigning hyj^o- 
theses, and to deduce causes from effects, tUl we come 
to the First Caiiso, which is certainly not mechanical.” 

3. Newton appears to have had a horror of the 

term hypothesis^ which probably arose fn>m his ac- 
quaintance with the rash and illicit general, assump- 
tions of Descartes. Thus in the passage just quoted, 
after declaring that gi*avity must have some other 
cause than matter, he says, “ Later philosophers banish 
the consideration of such a cause out of Natural Phi- 
losophy, feigning hypotheses for jixplaining all things 
mechanically, and referring causes to meta-* 

physics.” In the celebrated Bcholium at the end of 


. 1 p|itici,qtL 31, near tbeend. 


«QiL3a. 



NEWTON. 


183 

the Principia he says, “Whatever is not deduced 
from the phenomena, is to be termed hyi)othesis ; and 
hypotheses, whether metaphysical or physical, or oc- 
cult causes, or mechanical, have no place in experi- 
mental philosophy. In this philosophy, propositions 
are. deduced from phenomena, and rendered general V>y 
induction.” And in another place, ho arrests the 
course of his own suggestions, sjxying, “ Venim hypo- 
theses noli fingo.” I have alrwidy attempt "3d to show 
that this is, in reality, a superstitious and self-destmc- 
tivc spirit of speculation. Some . hypotheses are neces- 
saiy, in order to connoct the facts which arc observ^'d; 
some new principle of unity must be applied to the 
phenomena, before induction can be attempted. What 
is requisite is, that the hyjiothesis should be close to 
the facts, and not connected with them by the interme- 
diation of other arbitrary and untried tiiets ; and that 
the philosopher should be ready to resign it as soon as 
the facts refuse to confirm it. We have seen in the 
History^ y that it was by such a use of hypoth'vses, that 
both Newton himself, and Kepler, on whose discoveries 
those of Newton were based, made their discoveries. 
The suppositions of a force tending to the sun and vary- 
ing inversely as the square of the distance ; of a mutual 
force between all the bodies of the solar system ; of the 
force of each body arising from the attraction of all its 
l»arts; not to mention others, ajso propounded by 
Newton, — were all hypotheses before they were veri- 
fied as tlkoories. It is related that when Newton was 
asked how it was that he saw into the laws of nature 
so inuqh further than other men, ho replied, that if it 
were so,’ it resulted from his keeping his thoughts 
steadily OQcupied upon the subject which was to be 
thus penetrated. But what is this occupation of the 
thoughts, if it he not the -process of keeping the phe- 
nomena clearly in vfow, and trying, one after another, 
•all the plausible hy|ji^heses which seem likely to con- 
nect them, till at last the true law is discovei^^l Hy- 
potheses so used are a necessary element of discovtoy. 


• Uist, Ind, Si, Y. and K viL 




1 84 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

4. With regard to the detail^ of the process of 
disooveiy, Newton has given us some of his views, 
which are well worthy of notice, on account of their 
coming from him ; and which arc real additions to the 
philosophy of this subject. Ho speaks repcjxtedly of 
the aaalysia and syrtt/iesis of observed fhets ; and thus 
marks certain steps in scientific research, very import- 
ant, and not, I think, clearly pointed out by his prede- 
cessors. Thus he says^ “Ah in Mathematics, so in 
Natuml Philosophy, the investigation of difficult things 
by the method of anfi&ysis ought ever to precede the 
method of composition. This analysis consists in mak- 
ing experiments and obseiwations, and in drawing 
general conclusions from them by induction, and ad- 
mitting of no objections against the conclusions, but 
such as are taken from experiments or other certain 
truths. And although the arguing from exj:)criments 
and observations by induction be no demonstration of 
general conclusions ; yet it is the best way of arguing 
which the nature of things admits of, and may bo look- 
ed upon as so much the stronger, by hoW much the 
induction is more general” And he then obsetves, as 
wc have quot(*d abo\»j, that by this way of analysis wo 
proceed from compounds to ingredients, from motions 
to forces, from efiects to causes, and from less to more 
general causes. The analysis here spoken of includes 
the jdteps which in our Novum Organon w^e call the 
deconqiosition of facts, the exact chservatlon and meor- 
sarfinienl of tJie phenomena, and the cMujation of facts ; 
the necessary intermediate step, the selection and expli- 
cation of the appropriate conception, being passed over 
by Newton, in the fear of seeming to encourage the 
fabrication of hypotheses. The syntJmis of which New- 
ton here speaks consists of those steps of deductive rea* 
soningy proceeding from the conception once assumed, 
which are requisite for the comparison of its conse- 
quences with the observed ftets. This, his statement 
6i the process of research, is, as far as it goes, perfectly 
exact, 


.4 Opilctt qu. ax. 



NEWTON. 


185 

g. In speaking of Newton’s precepts on the sub^t» 
we are naturally led to the celebrated “ Rules of rhi- 
losophizing,” inserted in the second edition of the Priri^ 
cipi(i. These rules have generally been quoted and 
commented on with an almost unquestioning reverence. 
Such Rules, coming from such an authority, cannot 
fail to be highly interesting to us ; but at the same 
tiuie, wo cannot here evade the necessity of scrutinis* 
ing their truth and value, according to the piinciplea 
wdiich our survey of this subject has brought into view. 
The Rules stand at the beginning of tfuit part of the 
Prinnpia (the Third Book) in which he infers the mu- 
tual gravitation of the sun, moon, planets, and all parts 
of each. They are as foll«iws : 

“ Rule I. We are not to admit other caiises of na- 
tural things tluui such as both arc true, and suffice for 
explaining their phenomena. 

“Rule 11. Natural effects of the same kind are 
to be referred to the same caused, its ikr sls can be 
done. 

“ Rule III. The qualities of bodies which cannot 
be increased or diminished in intensity, and 'which be- 
long to all bodies in which we can institute experi- 
lucuts, are to bo held for qualities of all bodies what- 
ever. 

“ Rule IV, 111 experimental philosophy, proposi- 
tions collected from phenomena by induction,' are to 
bo held as true either accurately or approximately, not- 
withstanding contrary hyjx)thescs ; till other phe^no- 
mcna occur by which they may be rendered either 
more accurate or liable to exception.*’ 

In considering these Rules, we cannot help remark- 
ing, in the first place, that they are constructed with 
an intentional adaptation to the case with which New- 
ton has to deal,— the induction of Universal .Gravita- 
tion ; and are intended to protect the reasonings before 
which they stand. Thus the first Rule is designed to 
strengthen the inference of gravitation from the celcl^ 
tial phenomena, by describing it as a vera cemsa, a true 
cause ; the second Rule countenances the doctrine that 
the jdanctary motions are governed by mechanical 



i86 


PHIIiOSQPHT OP DISCOVERY. 


forces, As terrestrial motions are; the third rule ap- 
pears' intended to justify the assertion of gmvitatioii, 
as a universal quality of bodies ; and the fourth con- 
tains, along with a general declaration of the authority 
of induction, the author’s usual protest a.^inst hypo- 
theses, levelled at the Cartesian hypotheses especisdly. 

6. Of the First Buie. — ^We, however, must consi- 
der those Kules in their general application, in which 
point of view they have often ,been refeired to, and 
have had very .great authority allowed them. One of 
the . points which has been most discussed, is that 
maxim which requires that the causes of phenomena 
which we assign should be tnie causes, verce causae. 
Of coui’se this does not mean jhat they should be the 
tmo or right cause; for although it is the philosophers 
.aim to discover such causes, be would be little aided 
in his search of truth, by being told that it is tinith 
which he is to seek. The rule has generally been un- 
derstood to prescribe that in attempting to account for 
any class of phenomena, wo must assume such causes 
only,, as from other comiderations^ we know to exist. 
Thus gravity, which was employed in explaining the 
motions of the moon and planets, was already known 
to exist ajjd operate at the earth’s surface. 

Jiow the Rule thus interpreted is, I conceive, an 
injurious limitation of the field of induction. For it 
forbids us to. look -for a caWc, except among the causes 
with which we are already familiar. But if we follow 
this rule, how shall we ever become acquainted with 
any new catise 1 Or how do we know that the pheno- 
mena which we contemplate do really arise from some 
qause which we already truly know ? If they do not, 
must we still insist upon making them depend upon 
some of our known causes ; or must we abandon the 
study of them altogetlier? Must we, for example, 
resolve to refer the action of radiant heat to the air, 
rather than to any peotdiar fluid or ether, because the 
former is known to exist, the latter is merely, assumed 
for the purpose of explanation 7 But why sfobuld we 
do this 9 Why should we not endeavour to learn tibe 
cause from the effects, even if it be Dot already known 



NEWTON. 


187 

to tis ? We can infer causoa, which ^ new when We 
first beccmie acquainted with them. Chemical Forces, 
Optical Forces, Vital Forces, are known to us only hy 
chemical and optical and vital phenomena ; must we, 
therefore, reject their existence or abandon their study? 
They do not conform to the double condition, that they 
shall be sufficient and oho real : they are tnie, only so 
far as they explain the facts, but are they, therefore, 
unintelligible or useless? Are they not highly im- 
l>ortant and instructive subject^of sjiecjilation ? And 
if the gravitation which rules the motions of the pla- 
nets had not existed at the earth*s surface; — if it had 
been there masketl and concealed by the superior effect 
of magnetism, or some other extraneous force, — might 
not Newton still 'have inferred, from Kepler’s laws, 
the tendency of the planets to the sun ; and from their 
pei*turbations, their tendency to each other ? His dis- 
coveries would still have been immense, if tlm cause 
which he assigned had not been a vera causa in tha 
sense now contemplated. 

7, But what do wo mean by calling gravity a “true 
cause”? How do we learn its reality?’ Of coui^, by 
its effects, with which we are familiar; — by the weight 
and fall of bodies about us. These strike even the 
most careless obseiwer. No one can fail to see that all 
bodies wliich we come in contact with .are heavy;— 
that gravity acts in our neighbourhood here upon 
earth. Hence, it may be said, this cause is at any 
rate a true cause, whether it explains the celestiid 
phenomena or not. 

But if this he what is meant by a vera causa, it 
appears strange to j-equire that jn all cases We should 
find such a one to account for all classes of pheno- 
mena. Is it reasonable or prudent to. demand that wo 
shall reduce every set of phenomena, however minute, 
or abstruse, or complicate to causes so obviously ex- 
isting as to strike the most incurious, and to bo fami- 
liar among men? How can we expect to find st^ 
wree eatam for t}ie delicate and recondite phenomena 
which aif exact and skilfuF observer detects in chemi- 
cal, or optical, or electrical experi{neiits| The facts 



1 88 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

themselves are too fine for vulgar apprehc^on ; their 
relations, their symmetries, their measui'es require a 
previous discipline to understand them. How then 
can their causetr be found among those agencies with 
which the common unscientific herd of mankind are 
familiar? What likelihood is there that causes held 
for real by such persons, shall explain facts which such 
persons cannot see or cannot understand? 

Again: if we give authority to such a rule, and 
require that the causey by which science explains the 
facts which she* notes and measures and analyses, shall 
be causes which men, without any special study, have 
already come to believe in, from the effects which they 
casually sec around them, what is this, except to make 
our first rude and unscientific persuasions the criterion 
and test of our most laborious and thoughtful infer- 
ences? What is it, but to give to ignorance and 
thoughtlessness the right of pronouncing upon the con- 
victions of intense study and Ibng-disciplined thought? 
“Electrical atmospheres’* surrounding electrized bo- 
dies, were at one time held to be a “true cause” of 
the effects which such bodies produce. These atmo- 
spheres, it was said, are obvious to the senses; we 
feel them like a spider’s web on the hands and face. 
-®pinus had to answer such persons, by proving that 
there are no atmospheres, no effluvia, but only repul- 
sion. He thus, for a true came in the vulgar sense of 
the term, substituted an hypothesis; yet who doubts 
that what he did was an advance in the science of 
electricity? 

8. Perhaps some persons may be disposed to say, 
that Kewton’s Pule does not enjoin us to take those 
causes only wliich we clearly know, or supimse we 
know, to be really existing and operating, but only 
causes of such kiri^ as we have already satisfied our- 
selves do exist in nature. It may be urged that we 
are entitled to infer that the planets are governed in 
their motions by an attractive force, becaluse we jSnd, 
in the bodies immediately subject to observation and 
experiment, that such motiens ore produced by attitM>» 
live forces, for exi^ple, by that of the earth. It may 



NEWTON, 


189 

be said that we might on. similar grounds infer forces 
which unite particles of chemical compounds, or deflect 
particles of light, because we see adhesion and deflec- 
tion produced by forces. 

But it is easy to show that the Buie, thus laxly un- 
derstood, loses all significance. It prohibits no hypo- 
thesis; for all hypotheses suppose causes mch as, in 
some case or other, wo have seen in action. No one 
would think of explaining phenomena by refej'ring 
them to forces and agencies altogether different from 
any which are known; for on this supposition, how 
could he pretend to reason about the elfects of the 
assumed causes, or undertake to prove that they would 
explain the facts? Some close similarity with some 
known kind of cause is requisite, in order that the 
hypothesis may have the appearance of an explana- 
tion. No forces, or virtues, or sympathies, or fluids, 
or ethei’s, would bo excluded by interpretetion of 
verie camce. Least of all, would such an interpreta- 
tion reject the Cartesian hypothesis of vortices; which 
ujiidoubtedly, as I coneeiTc, Newton intended to con- 
demn by his Buie. For that such a case as a whirling 
fluid, carrying bodies round a centre in orbits, does 
occur, is too obvious to require proof! Every eddying 
stream, or blast that twirls the dust in the road, ex- 
hibits exampbis of such action, and would justify the 
assumption of the vortices which carry the planets in 
their courses; tis indeed, without doubt, such facts 
suggested the Cartesian explanation of tlie solar sys- 
tem. The vortices, in this mode of considering the 
subject, are at the least as real a cause of motion as 
gravity itself. 

9. Thus the Rule which enjoins “ true causes,” is 
nugatory, if we take vertr. cauace in the extended sense 
of any causes of a real kind^ and unphilosophical, if wo 
understand the term of thoae. very causes which wc 
familiarly suppose to exist But it may be said that 
we are to ddsigiiate as “true causes,” not those whidh 
are collected in a loose, confused and precarious man- 
ner, by undisciplined minds, from obvious phenomena, 
but those which are justly and rigoroudy inferred. 



190 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

Such a cause, it may be added, gravity is; for the 
facts of the downward pressures and downward mo- 
tions of bodies at the earth’s surface lead us, by the 
plainest and strictest induction, to the assertion of 
such a force. Now to this interpretation of tlie Buie 
there is no objection ; but then, it must be observed, 
that on this view, terrestrial gravity is inferred by the 
same process as celestial gi'avitation ; and the cause is 
no more entitled to be called ‘'true,” because it is 
obtained from the forpier, than because it is obtained 
from the latter class of facta We thus obtain an in- 
telligible and tenable explanation of a vera causa; 
but then, by this cx})lanation, its verity ceases to be 
distinguishable from its other condition, that it sut- 
fices for the explanation of the phenomena.” The 
assumption of universal gravitation accounts for the 
fall, of a stone; it also accounts for the revolutions of 
the Moon or of Saturn ; but since both these explana- 
tions are of the same kind, we cannot with justice 
make the one a criterion or condition of the admis- 
sibility of the other. 

TO. But still, the Buie, so understood, is so far 
from being unmeaning or frivolous, that it expresses 
one of the most iinpoHant tests which can be given of 
a sound physical theory. It is true, the explanation 
of one set of facts may be of the same nature as the 
explanation of the other class; but then, that the 
cause explains both classes, gives it a very different 
claim upon our attention and assent from that which 
it would have if it explained one class only. The 
very circumstance that the two explanations coincide, 
is a most weighty presumption in their favour. It is 
the testimony of two witnesses in behalf of the hypo- ’ 
thesis; and in proportion as these two witnesses are 
separate and independent, the conviction produced by 
their agreement is more and more complete# When 
the explanation of two kinds of phenomena, distinct 
ahd not apparently connected, leads us to the same 
cause, such a 'coincidence does give a reality to the 
cause, which it has not while it merely accounts for 
those appearances which suggested the supposition. 



NEWTON, 


I9I 

This coincidence of propositions inferred from sepa- 
rate classes of facts, is exactly what we noticed in the 
Novwni Organon Eenovatnm (b. ii. c, g, sect 3 ), as 
one of the most decisive characteristics of a true 
theory, under the name of Confsilience of Induetion^, 
That Kewton’a First Ilule of Philosophizing, so un- 
derstood, authorizes the inferences which he himself 
made, is really the ground on which they are so firmly 
believed by philosophers. Thus Avhen tlie doctrine of 
a gmvity vaiying inversely as the square of the dis- 
tance from the body, accounted at the* same time for 
the relations of times and distances in the planetary 
orbits and for tlie amount of the moon’s deflection 
from the tangent of her orbit, such a doctrine became 
most convincing : or again, when the doctrine of the 
iinivei*3al gravitation of all parts of matter, wljich 
explained so admirably the inequalities of tlie moon’s 
motions, also gave a satisfactory account of a pheno- 
menon utterly diflereiit, the precession of the equi- 
noxes. And of the same kind is the evidence in 
fsivour of the undulatory theory of light, when the 
assumption of the length of an undulation, to which 
vre are led by the coloui-s of thin plates, is found to be 
identical with that length which explains the pheno- 
mena of difli’action ; or when the hy])othesis of tvans- 
vei'se vibrations, suggested by the tacts of polarization, 
explains also the laws of double refiuction. When 
such a convergence of two trains of induction points 
to the same spot, w e can no longer suspect that we 
are wrong. Such an accumulation of proof really 
persuades us that we have to do’ with a vera causa. 
And if this kind of jiroof be multiplied; — if we again 
find other facts of a sort uncontemplated in framing 
our hypothesis, but yet clearly accounted for when we 
have adopted the supposition; — ^wo are still fuiilier 
confirmed in oiu* belief ; and by such accumulation of 
proof we may be so fiu* satisfied, as to believe without 
^ conceiving it possible to doubt. In this easC) when 
the validity of the opinion adopted by us has been 
repeatedly confirmed by its sufficiency in unforeseen 
cases, so that all doubt is removed and forgotten, the 



192 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY, 

theoretical cause takes its place among the of 

the world, and becomes a trm cvease. 

It. Newton’s Buie then, to avoid mistakes, might 
be thus e:s:pressed : That “ we may, provisorily, assume 
such hypothetical cause as will account for any given 
class of natural ])hcuomena; but that when two dlf-^ 
fereiit classef* of facts lead us to the S9.me hypothesis, 
wo may hold H to be a trm came"^ And this Buie 
will rari‘ly or never mislead us. There are no in- 
stances, in wliich a doctrine recommemdod in this^ 
manner has aVterwarAs been discovered to be false. 
There have been hyi^otheses which liave exi>lainod 
many phenomena, and kept their gi*ound long, and 
have afterwards been rejected. But these have been 
hypotheses which explained only one class of pheno- 
mena j and their fall took jdace when another kind of 
&,cts was examined and brought into conflict with the 
former. Thus the system of eccentrics and ejucycles 
accounted for all the observed mittiom of the planets, 
and was the means of expresbing and transmitting all 
astronomical knowledge for two thousand years. But 
then, how was it ovei thrown? By considcji'ing the 
distances as well as motions of the heavenly budios. 
Here was a second class of facts ; and when the sys- 
tem was adjusted so as to agree with the one class, it 
was at variance with the other. These cycles and 
epicycles could not be true, because tliey could not be 
made a just representation of the facts. But if tlie 
measures of dii^ance bs well as of position had con- 
q>ired in pointing out the cycles and ejncyclos, os the 
|>aths of the planets, the paths so determined could 
not have been otherwise than their real ixitlis; and 
the epicyelieal theory would have been, at least geo- 
metrically, true. 

12. Of the ^iecond Rule, — Newton’s Second Buie 
directs that natural events of the mine kind are to 
Iw referred to the same cames^ so far as can be done.” 
Such a precept at fimt appears to help us* but little; 
for all systems, however little solid, profess to conform 
to such a rule. When any theorist undertakes to ex- 
plain a class of facts, ho assigns causes which, according 



NEWTON. 


193 

to btlQ, will by tlieir natural action, as seen in other 
cases, produce the effects in question. The events 
which he accounts for "by his hypothetical cause, are, 
he holds, of the same kind as those which such a cause' 
is kjiown to produce. Kepler, in ascribing the pla- 
netaiy motions to magnetism, Descartes, in explaining 
them by means, of vortices, held that they were re- 
ferring celestial motions to the causes Yrhich give rise 
to terrestrial motions of the ssime kind. The question 
is. Are tlio effects of the Siimo kind? This once settled, 
there will be no question about the propnety of assign- 
ing them the same cause. Biit tlie difficulty is, to 
detei-mino when events arc of the same kind. Are 
the motions of the planets of the same kind with the 
motion of a body moving freely in a curvilinear 
path, or do they not rather resemble the motion of a 
. floating body swept round by a whirling current? The 
Newtonian and the Cartesian answered this question 
differently. How then can wo a 2 )ply this Rule with 
any advantage? 

T 3 . To this we, rej)ly, that there is no way of escap- 
ing tills iincertainiy and ambiguity, but by obtaining 
a clear possession of the ideas which our hypothesis 
involves, and by reasoning rigorously from them. 
Newton assorts that the planets move in free paths, 
acted on by certain fcu'ces. The most exact calcula- 
tion gives the clos<'st agreement of the results of this 
hyjiothesis with the frets. Descartes asserts that the 
planets arc carried i-ound 15y a fluid. The more rigor- 
ously the conceptions of force and the law's of motion are 
applied to this hypothesis, the more signal is its frilure 
in reconciling the frets to one another. Without such 
calculation, we can come to no decision between the 
two hypotheses. If the Newtonian hold that the 
motions of the planets ai-e evidenUy of the same kind 
as those of a body describing a curve in free space, 
,and therefore, like that, to be explained by a fbroe 
acting upon^fbo body; the Cartesian denies that thd 
planets do move in free space. They are, he main^ 
tains, immersed in a plenum. It is only when it 
appears that comets pass through this plenum in all 

o 



I94v philosophy of discovbet. 

directioxxs with no impediment, and that no possible 
form and motion of its whirlpools can explain ihe forces 
and motions which are observed in the solar system, 
that lie is compelled to allow the Newtonian’s classiJh- 
cation of events of the same khid. 

Thus it does not appear that this Rule of Newton 
can be interjmeted in any distinct and positive manner, 
otherwise than as enjoining that, in the task of induc- 
tion, we employ clear ideas, rigoif)us reasoning, and 
close and fair compaj-ison of the results of the hypo- 
thesis with tlie facts. These are, no doubt, important 
and fundamental conditions of a just induction; but 
in this injunction we find no peculiar or technical 
criterion by which we may satisfy ourselves that we 
are right, or detect our en*ors. Still, of such general 
prudential I'ules, none can be more wise than one 
which thus, in the task of connecting hicts by means 
of ideas, recommends that the ideas be clear, the mets, 
correct, and the chain of reasoning which connects 
them, without a flaw. 

14. Of HiA Third Buie , — The Third Rule, that 
** qualities which are obseived without exception be 
held to be universal,” as I have alreawly said, seems to 
be intended to authorize the assci^tion of gravitation 
as a universal attribute of matter. We formerly stated, 
in treating of Mechanical Ideas that this application 
of such a Rule appears to be a mode of reasoning far 
from conclusive. The assertion of the universality of 
any property of bodies mfist be grounded upon the 
reason of the case, and not upon any ai’bitrary maziiii. 
Is it intendcMl by this Rule to prohibit any further ex- 
amination how fai* gravity is an original property of 
matter, and how far it may be resolv^ into the resali 
of other agencieal We know perfectly well that this 
was not Newton’s intention; since the cause of gravity 
was a point which ho proposed to himself as a subject 
of inquiry. It would certainly be very unphilosopMeal^ 
to pretend, by this Rule of PiuloBopfaizing^ to prqjudge 
the question of such hypotheses as that'of Mosotti, 


• AMory UULe. s. 




NEWT02?. 


195 

That gravity is the excess of the electrical attraction 
over electrical repulsion, and yet to adopt this hy- 
pothesis, would be to sup[)ose electrical forces more 
truly universal than gravity; for according to the 
hypothesis, gravity, being the inequality of the att^c- 
tion and repulsion, is only an accidental and partial 
relation of these forces. Nor would it be allowable to 
urge this Kule as a reason of assuming that double 
stars are atti*acted to each other by a foice varying 
accortling to the inverse square of the disitance; with- 
out examining, as Hcrschel and others haAX‘ done, the 
orbits which they really describe. But if the Rule 
is not available in s\ich cases, what is its real value and 
authority? and in what cases are they exemplified? 

15. In a former work®, it was shown that the 
fundamental laws of motion, and the pi’operties of 
matter which these involve, are, after a full considera- 
tion of the subject, unavoidably assumed as univei’sally 
true. It was further shown, that although our know- 
ledge of these laws and f>ropertios be gathered from ex- 
perience, we are strongly impelled, (some philoso])her8 
think, autliorized,) to look upon these as not only uni- 
versally, but necessarily true. It was also stated, that 
the law of giuvitation, though its uiilversality may be 
deemed probable, does not apparently involves the same 
necessity as the fundamental laws of motion. But it 
was pointed out that these are some of the' most 
abstnise and difficult questions of the whole of phi- 
losophy; involving the profound, pei'hai)s insoluble, 
problem of the identity or diversity of Ideas and 
Things. It cannot, therefore, bo deemed philosophical 
to cut these Gordian knots by peremptory maxims, 
wliich encourage us to decide without rendering a 
reason. Moreover, it appears clear that the reason 
which is rendered for this Rule by the Newtonians is 
quite untenable; namely, that we know extension, 
hardness, and inertia, to be universal qualities of bo- ^ 
dies by experience alone, and that we have the same 


0 1 


^ Ibid, b.Ul.c.lz.x.zl. 




196 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 

evidence of experience for the universality of gravita- 
tion. We have already observed that we cannot, with 
any propriety, say that we find by experience all bodies 
are extended. This could not be a just assertion, 
unless we conceive the possibility of our linding the 
contrary. But who can conceive our finding by ex- 
perience some bodies which are not extended? It 
a])peai*s, then, that the reason given for the Third 
Rule of Newton involves a inishiko respecting the 
nature and f^utliority of experience. And the Rule 
itself cannot be applii'd without attempting to decide, 
by the casual limits of observation, questions wliicli 
necessarily depend upon the relations of ideas. 

1 6 . Of the Fourth llule . — Newtoifs Fourth Rule 
is, that ^‘Propositions collected from phenomena by 
induction, shall be held to be true, notwitlistiniding 
contrary hypotlieses; but shall be liable to be remjered 
more accurate, or to have their exceptions ]>ointcd out, 
by additional study of phenomena.” Tliis Rule con-^ 
tains little move than a g<*rieral assertion of the autho- 
rity of induction, accoinpauied by Newton’s usued 
protest against hyi^otlieses. 

,, Tlio rcjilly valuable pai*t of the FoiiHh Rule is that 
'which implies that a constant vcriticjation, and, if neces- 
sary, rectification, of truths discovered by induction, 
should go on in the scientific woi’ld. Even when the 
law is, or appears to be, most certainly exact and uni- 
versal, it should be constantly exhibited to us afresh in 
the form of expeiiencc and observation. This is neces- 
sary, in order to discover exceptions and mtalificatioiis 
if such exist : and if the law be idgorously true, the 
contemplation of it, as exemplified in the world of 
phenomena, will best give us that clear apprehension 
of its bearings whifth may lead us to see the ground of 
its tnith. 

The concluding clause of this Fourth Rule appears, 
at first, to imply tliat all inductive pi-opositions are tq 
be considered a.s merely provisional and limited, and 
never secure from exception. But to judge thus would 
be to underrate the staliility and genendity of scientiOc 
truths; for what man pf science can suppose that wo 



NEWTON. 


197 

stall hereafter discover exceptions to the universiil 
gravitation of all parts of the solar system ^ And it 
is plain that the autlior did not intend the restric- 
tion to be ai)plied so rigorously; for in the Third Rule, 
iis we have just seen, he authorizes us to infer uni- 
versal ])ropei’tie8 of matter from obscivation, and car- 
ries the liberty of inductive infemioe to its full 
cottcnt. The Third Rule »j)pefirs to encourage us to 
assert a law to be univerwd, even in ui which 

it has not been tried ; the Foni*^h Rule seems to warn 
us that the law may be inaccurate, even in cases in 
which it lias been tried. Nor is either of these sug- 
gestions erroneous ; but both the universality and the 
rigorous accuracy of our laws are proved by reference 
to Ideas niiher than to Experience; a truth, which, 
perhaps, the philosophers of Is^cwtoii’s time were some- 
whj.t dis))osed to overhu^k. 

17, The disposition to ascribe all our knowledge to 
Experience, appears in Newton and the Newtonians 
by other indications; for instance, it is seen in their 
extreme dislike* to the ancient expressions by which 
the principles and causes of phenomena were described, 
as the ocmlt causm of the Schoolmen, and \A\q forms 
of the Aristotelians, which had been adopted by Bacon. 
Newton says^, that the particles of matter not only 
possess inertia, hut iUso active princijdcs, as gravity, 
fermentation, cohesion ; lie adds, These principles I 
consider not as Occult Qualities, supposed to result 
from the Specific Forms of things, but as General 
liaws of Nature, by which the tilings themselves are 
formed: their truth appearing to us by phenomena, 
though their causes be not yet discovered. For these 
are manifest qualities, and their causes only are occult. 
And the Aristotelians gave the name of occult qualHies^ 
not to manifest qualities, but to such qualities only a3 
they suppostxl to lie hid in bodies, and to the unkiiown 
causes of manifest effects ; such as would be the causes 
of gravity, and of magnetick and olectrick attractions, 


OpUckft qu. 




PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


198 

and of fermentations, if we should suppose that these 
forces or actions arose from qualities unknown to us, 
and incapable of being discovered and made manifest. 
Such occult qualities put a stop to the improvement of 
Natural Philosophy, and therefore of late years have 
l^een rejected. To tell us that every species of things 
is endowed with an occult sj^ecific quality by which it 
acts and produces manifest eflects, is to tell us no- 
thing : but to derive two or three general principles of 
iiintioii from phenomena, and afterwards to tell us how 
the properties and actions of all coi^poreal things fol- 
low from those manifest principles, would be a great 
step in philosojihy, though the causes of those prin- 
ciples were not yet diso<)vered : and therefore T scruple 
not to propose the principles of inotlon above main- 
tained, they being of very geneial extent, and leave 
their ciuises to be found out.” 

18. All that is here said is highly philosophical and 
valuable; but we may observe that the investigation of 
»pecijic forms in the sense in which some writers had 
used the phrase, was by no means a frivolous or un- 
meaning object of inquiry. Bacou and othei'S had used 
form as equivalent to law^. If we could ascertain 
that anangement of the particles of a crystal from 
which its external crystalline form and other proper- 
ties arise, this arrangement would be the internal form 
of the crystal. If the undulatory theory be true, the 
form of light is transverse vibrations : if the emission 
theory bo maintained, the form of light is particles 
moving in straight lines, and deflected by various 
forces. Both the terms, and law^ imply an ideal 
connexion of sensible phenomena; form supposes mai- 


« Nw, Org. L U. Aph, a, “Licet 
eufni in natura nihil exlstet piseter 
corpora individim, edentia actiu pu- 
rps tndlvidttos ex lege ; in doctrliils 
tamen lUa ipsa lex, ej usque Inquist- 
tio, et inveotlo, et expUcatio, pro 
Ihtulamento est tarn ad ^sciendum 
quam ad operanduin. Earn antem 


feertm, ejasqne jMrograpAos, /orm** 
rum nomine InlelUglmus ; pmiMfiim 
cam hoe vocalmlum Inwdneitt, 
familUriter OGourrat.** 

Aph. 17. “Eadem res est/ofW 
calidi Vel/oma tominhs et to caiUU 
ant to lominia.** 



NEWTON. 


199 

ter which is moulded to the form; law supposes objects 
which are governed by the htw. The former term 
refers more precisely to existences, the latter to occur- 
rences. The latter term is now the more familiar, and 
is, perhaps, the better metaphor: but the former also 
contains the essential antithesis which belongs to the 
subject, and might be used in expressing the same con- 
clusions. 

But occult causes, employed in the way in which 
Newton descriVjos, liad certainly, been very prejudicial 
to the progress of knowledge, by stopping inquiry with 
a mere word. The absurdity of such pretended expla- 
nations had not escaj)ed ridicule. The pretended phy- 
sician in the comedy gives an example of an occult 
C4iu8e or virtue. 

Mihi deinandatur 
A doctisHhiio Boctore 
Qmre Opiutii facit donnire: 

Et ego re.spondeo, 

Quia cat in eo 
Virtus dormiiiva, 

Oujus natura est seiisus assoiipire. 

19. But the most valuable part of the view present- 
ed to us in the quobition just given from Newton is 
the distinct separation, alrctidy noticed as peculiarly 
bi*ought into prominence by him, of the determination 
of the laiva of phenomena, and thf 5 investigation of 
their causes. The maxim, that the former inquiry 
must precede the latter, and that if the general laws 
of facts be discovered, the result is highly valuable, 
although the causes remain unknown, is extremely 
important ; and had not, I think, ever b^n so strongly 
and clearly stilted, till Newton both repeatedly pro- 
mulgated the precept, and added to it the weight of 
the most striking examples. 

We have seen that Newton, along with views the 
, most just and important concerning the nature and 
mothers of science, had somethiug of the tendency, 
prevalent in bis time, to suspect or reject, at least 
speculatively, all elements of knowledge except ob* 
servatiou. This .tendency was, however, in him so 



200 ^ PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

oomoted and restrained by his own wonderful sagacity* 
apid mathematical, habits, that it scarcely led to any 
opinion which we might not safely adopt. But we 
must now consider the liases in which this tendency 
operated in a more .unbalanced manner, and led to the 
assertion of doctHues which, if consistently followed, 
wouid destroy the very foundations of all general and 
certain knowledge. 



CHAPTER XIX.. 

Locke and iiis Fkench Followers. 


I. TN tlie constant opposition and ^tru^gle of tLe 
X schools of philosophy, ^liich consider our Senses 
and our Ideas resjjoctively, as the ]>rincipal sources of 
oiu' knowledge, we have seen that at the peri^-Ki of 
which W’c now' treat, the tendency was to exalt the 
cxteiTial and disparage the internal elements The dis- 
position to ascribe our knowledge to observation alone, . 
had already, in Bacon’s time, led him to dw’^ell to a 
disproportionate degree upon that half of his subject; 
and Inul tinged Newton’s expressions, though it liad 
not biassed his practice. But this partiality soon as- 
sumed a more prominent shaj)e, becoming extreme in 
Locke, and extravagant in those who professed to 
follow him. 

Indeed Locke appears to owe his popularity and 
influence as a pojmlar w'riter mainly to his being qne 
of the first to express, in a plain and unhesitating 
manner, ojunions wliich had for some time been ripen- 
ing in the minds of a large portion of the cultivated 
public. Hobbes had already promulgated the main 
doctrines which Locke aftemards urged, on the sub- 
ject of the origin and nature of our knowledge : but 
in him these doctrines were combinetl with offensive 
opinions on points of morals, government, and religion, 
80 that their access to general favour was impeded : 
and it was to Locke that they were indebted for the 
extensive influence which they soon after obtained. 
Locke owed this authority mainly to the intellectual 
circumstances of the time. Although a writer of 
great merit; he by no means possesses suck metaphysi* 
cal acuteness or such philosophical largeness of view. 



202 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 


or such a charm of writing, as must necessarily give 
him the liigh place he has held in the literature of 
Europe. But he came at a period when the reign of 
Ideas was totteidng to its Ml. All tlie most active 
and ambitious spirits had gone over to the new opinions, 
and were prepared to follow the fortunes of the Philo- 
sophy of Experiment, then in the most prospei*ous 
and brilliant condition, and full of, still brighter pro- 
mise. There wore, indeed, a few learned and thought- 
ful men w'ho still remained faithful to the empire of 
Ideas; partly,* it may be, from a too fond attachment 
to ancient systems ; but partly, also, because they knew 
that there were subjects of vast imi^ortance, in which 
experience did not form the whole foundation of our 
knowledge. They knew, too, that many of the jdau- 
sible tenets of the new pliilosophy were revivals of 
fallacies which had been discussed and refuted in an- 
cient times. But the advocates of mere experience 
came on with a vast store of weighty truth among 
their artillery, and with the energy which the advance 
usually bestows. The ideal system of philosophy could, 
for the present, make no etfcctual resistance; Locke, 
by putting himself at the head of the assault, became 
the hero of his day : and his name has been used an 
the watchword of those who ivdhero to the philosophy 
of the senses uj) to our own times. 

2. Locke himself did not assert the exclusive au- 
thority of the senses in the extreme unmitigated 
manner in which some who cal} themselves his disci- 
ples have done. . But tliia is the common lot of the 
leaders of revolutions, for they are usually bound by 
some ties of affection and habit to the previous sta^ 
of things, and would not destroy all traces of 
condition ; while their followeiiB attend, not to their 
inconsistent wishes, but to the meaning of the revolu- 
tion itself ; and .carry out, to their genuine and com- 
plete results, the principles which won the victory, 
and which have been brought out more sharp from 
the conflict. Thus Locke himself does not assert that 
all our ideas are derived from Sensation, but from 
Sensation cmd Reflection, But it was easily seen that^ 



LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. !203 

in this assertion^ two very heterogeneous elements 
were conjoined : that while to pronounce Sensation 
the origin of ideas, is a clear decided tenet, the ac- 
ceptance or rejection of which determines the general 
character of our philosophy; to make the same decla- 
ivi^tion concerning Reflection, is in the highest degree 
vagU45 and ambiguous; since reflection may either be 
resolved into a mere modifleation of sensation, as was 
done by one school, or may mean all that the opposite 
school opposes to sensation, un 4 pr the name of Ideas. 
Hence tlie clear and strong impression which fastened 
upon men’s minds, and which does in tact represent 
all the systematic and consistent part of Locke’s phi- 
losot)hy, WHS, that in it all our ideas arc re2)reseuted 
as derived from Sonsiition. 

3. We need not sj)end much time in pointing out 
the inconsistencies into which Locke fell ; as all must 
fall into inconsistencies who recognize no source of 
knowledge except the senses. Thus he maintains that 
our Idea of Hpace is derived from the senses of sight 
and touch ; our Idea of Solidity from the touch alone. 
Our Notion of Sul)stiinco is an unknow'n snpj)oi*t of 
imknown qualities, and is illustrated by tlie Indian 
fable of the toi'toiso which supports the elephant, which 
supports the world. Our Notu)n of Towner or Cause 
is in like manner got from the senses. And yet, 
though these ide;xs are thus mere fragments of our 
expeiience, Locke does not- hesitate to ascribe to them 
necessity and universality when they occur in pro- 
positions. Thus he maintains the necessary truth of 
geometrical properties : he asserts that the resistance 
arising froiA solidity is absolutely insurmountable*; he 
conceives that nothing short of Omnipotence can 
annihilate a pai'ticle ot* matter”; and he has no mis- 
givings in arguing upon the axiom that Every thing 
must have a cause. He does not perceive that, upon 
his own account of the origin of our knowledge^ we 
ca4i have no right to make any of these assertions. It 


1 Mmyt b. zL c. Iv. sect* 3, 


•IMdaxULawLfla. 




204 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


our knowledge of the truths which concern the exter- 
nal world wei-c wholly denved from experience, all 
that we could venture to say would be, — ^that geome- 
trical proi)ei*ties of figures are true as far as we liam 
tried them; — ^that we have seen mo example of a solid 
body being reduced to occupy less space by pressure, 
or of a material substance annihilated by natural 
means; — and thsit wherever we have examined^ we have 
found that every change lias had a cause. Experience 
can never entitle us tp declare that what she has not 
seen is iini>ossible ; still less, that things which she can 
not see ai'e certain. Locke himself intended to throw 
no doubt upon the certainty of either human or divine 
knowledge; but his principles, when men discarded 
the temper in which ho ai)plied tliem, and the cheeks 
to their misapplication which ho conceived tliat lie 
had provided, easily led to a very comprehensive skep- 
ticism. ITis doctrines tended to dislodge from their 
true bases the most indisputable parts of knowledge; 
as, for example, pure and mixed matheinatita. It may 
well be supposed, therefore, that they shook the foun- 
dations of many other parts of knowledge in the minds 
of common thinkers. 

It was not long before these consequences of the 
overthrow of ideas showed themselves in the .specula- 
tive world. I have already in a previous work® 
mentioned Hume’s skeptical inferences from Locke’s 
maxim, that we have no.ideavS except those which 
we acquire by experience; aiid the doctrines set up 
in opposition to this by the metaphysicians of Ger- 
many. I might trace the. progress of the sensational 
opinions in Britain till the reaction took place hero 
also : but they were so much more clearly and deci- 
dedly followed out in Franco, that I shall pursue 
their history in that country. 

4. The French Followers of Locke^ Condillac^ 

Most of the French writers who adopted Locke’s le^- , 
ihg doctrines, rejected the ^ Reflection,’* which formed 

> cf IfUoB, b. UL c. ill MoUern Oplnioni renpoctlng tbe IdMi of 

CauM, . ^ ^ 




LOCKB AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 205 

an anomalous part of his philosophy, and declared that 
Sensation alone was the source of ideas. Among these 
wi-itcrs, Oondillac w'as the most distinguished. He 
expressed the leading tenet of their school in a clear 
and i)ointed manner by saying tlnit “All ideas are 
transformed sensations.” We have already considered 
this phrase*, and need not here dwell upon it. 

Opinions such as these tend to annihilate, as we 
have seen, one of the two co-ordinate ekriicnts of our 
knowledge. Yet they were tar, from btdng so preju- 
dicial to the progress of science, or even of the philo- 
sophy of science, as miglit havc^ been anticipated. One 
reason of this was, that they wert‘ practi<'all3’' con*ccted, 
especially among the cultivattn-s of Natural Philosophy, 
by tlic study of matlicmatics ; fur that study did really 
supply all that was n?qiiisite on the ideal side of sci- 
ence, so far as the ideas of space, time, and number, 
W(;re eoiicejrned, and partly also with regard to the idea 
of cause and some others. And the metliods of disco- 
very, though the [diilosophy of them made no material 
advance, were practically employed with so much ac- 
tivity, and in so many various subjf‘cts, that a cei*tain 
kind of prudence and skill in this em]»loyruont mis 
very widely dilfused. 

5. I mportance of Language, — In one respect this 
school of Tiietapbysickns rcnderc*d a very valuable ser- 
vice to the pliiloaojihy of science. They brought into 
2)rominent notict^ the great importance of worth and 
terrm in the fonuatiun and progress of knowledge, and 
pointed out tluit the olhco of language is not only to 
convey and i^reserve our thoughts, but to perform the 
analysis in which reasoning consists. They were led 
to this train of speculation, in a great measure, by 
tiiking i>uro mathematical science as their standard 
examine of substantial knowledge. Condillac, reject- 
ing, as we have said, almost all those ideas on which 
universal and <lonioiistrable trutlis must be based, 
was still not at all disixiscd to question the reality*of 


? jrwtZ.ii.ic.lv. 



2o6 philosophy op discovery. 

human kno-wledge ; but was, on the contrary, a zealous 
admirer of the evidence and connexion which appear 
in those scic^nces which have the ideas of space and 
number for their foundation, especially the latter. He 
looked for the grounds of the certainty and reality of 
the knowledge which these sciences contain; and found 
them, as he conceived, in the nature of the language 
which they employ. The Signa which are used in 
arithmetic and algebia enable us to keep steadily in 
view the identity of the same quantity under all tlie 
forms which, by com{xisition and decomposition, it 
may be made to assume; and these Signs also not 
only express the operations which are performed, but 
suggest the extension of tho operations according to 
analogy. Algebra, according to him, is only a very 
perfect language ; and language answei’s its purjx)Be of 
leading us to truth, by })Ossessing the characteristics of 
algebrti. Words are the symbols of certain groups of 
impressions or facts ; they are so selected and apjdiod 
as to exhibit the analogies which prevail among these 
facts ; and these analogies are the truths of which our 
knowledge consists “ Every language is an analytical 
method; every analytical method is a language®;*’ 
these were the truths “ alike new and simple,*’ as he 
held, which he conceived that he had demonstrated. 
“The art of speaking, the art of writing, the art of 
reasoning, the art of thinking, are only, at bottom, one 
and the same art®.*’ Each of these operations consists 
in a succession of analytical o{)erations ; and words are 
the marks by which we are able to fix our minds upon 
the £>teps of this analysis, 

6. The analysis of our impressions and notions 
does in reality lead to truth, not only in virtue of the 
identity of the whole with its parts, as Condillac held, 
but also in virtue of certain Ideas which govern the 
synthesis of our sensations, and which contain the 
elements of universal truths, as we have all along en^ 
dc&voured to show. Bat although Condillac overk^ked 
or rejected this doctrine, the importance of word% as 


* tongue det Cakufs, p. i. 


• Otanmaire^ p. xxzvL 



LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 20 ^ 

marking the snccesaive steps of this synthesis and 
analysis, is not less than he represented it to bo. Every 
truth, once estiiblishcd by induction from facts, when 
it is become familiar under a brief and precise form 
of expression, become| itself a feict ; and is caj)able of 
being employed, along with other facts of a like bind, 
as the materials of fresh inductions. In this successive 
process, the terra, like the cord of a fagot, both binds 
together the facts which it includes, and makes it pos- 
sible to manage the assemblage a single thing. On 
occasion of most discoveries in science, tlie selection of 
a technical term is an essential part c>f the proceeding. 
In the History of Science, we have hail numerous op- 
portunities of remarking this; and the List of technical 
terms given as an Index to that work, refers us, by 
almost every woixl, to one such occasion. And these 
terms, which thus have had so large a share in the 
formation of science, and which constitute its language, 
do also offer the means of analyzing its truths, each 
into Us constituent truths ; and these into facts more 
special, till the original foundations of our most gene- 
ral piYiiwsitions are clearly exhibited. The relations 
of general and particular truths arc most evidently 
represented by the Inductive Tables given in Book 11. 
of the Novura Organon Renovatnm, But each step 
in each of these Tables has its proper form of ex- 
pression, familiar among the cultivators of science ; 
and the analysis which our Tables display, is com- 
monly performed in men’s minds, when it becomes 
necessary, by fixing the attention successively upon a 
series of wonls, not u|K)n the lines of a Table. Lan- 
guage offers to the mind such a scale or ladder as the 
Table ofifers to the eye ; and since such Tables present 
to uc^ as we have said, the Logic of Induction, that is, 
the formal conditions of the soundness of our reasoning 
from facts, we may with propriety say that a just ana- 
. lysis of the meaning of words is an essential portion of 
Inductive Logic. * 

In saying this, we must not forget that a decom- 
position of general truths into ideas, as well as into 
fimts, belongs to our philosophy; but the point we 



2o8 


PHILOSOtfiT OF DISCOVERY. 


havo here to remark, is the essential importance of 
words to the latter of these procosscsL And this point 
had not ever had its due weight assigned to it till the 
time of Condillac and other followers of Locke, who 
pursued their si)eculauons in tj|e spirit I have just 
described. The doctrine of the importance of terms is 
the most considerable addition to the philosophy of 
science which has been made since the time of Bacon’. 

7. The French Encyclopedists . — The French Kncy~ 
clopMiey puldished in, 1751, of which Diderot and Da- 
lembcrt wiire the editors, may bo conaiderctl as repre- 
senting the leading chai'actei’S of European Y)hiloso])hy 
during the greater part of the oighteeiith century. The 
writers in this work belong for the moat part to the 
school of Locke and Condillac; and we may make a 
few remarks upon them, in order to bring into view 
one or two points in addition to what wc have already 
said of that school. The Discours FrUiminaire^ written 
by Daloinbert, is celebrated as containing a view of 
the origin of our knowledge, and the connexion and 
class] lication of the sciences. 

A tendency of the speculations of the Encyclope- 
dists, as of the School of Locke in general, is to reject 
all ideal principles of connoxion among facts, as some- 
thing which experience, the only source of true know- 
ledge, docs not give. Hence all cei*tain knowledge 
consists only in the recognition of the same thing un- 
der different aspects, or different forms of expression. 
Axioms are not tlie result of an original relation of 
ideas, but of the use, or it may be the abuse®, of words. 
In like manner, the pi’opositioua of Qeoniotry are a 
series of modifications, — of distortions, so to speak,— 
of one original truth ; much as if the proposition were 
stated in the successive forms of expression presented 
by a language which was constantly growing more and 

since the selection and construe- ciples, shonld be laid down for the 
tlon of tonus is thus a matter of so performance of this operation. Some 
much conserpience in the fotmation such rules are accordingly suggested 
of science, it is proper that systoma* in b. Iv. of the Nov. Org. JUn: 

He rules, founded upon sound i>rin- ¦ JH80, J*rAim. p. vili. 




LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 2O9 

toiore artificial. Several !of the sciences which rest 
.itpon physical principles, that is, (says the writer,) 
truths of experience or simple hypotheses, have only 
an expeiimehtal or hypothetical certainty. Impene* 
trability added to th# idea of extent is a mystery in 
addition : the nature of motion is a liddle for philoso- 
phers : the metaphysical principle of the laws of per- 
cussion is equally concealed from them. The moire 
profoundly they study the idea of matter and of the 
properties which represent it, ^Jbe more obscure this 
idea becomes; the more completely does it escape 
them. 

8, This iis a veiy common style of reflection, even 
down to our own times. 1 liave endeavoured to shbw 
that conefenaing the Fundamental Ideas of space, of 
force and resistance, of substance, external quality, 
and the like, we know enough to make these Ideas the 
grounds of ceitain and univei*sal truths; — enough to 
supply us with axioms from which we can demonstra- 
tively I’eason. If men wish for any otlier knowledge 
of the nature of matter than that which ideas, and 
facts conformable to ideas, give them, undoubtedly 
their desire will be fnisti-ated, and they will be left in 
a mysterious vacancy ; for it does not appear how such 
knowledge as they ask for could be knowledge at all. 
But in reality, this complaint of our ignorance of the 
real nature of things proceeds from the rejection of 
ideas, and the assiuuptioii of the senses alone as the 
ground of knowledge. Observation and calculation 
are the only sources of truth;” this is tlie motto of 
the school of which we now speak. And its import 
amounts to this : — that they reject all ideas except the 
idea of number, and recognixe the modifications which 
parts undergo by addition and subtraction as the only 
modes in which time propositions are generated. The 
laws of nature are assemblages of facts: the truths of 
• science are assertions of the identity of things whiq^ 
are the same. ^^By the avqwal of almost all philoso- 
phers^” says a writer of this school*, *^the most sublime 


» UelvoUu« But c. zilU. 



210 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

tmtbs, when once simplified and reduced to their low- 
est terms^ are converted into facts, and thenceforth 
present to the mind only this pi^opositioii ; the white is 
white, the black is black.” 

These stiitements are true ii^what they positively 
assert, but they involve error in the denial which by 
implication they convey. It is true that obseiwation 
and demonstration are the only sources of scientific 
truth; but then, demonstration may be founded on 
other grounds besides the elemcntaiy properties of 
number. It is true that the theory of gravitation is 
but the assertion of a general fact ; but this is so, not 
because a sound theory docs not involve ideas, but be- 
cause our ajiprohension of a facit does. 

9. Another characteristic indication of the temjier 
of the Encyclopedists and of the age to which they 
belong, is the irnportaTice by them assigned to those 
practical Arls which minister to man’s com fori and 
convenience. Not only, in the body of the Encyclo- 
]>edia, are the Mechanical Arts placed side by side 
with the Sciences, and treated at great length ; but in 
the Preliminary Discourse, the preference assigned to 
the liberal over the mechanical Arts is treated as a 
prejudice and the value of science is spoken of as 
measured by its utility, “ The discovery of the Mari- 
ner’s Compass is not less advantageous to the human 
race than the explanation of its properties would be to 
phyrics. — ^Why should we not esteem those to whom 
we owci^tlie fusee and the escapement of watches as 
much as the inventors of Algebral” And in the clas- 
sification of sciences which accompanies the Discourse, 
the labour's of artisans of all kinds have a place. 

This classification of the ^lirious branches of science 
contained in the Dissertation is often spoken of. It 
lias for its basis the classification proposed by Bacon; 
in which the parts of human knowledge, are arranged 
tyceording to the fiiculties of the mind in which tfa^* 
originate; and these &cultie8 are takeo^ botli by Baooft 
and by Dalembert, as Memory, Beason, and Imagi^ 


W P. «UL 




LOCKE AKD HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS- 211 


nation. The insufficiency of Bacon’s arrangement as a 
scientific classification is so glaring, that the adoption 
of it, with only superficial modifications, at the period 
of the Encyclopedia, is a remarkable proof of the want 
of original thought aad real philoBojdiy at the time of 
which we speak. 

10. We need not trace further the opinion which 
derives all our knowledge from the senses in its appli- 
cation to the ])hilosophy of Science. Its declared aim 
is to leduce all knowledge to th® knowledge of Facts; 
and it rejects all inquiries which involve the Idea of 
Cause, and similar Ideas, describing them as “meta- 
jihyaical,” or in some other damnatory way. It pro- 
fesses, indeed, to discard all Ideas; but, as vre have 
long ago seen, sonic Ideas or other are inevitably in- 
cluded even in the simplest Facts. Accordingly the 
speculations of this scliool are compelled to rettiin the 
relations of Position, Succession, Number and Kesem- 
blance, which are rigorously ideal relations. The phi- 
losophy of Sensation, in order to be consistent, ought 
to reject these Ideas along with the rest, and to deny 
altogether the possibility of general knowledge. 

When the opinions of the Sensational School liad 
gone to an extreme length, a Reaction naturally began 
to take place in men’s minds. Such have been the 
alternations of opinion, from the earliest ages of human 
speculation. Man may perhaps have existed in an 
oidginal condition in which he was only aware of the 
impi'essions of Sense; but his first attempts t(^ analyse 
his perceptions brought under his notice Ideas as a 
separate element, essential to the existence of know- 
ledge. Ideas were thenceforth almost the sole subject 
of the study of philosophers ; of Plato and his disci- 
ples, professedly; of Aristotle, and still more of the 
followers and commentators of Aristotle, practically. 
And this continued till the time of Galileo, when the 
• authority of the Senses again began to be assertec^ 
for it was shown by the great discoveries which were 
then made, that the Senses had at least some share in 
the promotion of knowledge. As discoveries more 
numerous and more striking were supplied by Obser- 

p 2 



212 


raiLOSOPHt OV DISCOVBItY. 


ration, the world gradually passed over to the opinion 
that the share which had been ascribed to Ideas in the 
formation of real knowledge was altogether a delusion, 
and that Sensation alone was true. But when this 
was asserted as a gencml doctrine, both its manifest 
falsity and its alarming consequences roused men’s 
minds, and made them recoil fix>m the extreme point 
to which they wore approaching. Philosophy again 
oscillated back towards Ideas ; and over a great part of 
Europe, in the clearest* and most comprehensive minds, 
this regression from the dogmas of tlie Sensational 
School is at present the prevailing movement. We 
shall conclude our i*eview hy noticing a fevy indications 
of this state of things. 



CHAPTER XX. 


The EeactJon against the Sensational School. 


I. XITIIEN Lodke’s Essay a*ppeared, it was easily 
? T seon that its tendency was to urge, in a much 
more rigorous sense than liad previously been usual, 
the ancient maxim of Aiistotle, adopted by the school- 
men of the middle ages, that ‘‘nothing exists in the 
intellect but wliat has entered by the senses.” Leib- 
nitz expressed in a j)ointcd manner the limitation with 
which this doctrine had always been understood. “ Ni- 
hil est in inlellectu quod non piius fiierit in sensu; — 
he added, midlecius ipse^ To this it 

has been objected*, that we cannot say that the in- 
tellect is in the intellect. But this i-emark is obvi- 
ously frivolous; for the faculties of the undei'standing 
(which are what the argument iigainst the Sensation^ 
School requires us to I'eserve) may be said to be in the 
understanding, with as much justice as we may asseiij 
there are in it the impressions derived from sense. 
And when we take account of these ^ulties, and 
of the Ideas to which, by their operation, we neces- 
sarily subordinate our apprehension of phenoihcua, we 
are led to a refutation of the philosophy which makes 
phenomena, unconnected by Ideas, the source of all 
knowledge. The succeeding opponents of the Lockian 
school insisted upon and developed in various ways 
this remark of Leibnitz, or some equivalent view. 

2. It was by inquiries into the foundations of 
Morals that English philosophers were led to question 
* the truth of Locke’s theory. Dr. Price, in his Eevi^ 


1 Mr Slmrpe’s 




214 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


of the Principal Questions in Morals^ first published 
in 1757, maintaineil that wo cannot with propriety 
assert all our ideas to be derived from sensation and 
reflection. He pointed out, very steadily, the othov 
source. “The power, I assert, that understa'ndsj or 
the faculty within us that discerns trathy and that 
compares all the objects of thought &nd judges of them, 
is a spring of new ideas*.” And he exhibits the anti- 
thesis in various forms. “ Were not sense and knovyhdge 
entirely different, we ^hould rest satisfied with semsiblo 
impressions, such as light, colours and sounds, and in- 
quire no further about them, at least when the im- 
pressions are strong and vigorous: Avbereaa, on the 
contrary, we i^ecebsjirily desire some further aoipiaint- 
ance with them, iind cjin never be satisfied till wo liave 
subjected them to the survey <)f reason. Scmsc presents 
paa^ticidar forms to the mind, but caniiot rise to any 
general ideas. It is the intellect that examint^s and 
compares the presented fonns, that risers above indi- 
viduals to universal and abstract idesis j and thus looks 
downward ui)on objects, takes in at one view an in- 
finity of particulars, and is ca]>ab]c of discovering 
general truths. Sense sees only the outride f»f things, 
reason acquain^a itself witli their natures. Sensation 
is only a mode of feeling in the mind ; but knowledge 
implies an active and vital energy in the mind®,” 

3. The necessity of i-efiiting Hume’s inferences from 
the mere-sensation system led other writers to limit, in 
various ways, their assent to Locke. Especially waa 
this the case with a number of intelligent metaphysi- 
cians in Scotland, as Rehl, Beattie, Dugald Htewart^ 
and Thomas Brown. Thus Reid asserts*, “that the 
account which Mr. Locke himself gives of the Idea of 
Power cannot be reconciled to his favourite doctrine, 
that all our simple ideas have their origin from sensa^ 
tion or reflection.” Reid remarks, that our memory 
and our reasoning power come in for a share in the 


* Price*! J?Ma|^Sp p. 16. * • P. la 



EEACTlOir AGAINST SENSATIONISTS. 2lg 

origin of thin idea: and in speaking of reasoning, he 
obvioxisly assumes the axiom that every event must 
have a cause. By succeeding writers of this school, 
tlie assumption of the fundamental principles, to wliich 
our nature in such cases irresistibly directs us, is more 
clearly pointed out. Thus Stewart defends the fonn 
of expression used by Price®: ‘‘A variety of intuitive 
judgments might bo mentioned, involving simple ideas, 
which it is impossible to trace to any origin but to the 
power which enables us to form these judgments. Thus 
it is surely an intuitive truth that the sensations of 
which I am conscious, and all those I remember, be- 
long to one and the same being, which I cull my self » 
Here is an intuitive judgment involving the simple 
idea of Identity^ In like manner, the changes which 
I perceive in the universe impress me with a convic- 
tion that some cause must have operated to produce 
them. Hero is an intuitive judgment involving the 
simple Idea of CmmUion, When we consider the 
adjacent angles made by a straight line standing upon 
another, and perceive that their sum is equal to two 
right angles, the judgment we form involves a simple 
idea of KqnalUy. To say, therefore, that the Reason 
or the Understiuiding is a source of iiAv ideas, is not 
so exceptionable a mode of speaking as has been some- 
times supposed. According to Locke, Senise furnishes 
our ideas, and Reason perceives their agreements and 
disagreements. But the truth is, that these agree- 
ments and disagreements are in many instances, sim- 
ple ideas, of which no analysis can be given; and of 
which the origin must tUerelurc be referred to Reason, 
according to Locke’s own doctrine.” This view, ac- 
cording to which the Resison or Understanding is the 
source of certain simple ideas, such as Identity, Oausa- 
tioii, I^uality, which ideas are necessarily involved 
in the intuitive judgments wliich we form, when we 
recognize fundamental timths of science, approaches 
very near in effect to the doctrine which in several works 
1 have presented, of Fundamental Ideas belonging to 


* Stowart, Outiincaqf Aforvl PhXL p. 138. 




2i6 philosophy op 'discovert. 


eaeli acience^ and manifesting themselves in th^ axioma 
of the science. It may bo observed, however, that by 
attempting to enumerate these ideas and 'axioms, so as 
to lay the foundations of the whole body of ]>h 3 r 6 ioal 
science, and by endeavouring, as far as {)os3ible, to 
simplify apd connect each groii^ of such Ideas, 1 
have at least given a moro systematic form to this 
doctrine, I have, moreover, traced it into many 
consequences to which it necessarily leads, but which 
do not appear to have^ been contemplatefl by the meta- 
physicians of the Scotch sc)i<x>l. But I gladly acknow- 
ledge my obligations to the writers of that school; 
and I tnist tliat in the neai* agreement of my views 
on such j>oints with theirs, there is gi’ound for believ- 
ing the system of philosophy which J have presented, 
to Ihj that to which the minds of thoughtful men; 
who have meditated on such subjects, are generally 
tending. 

4 . As a further instance that such a tendency is 
at work, I may make a quotation from an eminent 
English philosophical writer of another school. “If 
you will be at the pains,” says Archbishop Whately**, 
“ cai’efully to aiialy#i3 the simplcht description you hear 
of any transaefion or stsite of things, you will find that 
the process which alm(.>«t invariably takes place is, in 
logical language, this : that each individual has in his 
mind certain major premises or principles relative to 
the subject in que.stion; — ^that ol>servation of what 
actually presents itself to the scuises, su])plies minor 
])reiniHes; and that the statement given (and which is 
reported as a thing experienced) consists, in fact, of 
the cwiclusions drawn from the combinations of these 
premises.” The major premises hero spoken of are 
the Fundamental Ideas, and the Axioms and Proposi- 
tions to which they lead; and whatever is regarded 
as a fact of observation is necessarily a conclusion in 
which those propositions are assum^ ; for these con- 
taiu, as we liave said, the conditions of our experience. 


• Wliatcly, MiU Econ* y, 7^* 




BBACTIO^r koAlisrST SBNSA*riOHISTS. a 17 

Onr experience conforms to these axioms and their 
consequences, whether or not t^he connexion be stated 
in a logical manner, by means of premises and a con^ 
elusion. 

The same persuasion is also, suggested by the 
course which the study of meta}>hy8ics has taken of 
late years in France. In that country, as we have 
seen, the Sensational System, which was cons^ei*ed as 
the necessary consequence of the revolution begun by 
Locke, obtained a more complete ascendancy than it 
did in England; and in that country too, the reaction, 
among metaphysical and moral Avriters, when its time 
came, was more decided and rapid than it was among 
Locke’s own countrymen. It would appear thiit M. 
Laromiguidre was one of the firat to give expresaiem to 
this feeling, of the necessity of a modiiication of the 
sensational philosophy. Ho began by professing him- 
self the disciple of Condillac, even white he was almost 
unconsciously subverting the fundamental principles 
of that writer. And thu.s, as M. Cousin justly ob- 
serves^, his opinions had the more powerful eflcct from 
being presented, not as thwarting and contradicting, 
but as sharing and following out the spiiit of hLs age. 
M. Laromigiii^re’s work, entitled JEsmi mr les Fa 6 td- 
its de VAme^ consists of lectures given to the Faculty 
of Letters of the Academy of Paris, in the yeai's i8ii, 
1812 and 1813. Ill the views which these lectures 
present, there is much which the author has in qpm- 
mon with Condillac. But he is led by his investiga- 
tion to assert®, that it is not true that sensation is the 
sole fundamental element of our thoughts and our un- 
derstanding. Attention also is requisite : and here we 
have an element of quite another kind. For sensation 
is passive; attention is active. Attention does not 
spring out of sensation; the passive principle is not 
the reason of the active principle. Activity and pas- 
sivity are two facts entirely diffoi'eni Nor can this 
activity bo defined or derived; being, as the author 


» CousUi. Frof^nt PhiloBOph^a, 1. 33. 





2I8 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCrOVERT. 


Bays, a fundamental idea. The distinction is manifest 
by its own nature ; and we may find evidence of it in 
the very forms of langutige. To loot is more than to 
see/ to hearken is more than to hear. The French 
language marks this distinction with respect to other 
senses also. “ On voit^ et Ton regarde; on efrdmd^ et 
Ton ^coute; on sent^ et Ton jlaire; on godte^ et Von 
savoure,'' And thus the mere sensation, or capacity 
of feeling, is only the occasion on which the attention 
is exemsed; wdifle the attention is the foundation of 
all the operations of tibe understanding. 

The reader of my works will have seen how much 
I have insisted Mipon the activity of the mind, 
as the necessary basis of all knowledge. In all ob- 
servation and experience, the mind is active, and 
by its activity apprehends all sensations in subor- 
dination to its own ideas ; and thus it becomes capa- 
ble of collecting knowledge from phenomena, since 
ideas involve general relations and connexions, which 
sensations of themselves cannot involve. And thus 
we see that, in this respect also, our philosophy 
stands at that point to which the speculations of the 
most reflecting men liavo of late constantly been 
verging. 

6. M. Cousin himself, from whom we have quoted 
the above account of LaromiguiSre, shares in this tend- 
ency, and has argued very energetically and success- 
fully against the doctrines of the Sensational School. 
He has made it his ofilce once more to bring into 
notice among his countrymen, the doctrine of ideas as 
the source.s of knowledge ; and has revived the study 
of Plato, who may still be considered one of the 
great leaders of the ideal school. But the larger 
portion of M. Cousin’s works refers, to questions 
out of the reach of our present review, and it would 
be un.suitable to dwell longer upon them in this 
placa 

^ 7 . We turn to speculations more closely connected 
with our present subject. M. Ampere, a French man 
of science, well entitled by his extensive knowledge, 
and large and profound view^ to deal with the phuo- 



REACTION AGAINST SENSATIONISTS. 219 

sophy of the sciences, published in 1834, his £ssai mr 
la PhUodophie des ikiencea^ ou Exposkimi analytique 
cP um Glaarificatum Naiurelh de toutea lea Connaiasancea 
Huniainea. In this remarkable work wo see strong 
evidence of the progress of the reaction against the 
system which derives our knowledge from sensation 
only. The author starts from a maxim, that in class- 
ing the sciences, we must not only regard the nature 
of the objects about which each science is conceiue^d, 
but also the point of view uiid^r which it considers 
them: that is, the ideas which each science involves. 
M. Ampdre also gives briefly Ids views of the intel- 
lectual constitution of man; a subject on which he 
had long and sedulously employed his thoughts , and 
these views are far from belonging to the Sensational 
School. Human thought, he says, is composed of phe- 
nomena and of conceptions. Phenomena are extermil, 
or sensitive; and internal, or active. (\^nceptions are 
of four kinds; primitive, as space and motion, duration 
and cause; objective, as our idea of matter and sub- 
stance; ono 7 natic, or those which we associate with 
the general terms which language presents to us ; and 
explicative, by which we ascend to causes after a com- 
parative study of phenomena. lie teaches further, 
that in deriving ideas from sensation, the mind is not 
passive ; but exerts an action which, when voluntary, 
is called attention, but when it is, tis it often is, invo- 
luntary, may be teimed relation, 

1 sh^l not dwell upon the examination of these 
opinions^; but I may remark, that both in the recog- 
nition of conceptions as an original and essential ele- 
ment of tho mind, and in giving a prominent phice to 
the active function of tho mind, in the oingin of our 
knowledge, this view appimcbos to that wldoh I have 
presented in preceding works; although undoubtedly 
with considerable diflerences. 

8. The classification of tho sciences which M. 


* See also the vlgoroiu orltiaoe of Lecko's Ettay, by Lemaistre, Soit det tfe 
at ]?vkf«dmrg. 




220 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEHY. 


Ampere proposes, is founded upon a oonsideration of 
the sciences theinselvos ; and is, the author conceives, 
in accordance with the conditions of natui*al classifi" 
cations, as exhibited 'in Botany and other sciences. It 
is of a more symmetrical kind, and exhibits more steps 
of subordination, than that to which I have been led; 
it includes also practical Ai*t as well as theoretical Sci- 
ence; and it is extended to moral and political as well 
as physical Sciences. It wiirnot be necessary for me 
here to examine it in detail : but T may remark, that 
it is throughout a dichotomous divisLou, each higher 
member being subdivich^d into two lower ones, and so 
on. In this way, M. Ampere obhiins sciences of the 
First Onler, eacli of which is divided into two sciences 
of the Second, and four of the Third Order. Thu§ 
Mechanics is divided into Cinematics^ Statiesy DyiiOr- 
miesy and Molecular Mechanics; Physics is divided 
into Exjierimental Physiesy (JJhemistryy Htereormtryy and 
Atomoloyy; Geology is divided into Physical <?co(/ra- 
phyy Mtncralogyy Geoaomy. and TIisory of the Ear^, 
Without here criticizing iiieso ditibions or their prin- 
ciple, 1 may observe tlnit Cine/natieSy the doctrine of 
motion witliout reference to the force which produces 
it, is a portion of knowledge which our investigiition 
lias led us also to see the necessity of erecting into 
a separate science ; and which wo have termed Pure 
Mechanism, Of the divisions of Geology, Physical 
Geography y especially as explained by M. Ampere, is 
certainly a part of the subject, both impoiiant and 
tolerably distinct from the rest. Geonomy contains 
what we have termed in the History, Descriptive Oeo^ 
logy ; — the exhibition of the facts separate from the 
inquiry into their causes; while our Physical Geology 
agrees with M. Ampere’s ^Theory of the Earth, Mms- 
ralogy appears to be placed by Mm in a different place 
from that which it occupies in our scheme: but in 
fact, he usc^s the term for a diilbrent science; he 
applies it to the classification not of simple mineralSy 
but of rochSy which is a science auxiliary to geology, 
and which has sometimes been called Petrology, What 
we have termed Mimralogyy M. Ampdre unites with 



REACTION AGAINST SENSATIONISTS. 221 

Chemistry. ‘*It belongs,*’ he says‘®, Chfemistiry, 
and not to Mineralogy, to inquire how many atoms of 
sdlicium and of oxygen compose silica"]; to tdl us that 
its primitive form is a rhombohedron of certain angles, 
that it is called qtiartz^ <bc.; leaving, on one hand, to 
Molecular Geometry the task of explaining the di^et- 
ent secondary forms, which may result from the pri- 
mitive form ; and on the other hand, leaving to Mine- 
ralogy the office of describing the different vearietk^ of 
quartz, and the rocks in which ihey dccur, according 
as the quartz is crystallized, transparent, coloured, 
amorphous, solid, or in sand.** JBut we may remark, 
that by adopting this arrangement, wc separate from 
Mineralogy almost all the knowledge, and absolutely 
all the general knowledge, which books professing to 
treat of that science have usually contained. The 
consideration of Alincndogical Classifications, which, 
as may be seen in the JlUtory of Science^ is so curious 
and insti’uctive, is forced into the domain of Chcinistiy, 
although many of the persons who figure in it were 
not at all properly chemists. And we lose, in this 
way, the advantage of that pecidiar office which, in 
our arrangement. Mineralogy fills ; of forming a rigor- 
ous transition from the sciences of classification to 
those which consider the mathematical properiies of 
bodies; and connecting the external characters and 
the internal constitution of bodies by means of a system 
of important general truths. I conceive, therefore;, 
that our disposition of this science, and our mode of 
applying the name, are far more convenient than those 
of AL Ampere. 

9. We have seen the reaction against the pure sen- 
sational doctrines operating very powerfully in England 
and in France. ^ But it was in Germany that these 
doctrines wore most decidedly rejected; and systems 
in extreme opposition to these put forih with confi- 
dence, and received with applause. Of the authors 
yrho gave this impulse to (pinions in that country, Kant 


ID Aiupdre, Etaai, pu ato. 



222 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY,. 


was the first, afid by far the most important. I liave 
ill the History of Ideas (b. iii c. 3), endeavoured to ex- 
plain how he was aroused, by the skepticism of Humo, 
to exaiuino wherein the fallacy lay which appeared to 
invalidate all reasonings fi*om> effect to cause; and how 
this inquiry terminated in a conviction that the foun- 
dations of our reasonings on this and similar points were 
to bo sought in the mind, and not in the })henomena;-— 
in the subject^ and not in the object The revolution 
in the customary moc\e of contemplating human know- 
ledge Mdiich Kant’s opinions involved, was most com- 
])lete. He himself, with no small justice, compares" 
it with the change produced by Copernicus’s theory 
of the solar system. “ Hitherto^” he says, ‘‘men liave 
assumed tliat all our knowledge must be regulated 
by the objects of it; yet all attempts to make out 
anything concerning objects d priori by means of our 
conceptions,” (as for instance their geometrical proper- 
ties) ^Mnust, on this foundation, 1^ unavailing. Let 
UH then try whether we cannot make out something 
more in the problems metfiqdiysics, by assuming 
that objects must be regulated by our knowledge, 
since this agi’ccs better with that supposition, which 
we are prompted to make, that we can know some- 
tliing of them d priori Tliis thought is like tiiat of 
Copernicus, who, when he found that nothing was to 
be made of the phenomena of the heavens so long 
as everything was supposed to turn about the spec- 
tator, tried whether the matter might not be better 
explained if he mode the s|)octator turn, and left the 
stars at rest. We may make the same essay in meta- 
physics, as to what concerns our intuitive knowledge 
respecting objects. If our apprehension of objecte 
must be regulated by the properties of the objects, I 
cannot comprehend how we can possibly know any-* 
thing about them d priori But if the object, as ap- 
prehended by US, be r^ulated by the constitution of 
onr faculties of apprehension, 1 can readily couceiva 


KrUUt der Behttn, Vmtimjt, ik. 


REACTION AGAINST SENSATIONISTS, 223 

this possibility.” Prom this he infers that our expe- 
rience must be regulated by our conceptions. 

lo. This view of the nature of knowledge soon 
superseded entirely the doctrines of the Sensational 
Schoql among the metaphysicians of Gerihany. Tliose 
philosophers did not gradually modify and reject the 
dogmas of Locke and Condillac^ as was done in England 
and France'* j nor did they endeavour to ascertain 
the extent of the empire of Ideas by a caj-eful survey 
of its several provinces, as we^ have been doing in 
tliis series of works. The German metaphysicians 
saw at once that Ideas and Things, the Subjective 
and the Objective elements of our knowledge, were, 
by Kant’s system, brought into oj>position and -cor- 
relntion, as equally I'eal and equally indispensable. 
Seeing this, they rushed at once to the highest 
and most difficult problem of philosophy, — to deter- 
mine what this correlation is; — to discover how Ideas 
and Things are at the same time oi)positc and iden- 
tical; — how the world, wliilo it is distinct from and 
independent of us, is yet, iis an object of our know- 
ledge, govenied by the conditions of our thoughts. 
The attempts to solve this problem, taken in the widest 
sense, including the forms which it assumes in Morals, 
Politics, the Arts, and Religion, as well as in the 
Material Sciences, have, since that time, occupied the 
most profound speculators of Germiuiy ; and have given 
rise to a number of systems, which, mpidly succeeding 
each other, have, each in its day, been looked upon 
as a complete solution of the problem. To trace the 
characters of these various systems, does not belong 
to the business of the present chapter : my task is 
ended when I have showm, as I have now done, how 
the progress of thought in the philosophical world, 
followed from the earliest up to the present time, has 


^ The^ tensational systetn never pass over the history of philosophy 
aequlzed in Germany the ascendaney in Germany, except so far as it af- 
wblch It obCtdned In England and fects ourselves. 

Stenoe; but I am compelled hereto 




224 PHILOSOPHY Ol DISCOVERT. 

led to that recognition of the co-exiatence and joint 
necessity of the tvno opposite elements of our know** 
ledge ; and when I have pointed ont processes adapted 
to the extension of our knowledge, which a true view 
of its nature has suggested or may suggest. , 

The latter portion of this task occupies the third 
book of the Nomm Oi'gaTion MenovcUim. .With regard 
tp the recent succession of Oermnn systems of ^ihUo- 
sopliy, I shall add something in a subsequent chapter: 
and I shall also veni^ir^ to trace further than 1 have 
yet done, the bearing of the philosophy of science 
upon the theologicjil view of the universe and the 
nioial and religious condition of man. 



CHAPTER XXL 


Fubtheb Advance of the Sensational School. 
M. Auguste Comte. 


I SHALL now take the liberty of noticing the views 
published by a contemporary writer; not that it 
forms part of my design to offer any criticismr upon 
the writings of all those who have treated of those 
subjects on which we are now employed; but because 
we can more distinctly in this manner point out the 
contiBsts and ultimati^ tendencies of the several sys- 
tems of opinion which have come under our smvey: 
and since from among these systems we have endea- 
voured to extract and secure the portion of truth 
which remains in esich, and to reject the rest, wc are 
led to ])oint out the errors on which our attention is 
thus fixed, in recent as well as older writers. 

M. Auguste Comte published in 1830 the first, and 
iu 1835 the second volume of his Cours de Philasophie 
Positive; of which the aim is not much different from 
that of the present work, since as he states (p. viii.) 
such a title as the Philosophy of the would 

describe a part of his object, and would be inappro- 
priate only by excluding that portion (not yet pub- 
lished) whibh refers to speculations concerning social 
relations. 

I. Comte on Tlvree States of By em- 

ploying the term Philosophie Positive^ he wishes to 
distinguish the philosophy involved in the present 
state of our sciences from die previous forma of human 
knowledge. For according to him, each branch 6f 
knowledge passes, in the course of man’s history, ^ 
through three different states; it is first theoto^adly 
then metaphysical^ then positive. By the latter term 



226 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

he implies a state which includes nothing but general 
representations of facts; — phenomena arranged accord-^ 
ing to relations of succession and resemblance. This 
** positive philosophy" rejects all inquiry after causes, 
which inquiry he holds to be void of sense* and inac- 
cessible. All such conceptions belong to the meta- 
physical ” state of science which deals with abstract 
forces, real entities, and the like. Still more completely 
does he reject, as altogether antiquated and absurd, 
the “theological” vjew of phenomena. Indeed he 
conceives* that any one’s own consciousness of what 
passes within himself is suflicicnt to convince him of 
the truth of the law of the three phases through which 
knowledge must pass. “ Does not each of us,” he 
says, “in contemplating his own history, recollect 
that he has been successively a theologian in his in- 
fancy, a rtietaphysician in his youth, and a physicist in 
his ripe agel This may easily bo verified for all men 
who are up to the level of their time.” 

It is plain from such statements, and from the whole 
course of his work, that M. Comte holds, in their most 
rigorous form, the doctrines to which the speculations 
of Locke and his successors led; and wliich tended, 
as we have seen, to the exclusion of all ideas except 
those of number and I'osemblance. As M. Comte 
refiises to admit into liis philosophy the fundamental 
idea of Cause, he of course excludes most of the other 
ideas, which are, as we endeavoured to show, the 
foundations of science ; such as the ideas of Media by 
which secondary qualities are made known to us; the 
ideas of Chemical Attraction," of Polar Forces, and 
the like. He would reduce all science to the mere 
expression of laws of phenomena, expressed in formulee 
of spaded time, and number; and would condemn as 
unmeaning, and as belonging to an obsolete state of 
science, all endeavours to determine the causes of 
l^henomena, or even to refer them to any of the other, 
ideas just mentioned. 


> i.p. X4. 


» Lp.7. 



M. AUGUSTE COMTE. 


227 


2 . Af. Comte rejects the Sea/rch of Canises. — In 
a pluvious work* 1 have shown, 1 trust decisively, 
that it is the genuine office of science to inquire 
into the causes as well as the laws of phenomena; 
— that such an inquiry cannot be avoided ; and 
that it has been the source of almost all the science 
we possess. I need not here repeat iSie arguments 
there urged; but 1 may make a remark or two upon 
M. Comte’s hypothesis, that all scien^’c is first meta- 
physical” and then “positive;’^ since it is in virtue 
of this hypothesis that ho rejects the iuvostigation of 
causes, as worthy only of the infancy of science. All 
discuasions concerning ideas, M. Comte would condemn 
as “ metaphysical,” and would consider as mere pre- 
ludes to positive philosophy. Now I venture to assert, 
on the contrary, that discussions concerning ideas, and 
ri»al discoveries, liave in dvery science gone hand in 
hand. There is no science in which the pretended 
order of things can be pointed out. Tliere is no science 
in which the discoveries of the laws of phenomena, 
when once begun, have be<m carried on independently 
of discussions concerning ideas. There is no scicKnee 
in which the expression of the laws of phenomena can 
at this time dispense with ideas which have acquired 
their place in science in virtue of metaphysical con- 
sidemtions. There is no science in which the most 
active disquisitions concerning ideas did not come 
afteVy not before, the first discovery of laws of pheno- 
mena. In Astronomy, the discoveiy of the pheno- 
menal laws of the epicyclical motions of the heavens 
led to assumptions of tho metaphysical principle of 
equable circular motions : Kepler’s discoveries would 
never have been made but for his metaphysical notions. 
These discoveries of the laws of phenomena did not 
lead immediately to Newton’s theoiy, became a century 
of metaphysical discussions was requisite as a prepa- 
^ ration. Newton then discovered, not merely a law 
of phenomena, but a came; and iJwrefore he was the 


q2 


9 Hut Ind* Sc. b. ^ c. vU. 



228 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVE&Y. 


greatest of discoverers. The same is the case in Op- 
tics; the ancients possessed some share of our know- 
ledge of facts; but meddled little with the metaphy- 
sical reasonings of the subject. In modem times 
when men began to inquire into the natwre of light, 
they soon extended their knowledge of its laws. When 
this series of discoveries had come to a pause, a new 
series of brilliant discoveries of laws of phenoinena 
went on, inseparably connected with a new series of 
views of the nature and cause of light. In like man- 
ner, the most modem discoveries in chemistry involve 
indispensably the idea of polar forces. The metaphy- 
sics (in M. Comte’s sense) of each subject advances in 
a pai-allel line with the knowledge of physical laws. 
The Explication of Conceptions must go on, as we 
have already shown, at the same rate as the Colligation 
of -Facts. 

M. Comte will say* that Kewton’s discovery of 
gravitation only consists in exhibiting the astronomical 
phenomena of the universe as one single fact under 
different points of view. But this fact involves the 
idea of force^ that is, of cmiae. And that this idea 
is not a mere modification of the id(»as of time and 
simce, we have shown ; if it were so, how could it 
lead to the axiom that attraction is mutual, an indis- 
pensable part of the Newtonian theory? M. Comte 
says® that we do not know what attraction is, since wo 
can only define it by identical phrases ; but this is just 

true of space, or time, or motion; and is in fact 
exactly the characteristic of a fundamental idea. We 
do not obtain such ideas froth definitions, but we possess 
them not the less truly because we cannot define 
them. 

That M. Comte’s hypothesis is historically false, is 
dbvious by such 'Examples as I have mentioned. Meta- 
physicilEd discussions have been essential steps in the 
progress of each science. If we arbitrarily reject all* 
these portions of scientific history as useless trifling, 


4P.I5. 


ftp.za 




M. AUGUSTE COMTE. 


229 


bcilonging to the first rude attempts at knowledge, we 
shall not only distort the progress of things, but per^ 
vert the plainest &cts. Of this we have an example 
in M. Comte’s account of Kepler’s mechanical specu- 
lations. We have seen, in the History of Physical 
Astronomy, that Kepler’s second law, (that the planets 
describe areas about the sun pr(»portional to the times,) 
wa% proved by him, by means of calculations founded 
on the observivtions of ‘Tycho ; but that the mechani- 
cal reason of it was not assigned till a later period, 
when it appeai'ed as the first proposition of Newton’s 
PHneipia, It is plain from the writings of Kepler, 
that it was impossible for him to show how this law 
resulted from the forces which were in action; since 
the forces which he considered were not those tending 
to the eentre, which i-eally determine the property in 
(|ueHtioii, but forces exeiiied by the sun in tlte direction 
of the planefa motion^ without which forces Kepler 
conceived that the motion could not go on. In short, 
tlie state of mechanical science in Kepler’s time was 
such that no demonstration of the law could be given. 
The terms in which such a demonstration must be 
expressed had not at that time acquired a precise 
significance ; and it wa.s in virtue of many subsequent 
metaphysical discussions (as M. Comte would teim 
them) that these terms became capable of expressing 
sound mechanical retisoning. Kepler did indeed pre- 
tend to assign what he called a ‘‘physical proof” of 
his law, depending upon this, that the sun’s force is 
less at greater distances; a condition which does liot 
at all influence the i*esult; Thus Kepler’s reason for 
his law proves nothing but the confusion of thought in 
which he was involved on such aubjectfe.^ Vet M. Comte 
assigns to Kepler the credit of having- proved this law 
by sound mechanical reasoning, as well as established 
it as a matter of fact*. “ This discovery by Kepler,’* 


0 M. Comte's statement is so en- **Le seeond thdordme general de 
tirely at Tariance with the fact that dynamique oonslste dans le celdbre 
1 mnst quote it here. (PhiL Pob. et important prinetjw des aires. dost 
voL i p. 705.) le premia ld£e eat due S Kepler, 



230 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

he adds, the more remarkable, inasmuch as it oc- 
curred before the science of dynamics had really been 
created by Galileo.” We may remark that inasmuch 
as M. Comte perceived this incongruity in the facta as 
he stated them, it is the more remai'kable that he did 
not examine them more carefully. 

3. Causes m Physics , — The condemnation of the 
inquiry into causes which is conveyed in M. Conte’s 
notion of the three stages of Science, ho again ex- 
presses more in detail, in stating’ what he calls his 
Fundatmutal theory of hypotheses. This “tlieory” is, that 
we may employ hypotheses in our natuml philosophy, 
but these hyi>otheses must always be such as admit of 
a positive verification. We must have no suppositions 
concerning the agents by which effects are produced. 
All such suppositious have an anti^sciciitihc charac- 
ter, and can only impede the real progress of physics. 
There can bo no use in the ethers and imaginary fluids 
to which some persons refer the phenomena of heat, 
light, electricity and magnetism. And in agreement 
with this doctrine, M. Uomte in his account® of the 


qui d^uvrlt et d^montra forte 3lm< 
plement cette propri^tfi pour le cus 
du mouvement d'une molecule u- 
nique, ou en d’autres ienns, d’un 
corps dont tous les points so meu- 
vent identiquemont. Kepler Ctablit, 
par lea consid^rationa lea plua 616- 
mentairea, qul ai la force accei6ratrice 
totale dont une molecule eft animfie 
tend oonatamment vera un point 
le layon vecteur du mobile ddcrlt 
autour do ce point dda alrea ^galea on 
tempo ogaux, do tello aorta quo Talre 
d6crite au bout d'un temps quel- 
conque croft proportionellement & co 
temps. 11 fit voir en outre quo red- 
proquement, al une aemBlable rda- 
tion a 616 vetia6e dans le mouve- 
ment d’un corps par rapport ft un 
certain point, e’est une preuve 8U0- 


sante de I'action surle corps d'un force 
dirig6e aan^ ceose vura ce poiut” 
There is not a trace of the above 
propositions In the woric Da SkUA 
MaiHSf which contains Kepler’s dis- 
covery of hU law, nor, 1 am con- 
vinced, in any other of Kepler’s 
works, lie is everywhere constant 
to his conceptions of the moffneUe 
virtue residing in the sun, by means 
of which tlie sun, revolving on hia 
axis, carries the planets round with 
him. M. Comte’s statement so exactly 
expresses Newton** propositions, that 
one Is led to suspect some extraordl- 
naty mistake, by which what diould 
have been said of the one was trans- 
ferred to the other. 

1 YoL IL p. 433. 
c Vol. ILdfo. 




M. AUGUSTE COMTE. 23 1 

Science of Optics, condemns, as utterly unphiloso-- 
phioal and absurd, both the theory of emission and 
that of undulation. 

To this we reply, that theory of one kind or other 
is indispensable to the expression' of the phenomena ; 
and that when the laws are expressed, and apparently 
explained, by .means of a theory, to forbid us to in- 
j^uire whether it be really true or false, is a pedantic 
and capricious limitation of our knowledge, to which 
the intellect of man neither can nor should submit. 
If any one holds the adoption of one or other of these 
theories to be indifferent, let him express the laws of 
jihenomenio, of diffraction in terms of the theory of 
emission‘s. If any one rejects the doctrine of undula- 
tion, let him point out some other way of connecting 
double refraction with polarization. And surely no 
man of science will contend that the beautiful branch 
of science which refers to that connexion is not a 
portion of our positive knowledge. 

M. Comte’s contempt for tJie speculations of the 
uiidulationists seems to have prevented his acquainting 
himself with their reasonings, and even with the laws 
of phenomena on which they have reasoned, although 
these form by fiir the most striking and beautiful 
addition which Science has received in modern times. 
He adduces, as an insuperable objection to the undu- 
latory theory, a difficulty which is ftilly removed by 
calculation in every w<>rk on the subject: — the ex- 
istence of shadow . He barely mentions the subject of 
diffraction, and Young’s law of interferences ; — speaks 
of Fresnel as having applied this principle to the 
phenomena of coloured rings, ^*on which the ingenious 
labours of Newton left much to desire;” as if Fresnel’s 
labours on this subject had been the supplement of 
those of Newton: and after regretting that ‘‘this 
principle of interferences has not yet been distinctly 


* I venturo to olfor ibis problem imj one* who holds such hypothesis 

to express the lam of the phenomtna to be unphUosophlcaL 
of diffractloii wlthont the hypothesis to y. p. 641, 
of iuidiL]atioii8;-'as a challenge to 


232 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVBEY. 


disentangled from chemical conceptions 6n the nature 
of light/* concludes his chapter. He does not even 
mention the phenomena of dipolarization, of circular 
and elliptical polarization, or of the optical properties 
of crystals ; discoveries of laws of phenomena quite as 
remarkalde aa any which can be mentioned. 

M. Comte’s favourite example of i)hysical research 
is Therinotias, and especially Fourier’s researches with 
regard to heat. It is shown” in the History of Ther- 
motics, that the general phenomena of ra^ation re- 
quired the assumption of a fluid to ‘express them; 
as appears in the theory of exchanges^^. And the ex- 
planation of the principal laws of radiation, which 
Fourier gives, depends upon the conception of material 
molecular radiation. The flux of caloiic, of which 
Fourier speaks, cannot be conceived otherwise than as 
impl 3 dng a material flow. M. Comte apologizes for 
this expression, as too figurative, and says that it 
merely indicates a faxt. But wliat is the flow of a 
current of fluid except a fact! And is it not evident 
that without such expressions, and the ideas corre- 
sponding to them, Fourier could neither have conveyed 
nor conceived his tlieoryl 

In concluding this discussion it must bo recollected, 
that though it is a most narrow and untenable rule to 
say that we will admit no agency of ethers and fluids 
into philoHoi)hy; yet the redity of such agents is only 
to be held in the way, and to the extent, which the 
laws of phenomena indicate. It is not only allowable, 
but inevitable to assume, as the vehicle of heat and 
light, a medium j^ossessing some of the properties of 
more familiar kinds of matter. But the idea of such 
a medium, which we possess, and on which we cannot 
but reason, can be fully developed only by an assi- 
duous study of the cases in which it is applicable. It 
may be, that as science advances, all our knowledge 
n^ay conveige to one general and single aspect of the 


u Hid. JmLSo. IL 4Sgkb. 1. e. L 
» a p. s6i. 


u IL p. 673. 



M. AtiaUStB COMTE. 


233 

universe. We abandon and reject this hope, if vre 
refiise to admit those ideas which must be our step- 
ping-stones in advancing to such a point : and wo no 
less frustrate such an expectation, if we allow ourselves 
to imagine that from our present position we can stride 
at once to the summit. 

4. Games in other Sciences, — But if it is, in the 
sciences just mentioned, impracticable to reduce our 
knowledge to laws of phenomena ah>no, without refer- 
ring to causes, medio, and other agencies; how much 
more plainly is it impossible to confine our thoughts 
to phenomena, and to laws of succession and resem- 
blance, in other sciences, as chemistry, physiology, and 
geology? Who shall forbid us, or why should we be 
Ibrbidden, to inquire wliether chemical and galvanic 
forces are identical ; whether instability is a peculiar 
vital power ; wlietlier geological causes have been uni- 
fonu or paroxysmal? To exclude sucli inquiries, would 
be to secure ourselves from tlie poison of error by 
abstaining from the banquet of truth : — at would bo to 
attempt to feed our minds with the meagre diet of 
space and number, because we may find too delightful 
a relish in such matteis os cause and end, symmetry 
and afiiiiity, organization and development. 

Thus M. Oomte^s arrangement of the progress of 
science as successively metaphysical and i>ositive, is 
contrary to history in fact, and contraiy to sound phi- 
losophy in principle. Nor is there any better founda- 
tion for his statement that tlieologicol views are to be 
found only in the rude infantine condition of human 
knowledge, and vanish as science advances. Even in 
material sciences this is not the case. We have shown 
in the chapter on Final Causes, that physiologists have 
been directed in their remarks by the conviction of a 
purpose in every part of the structure of animals; and 
that this idea, which had its rise after the first obser- 
vations, has gone on constantly gaining strength and 
clearness, so that it is now the basis of a large portion 
of the science. We have seen, too, in the on the 
paleetiological sciences, that the researches of that class 
do by no means lea<l \ts to reject an origin of the series 



234 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


of events, nor to suppose this origin to be included in 
the series of natural laws. Science has not at all 
shown any reason for denying either the creation or 
the purpose of the universe. 

This is true of those aspects of the universe which 
have become the subjects of rigorous science : but how- 
small a portion of the whole do they form ! Especially 
how minute a proportion does our knowledge bear to 
c»ur iguoi-ance, if we admit into science, as M. Comte 
advises, only the laws of phenomena! Even in the 
best explored fields of science, how few such laws do 
we know ! Meteorology, climate, teiTes trial magnetism, 
the colours and other propertias of bodies, the con- 
ditions of musical and articulate sound, and a thou- 
sand other facts of physics, are not defined by any 
known laws. In physiology wo may readily convince 
ourselves how little we know of laws, since we c^ 
hardly study one species without discovering some un- 
guessed property, or apply the microscope without 
seeing some new structure in the best known organs. 
And when we go on t(' social and moral and political 
matters, we may well doubt whether any one single 
rigorous rule of phenomena has ever been stated, al- 
though on such subjects man’s ideas have been busily 
and eagerly working ever sinco his origin. What a 
wanton and baseless assumption it would be, then, to 
reject those suggestions of a Governor of the universe 
which we derive from man’s moral and spiritual ns^- 
ture, and from the institutions of society, because we 
fiincy we see in the small field of our existing “ positive 
knowledge” a tendency to exclude “ theological views!” 
Because we can explain the motion of the stars by a 
general Law which seems to imply no liyperphysical 
agency, and can trace a few more limited laws in 
other properties of matter, we are exhorted to r^ect 
convictions irresistibly suggested to us by our bo^es 
and our souls, by histoiy and antiquities, by conscience 
aiid human law. 

5. M. practical philosophy. — It is not 

merely as a speculative doctrine that M. Comte urges 
the necessity of our thus following the guidance of 



M. AUGCSTE COMTE. 


235 


^‘positive philosophy.” The fevered and iwolutionary 
condition of human society^at present arises, according 
to him^^ from the simultaneous employment of three 
kinds of philosophy radically incompatible; — theolo- 
gical, metaphysical, and positive philosophy. The 
remedy for the evil is to reject the two former, and to 
i*efer everything to that positive philosophy, of which 
the destined triumph cannot be doubtful. In like 
manner, our European education**, still essentially 
theological, metaphysical, and literary, must be re- 
placed by a positive education, suited to tlie spirit of 
our epocL 

With these practical consequences of M. Comte’s 
philosophy we are not here concerned : but the notice 
of them may serve tc» show how entirely the rejection 
of the theological view peiwades his system ; and how 
closely this rejection is connected with the principles 
whicl^lead him also to reject the fundamental ideas of 
the sciences as we have presented them. 

6. M, ConUe on Hypotheses . — In the detail of 
M. Comte’s work, I do not find any peculiar or novel 
remarks on the induction by which the sciences are 
formed; except we may notice, as such, his permission 
of hypotheses to the inquirer, already referred to. 
“There can only be,” ho says*®, “two general modes 
fitted to reveal to us, in a direct and entirely rational 
manner, the true law of any phenomenon; — either the 
immediate analysis of this phenomenon, or its exact 
and evident relation to some more extended law, pre- 
viously established; — in a woi-d, induction^ or deduc^ 
tion. But both these ways would certainly be insuf- 
ficient, even with regard to the simplest phenomenon, 
in the eyes of any one who fully comprehends tlie 
essential difficulties of the intimate study of nature, if 
we did not often begin by anticipating the result, and 
making a provisory supposition, at first essentially 
conjectural, even with respect to some of the notions 
which constitute the final object of inquiry. Henbe 




M L 41 . 


w iL 431. 


236 PHILOSOPHT OF DISCOVERT. 

the introduction, which is strictly indispensable, of 
hypotheses in natural philoaophy.” We have already 
seen that the “ permissio intellectus” had been noticed 
as a requisite step in discovery, as long before as the 
time of Bacon. 

7. M, Gonitis Gldssijication of Sciences . — I do not 
think it necessary to examine in detail M. Comte’s 
views of the philosophy of the different sciences ; but 
it may illustrate the object of the present work, to 
make a remark upon his attempt to establish a distinc- 
tion between physical and chemical science. This dis- 
tinction he makes to coTisist in three points*^; — ^that 
Physics considers general and Chemistry special pro- 
perties,* — ^that Physics considers masses and Chemistry 
molecules; — that in Physics the mode of arrangement 
of the molecules remains constant, while in Chemistry 
this airangement is necessarily altered. M. Comte 
however allows that these lines of distinction are^vague 
and insecure; for, among many other's, magnetism, a 
special property, belongs to physics, and breaks down 
his first criterion; and molecular attractions are a con- 
stant .subject of speculation in physics, so that the 
second distinction cannot be insisted on. To which 
we may add that the greater portion of chemistiy does 
not attend at all to tiie arrangement of the molecules, 
so that the third character is quite erroneous. The 
real distinction of these branches of science is, as we 
have seen, the fundamental ideas which they employ. 
Physics deals with relations of space, time, and num- 
ber, media, and scales of qualities, according to intens- 
ity and other differences; while chemistry has for its 
subject elements and attractions as shown in compo- 
sition; and polarity, though in different senses, belongs 
to both. The failure of this attempt of M. Comte at dis- 
tinguishing these provinces of science by their objects, 
may be looked upon as an illustration of the impossi- 
bility of establishing a philosophy of the sciences on 
any other ground tlmn the ideas which they involva 


Poe. 11. 398-398. 



M. AUGUSTE COMTE. 


237 


We have thus traced to its extreme poinl^ so &r as 
the-nature of science is concerned, one of those two 
antagonistic opinions, of which the struggle began in 
the outset of philosophy, and has continued during tlio 
whole of her progress; — namely, the opinions which 
respectively make our sensations and our ideiis the 
origin of our knowledge. The foimer, if it be consist- 
ent with itself, must consider all knowledge of causes 
as impossible, since no sensation car^t give us the idea 
of cause. And when this opinion is applied to science, 
it reduces it to the mere investigation of laws of phe- 
nomena, according to relations of space, time, and 
number. I purposely abstain, as far as possible, from 
the considei-ation of the other consequences, not strictly 
l)elonging to the physical sciences, which were drawn 
from the doctrine that all our ideas ai'e only trans- 
formed sensations. The mateiialism, the atheism, the 
sensualist morality, the anarchical polity, which some 
of the disciples of the Sensational Scljool erected upon 
the fundamental dogmas of their sect, do not belong to 
our present subject, and are matters too Avcighty to be 
treated of as mere accessones. 


The above Remarks were written before I had seen 
the third volume of M. Comte’s work, or the subse- 
quent volumes. But I do not find, in anything w’hich 
those volumes contain, any gi'ound for altering what 1 
have written. Indeed they are occupied altogether 
with subjects which do not come within the field of my 
present speculations. 



CHAPTER XXIL 


Mk. Mill’s Logic \ 


T he History of t/ie Inductive Sciences was pub- 
liblied in 1837, and the Philosophy of the Ind'u^:- 
tire Sciences in 1840. In 1843 Mr. Mill published liis 
System of Logic^ in which he states that without the 
aid derivo<l fiom the facts and ideas in my volumes, 
the corresponding portion of his own would most pro- 
bably not have been written, and quotes parts of wliat 
I have said with commendation. He also, however, 
dissents from me on several important and funda- 
mental points, and argues against what 1 have said 
thereon. 1 conceive that it may tend to bring into a 
clearer liglit the doctrines which I have tried to estab- 
lish, and the truth of them, if I discuss some of the 
differences between us, which I shall proceed to do*. 

Mr. Mill's work has had, for a work of its abstruse 
character, a circulation so extensive, and admirers so 
numerous and so fervent, that it needs no commenda- 
tion of mine. But if my main concern at present bad 
not been with the ixjints in which Mr. Mill differs 
from me, 1 should have had great pleasure in pointing 
out passages, of which there are many, in which Mr. 
Mill appears to me to have been very happy in pro- 
moting or in expressing philosophical truth. 

There is one portion of his work indeed which 
tends to give it an interest of a wider kind than be- 


r A 8 ydeni(ifloffle,ItaHoHfuUiiie * Tliese Romarlcs mm publldied 
and Jnduetm, heUig a eoMurUd vUw in 1849, under the title Of IndtuUon, 
of ihf Prmei^i of IMdeneo, and <f with etpedal r^ermce to Mr. J. . 
Uu Methodi of SoMUfio InvMgar MUF$ BytUmofLosw. 
ttioa. ByJohttBtoartMUL] 




HR. mill’s logic. 


239 

lor)gs to that merely scientific truth to which I pur- 
])oSely and resolutely confined my speculations in the 
works to which I have referred. Mr. Mill has intro- 
duced into his work a direct and extensive considera- 
tion of the modes of dealing with moral and political 
as well as physical questions; and I have no doubt 
that this part of his book has, for many of his readers, 
a more lively interest than any other. Such a com- 
prelionsive scheme seems to give to doctiincA respect- 
ing science a value and a purpose winch they cannot 
have, so long as they are restricted to mere material 
sciences. I still retain the opinion, however, upon 
which I formerly acted, that the philosophy of science 
is to be extracted from the portions of SLience which 
are universally allowed to be most certainly estab- 
lislied, and that those are the physical sciences. 1 am 
very far from saying, or thinking, that there is no 
such thing as Moral and Political Science, or that no 
method can be suggested for its promotion; but 1 
think that hy attempting at present to include the, 
Moral Sciences in the same humulfe with the Phy- 
sical, we open far more controversies than we close; 
and that iu the moral as in the j^hysical sciences, the 
first step towards showing how truth is to be disco- 
vered, is to study some portion of it which is assented 
to so as to be beyond controversy. 

1. Wha/t is Induction^ — i. Confining myself, then, 
to the material sciences, I shall proceed tt> ofler my 
remarks on Induction with especial refei-ence to Mr. 
Mill’s work. And in order that we may, as I have 
said, proceed as intelligibly 'as possible, let us begin 
by considering what we mean by Induction, as a mode 
of obtaining truth ; and let us note whether there is 
any difference between Mr. Mill and me on this sub- 
ject 

For the purposes of the present inquiry,” Mr. Mill 
• says (L 347 ‘)9 “Induction may be defined the opersi^ 


* My references are throughout the volume and the page of Mr. MUl'a 
iezoept when otherwise expressed) to first cdillou of his Xogie. 




240 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


tion of discoyering and forming general propositions 
meaning, as appears by the context, the discovery of 
them from pai*ticular facts. He dsewhere (i. 370) 
terms it ** generalization from experience and again 
he speaks of it with greater precision as the inference 
of a more general proposition from less general ones. 

2. Now to these definitions and descriptions I 
assent as far os they go; though, as I shall have to 
remark, they appear to me to leave unnoticed a fea- 
ture wldch is very imix)rtant, and which occurs in all 
cases of Induction, so far as we are concerned with it. 
Science, then, consists of general propositions, inferred 
from particular facts, or from less general propositions, 
by Induction ; and it is our object to discern the na- 
ture and laws of Induction in this sense. That the 
propositions are general, or arc more general than the 
facts from which they are inferred, is an indispensable 
part of the notion of Induction, and is essential to any 
discussion of the process, as the mode of arriving at 
Science, that is, at a body of general truths. 

' 3. . I am obliged theretbre to dissent from Mr. Mill 
when he includes, in his notion of Induction, the pro- 
cess by which we arrive at ivdividual facts from other 
facts of tJie same order of 'particularity. 

Such inference is, at any rate, not Induction alone; 
if it be Induction at all, it is Induction applied to an 
example. 

For instance, it is a general law, obtained by In- 
duction from particular facts, that a body falling ver- 
tically downVards from rest, describes spaces propor- 
tional to the squares of the times. But that si par-' 
ticular body will fall through t 6 feet in one second 
and 64 feet in two seconds, is not an induction simply, 
it is i*esult obtained by applying the inductive law 
to a j)articular case. 

But further, such a process is 6fiben hot induction 
>at all. That a ball striking another ball directly will ,, 
dommunicate to it afi much menientiim as the striking 
ball itself loses, is a law established by induction : but 

from habit or .practical skill, I make one ttiliard** 
ball strike another, so as to produce the velocity which 



HR. MILL'S LOQIO, 


241 

I Irish, without knowing or thinking of the general 
the teim Inductlcm cannot then be rightly ap- 
plied. If I haov} the law and act upon it, 1 have in 
my mind both the general induction and its pailicular 
application. But if I act by the ordinary billiard-* 
player’s skill, without thinking of momentum or law, 
there is no Induction in the case. 

4. This distinction becomes of importance, in re- 
ference to Mr. Mill’s doctrine, becaiiso he has extended 
his use of the term Induction^ not only to the oases in 
which the general induction is consciously applied to 
a particular instance; but to the cases in which the 
particular instance is dealt with by means of expe- 
rience, in that rude sense in which experience can be 
asserted of brutes ; and in which, of course, we can in 
no way imagine that the law is possessed or under- 
stood, as a general proposition. He has thus, as I 
conceive, overlooked the broad and essential difference 
between speculative knowledge and practical action; 
and has introduced oases which are quite foreign to 
the idea of science, alongside with coses from which 
we may hope to obtain some views of the nature of 
science and the prwesses by which it must be formed. 

5. Thus (ii. 232) he says, “ Tliis inference of ono 
particular fact from another is a case of induction. 
It is of this sort of induction that brutes arc capable.” 
And to the same purpose he had previously said (i.. 
251), “He [the burnt child who shuns the fire] is not 
generalizing: he is inferring a particular from parti- 
culars. In the same way also, brutes reason... not 
only the burnt child, but the burnt dog, dreads the 
fire.” 

6. This confusion, (for such it seems to me,) of 
knowledge with pi-actical tendencies, is expressed more 
iu detail in other places. Thus lie says (i. 118), ‘*I 
cannot dig the ground imless I have au idea of the 
ground and' of a spade, and of all the other things 1 ^ 
*am operating upon.” ' ^ > 

7. This appears to n^e to be a use of words whiclf 
only tend to confuse our idea of knowledge by ob- 

Uteriating all tiiat is distinctive iu human knowledge. 

R 



242 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

It seems to me quite false to say that I cannot dig the 
ground, unless I have an idea of the ground and of my 
spade. Are we to say that we cannot walk the ground, 
unless we have an idea of the ground, and of our feet, 
and of our shoes, and of the muscles of our legs ] Are 
wo to say tliat a mole cannot dig the ground, unless 
he has an idea of the ground and of the snout and 
paws with which he digs it ? Are we to say tliat a 
pholas cannot iiorforate a rock, unless he have an idea 
of the rock, and of the acid with which he corrodes it? 

8. This appears to me, as I liavc said, to be a line 
of speculation which can leiul to nothing but confusion. 
The knowledge concern iiig which I wish to inc^uire is 
huimin knowledge. And in order that I may have 
any chance of success in the inquiry, I find it neces- 
sary to single out that kind of knowledge which is 
especijilly and distinctively huniau. Hence, I pass by, 
in tins part of my investigation, all the knowledge^ il‘ 
it is to be so called, which man has in no other way 
than brutes have it ; — ail that merely shows itself in 
action. For though action may be modified by habit, 
and habit by experience, in animals as well as in men, 
such experience, so long as it retains that merely prac- 
tical form, IS no part of the materials of science. 
Knowledge in a general form, is alone knowledge fur 
that purpose j and to that^ therefore, 1 must confine 
my attention ; at least till I have made some progress 
in ascertaining its nature and laws, and am thus pr^f 
pared to compare such knowledge , — human knowledge 
properly so called, — with mere animal tendencies to 
action ; or even with practical skill which does not 
include, as for the most part practical skill does not 
include, speculative knowledge. 

9. And thus, I acc/ept Mr. Mill’s definition of In- 
duction only in its first and largest form ; and reject, 
as useless and mischievous for our purposes, his exten- 
sion of the term to the practical influence which expo- 
nence of one fact exercises upon a creature dealing 
with similar facts. Such influence cannot be i^esolved 
into ideas and induction^ without, as I conceive; mak- 
ing all our subsequent investigaHou vague and hete- 



MR. MILL'S LOGIC. 


243 


rogeneous, indefinite and inconclusive. If we must 
speak of animals as lea/rning from experience, we may 
at least abstain from applying to them terms which 
imply that they learn, in the same way in which men 
learn astronomy from the stars, and chemisti-y from 
the effects of mixture and heat. And tlie same may 
be said of the language which is to be used concerning 
what 7 mn learn, wlien their learning merely shows 
itself in action, and does not exist as a genei-al tJiought. 
Induction must iu)t be applbni to such cases. Induc- 
tion miLst be coufined to cases where we hiive in our 
minds general propositions, in oi'der that the sci- 
ences, which are our most instructive examples of the 
process we have to consider, may be, in any definite 
and proper sense, Inductive Sciences. 

10. Perhaps some persons may be inclined to say 
that this difference of opinion, sis to the extent of 
meaning which is to be given to the term Induct ion y 
is a question merely of words ; a matter of definition 
only. This is a mode in which men in our time often 
seem inclined to dispose of philosoidiieal (questions; 
thus evading the tsisk of forming an opinion upon such 
questions, while they retain the air of looking at the 
subject from a more comprehensive point of view. 
But as I have elsewliere said, such questions of defini- 
tion are never questions of *<106111 tion merely. A pro- 
position is always imidied along with the dofinitioii ; 
and the truth of the proposition depends upon the 
settlement of the definition. I'his is tlie case in the 
present instance. We are speaking of hidtictmn, and 
we mean that kind of Induction by which the sciences 
now existing am(mg men have been constructed. On 
this account it is, that we cannot include, in the mean- 
ing of the term, mere pi'actical tendencies or practical 
habits ; for science is not constructed of these. No 
accumulatiou of these would make up any of tlie ac- 
•knowledged sciences. The elements of such science^ 
are something of a kind different from practical habits. 
The elements of such sciences are principles which we 
Imow; truths which can be contemplated as being 
true, Praotioal habits, practical skill, instincts and 



244 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 


tbe like, appear in action, and in action only. Such 
endowments or acquirements show themselves when 
the occasion for action arrives, and then, show them- 
selves in the act ; without being put, or being capable 
of being put, in the form of truths contemplated by tho 
intellect. But the elements and matei'ials of Science 
are necessary truths contemplated by the intellect. Tt 
is by consisting of such elements and such materials, 
that Science ia Science. Hence a use of the term In- 
duction which requires us to obliterate this distinction, 
must make it impossible for us to annve at any con- 
sistent and intelligible view' of the nature of Science, 
and of the mental jirocess by which Sciences come into 
being. Wo must, for the juirpose which Mr. Mill and 
I have in common, retain his larger and more philo- 
sophical definition of Induction, — that it is tlfo infer- 
ence of a more general proposition from less general 
ones. 

I r. Perhaps, again, some persons may say, that 
practical skill and ])ractical experience lead to science, 
and may therefore be included in the term IndactioUj 
which (lescribes the formation of science. But to this 
we reply, that these things lead to science as occasions 
only, and do not form j>art of science ; and that sci- 
ence begins then only wlien we look at tho facts in a 
general point of view. Tliis distinction is essential to 
the philosophy of science. The rope-dancer may, by 
his perfonnances, suggest, to himself or to others, pro- 
perties of the center of gravity ; but this is so, because 
man has a tendency to speculate and to think of gene- 
ral truths, as well as a tendency to dance on a rope on 
special occasions, and to acquire skill in such dancing 
by practice. The rope-dancer docs not dance by In- 
duction, any more than the dancing dog does. To 
apply the terms Science and Induction to such cases, 
carries us into the regions of metaphor; as when wo 
(^all birds of passage wise meteorologists,” or tho bee , 
“a natural chemist, who turns the flower-dust into 
honey.” This is very well in poetry : but for our pur- 
poses we must avoid recognizing these cases as retilly 
belonging to the sciences uf meteorology and chemis- 



Mil. MILL'S LOGIC. 


245 


try, — as really cases of Induction, Induction for us 
is geneml propositions, contempIcUed as such^ derived 
from particulars. 

Science may result /ro/^ ex]r>erience and observation 
hy Induction j but Induction is not thei’efore the same 
thing as experience and observation. Induction is 
experience or observation consdomly looked at in a 
yeneral form. This consciousness and ffpiierality arc 
necessary parts of that knowledge which is science. 
And accordingly, on the other hand, science cannot 
losult from inoi'o Instinct, as distinguished from Rea- 
son; because Instinct by its nature is not conscious 
and general, but operattis blindly and unconsciously in 
])ai*iicuhir cases, the actor not seeing or thinking of 
the riil(j which lie obeys. 

1 2. A little further on I shall endt^avonr to show 
that not only a general thought^ but a general loord or 
phrase is a requisite element in Induction. This doc- 
trine, of course, still more decidedly excludes the ciise 
of animals, ami of mere practical knowledge in man. 
A burnt child dreads the fire ; but reason must be 
unfolded, before the child learns to understand the 
words ‘‘ (ire will hurt you.” Tlie burnt dog never 
thus Icarus to imdcrshind words. And this difference 
points to an entirely different state of thought in the 
two cases : or rather, to a difference bet>veen a state of 
rational thought on the one hand, and of mere prac- 
tical instinct the other. 

13. Besides this difference of speculative thought 
and practical instinct which thus are, as appears to me, 
confounded in Mr. Mill’s philosophy, in such a way as 
tends to destroy all coherent views of human know- 
ledge, there is another set of cases to which Mr. Mill 
applies the term InduHion^ and to which it appears to 
me to be altogether inapplicable. He employs it to 
describe the mode in which supei-stitious men, in igno- 

• rant ages, were led to tlie opinion that striking natu- 
ral events presaged or accompanied calamities. Thus 
he says (i. 389), “ The opinion so long prevalent that 
a comet or any other unusual appearance in the 
heavenly regions was the precursor of calamities to 



246 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

mankind, or at least to those who witnessed it; the be- 
lief ill the omcles of Delphi and Dodona ; the reliance 
on astrology, or on the weather-prophecies in almanacs ; 
were doubtless inductions supposed to be grounded on 
experience and he speaks of these insuflicient induc- 
tions being extinguished by the stronger inductions 
subsequently obtained by scientific inquiry. And in 
like manner, he says in another ]>]acc (i. 367), “ Lot us 
now compare different predictions : the first, that 
eclipses will occur whenever one planet or satellite is 
so situated as to cast its shadow upon another : the 
second, that they will occur whenever some great 
calamity is impending over mankind.” 

14. .N’ow I cannot see how anything but confusion 
can arise from applying the term Induction to super- 
stitious fancies like those here mentioned. They are 
not imperfect truths, but entij’C falsehoods. Of that, 
Mr. Mill and I are agreed: how then can they ex- 
emplify the progress towards truth 1 They were not 
collected from the feefcs by seeking a law of their 
occurrence; but were suggested by an imagination of 
the anger of superior powers shown by such deviations 
from the ordinary course of nature. If we are to 8j)eak 
of inductions to any puriKise, they must be such induc- 
tions as represent the fkctis iu some degree at least. 
It is not meant, I presume, that these opinions iue in 
any degree true : to what purjKwse then are they ad- 
duced ] If I were to hold that my dreams predict or 
conform to the motions of the stars or of the clouds, 
would this be an induction? It would be so, as much 
one as those here so denominated : yet what hut con- 
fusion could arise from classing it among scientific 
truths? Mr. Mill himself has explained (ii. 389) the way 
in which such delusions as the proplieoies of almanac* 
makers, and the like, obtain credence; namely, by the 
greater effect which the positive instances produce on 
ordinary minds in comparison with the neg^itive, when 
the rule has once taken possession of their thoughts. 
And this being, as he says, the recognized explanation 
of such cases, why should we not leave them to their 
due place, and not confound and perplex the whole of 



MR. mill’s logic. 


247 

our investigation by elevating them to the rank of 
‘‘inductions” ? The very condemnation of such opinions 
is that they are not at all inductive. When we have 
made any progress in our investigation of the nature 
of science, to attempt to drive us back to the weari- 
some discussion of such elementary jx>int8 as these, is 
to make progress hopeless. 

IJ. Inductiofi or Deficription? — if;. In the cases 
hitherto noticed, Mr. Mill extends the term Judiictiony 
as I think, too widely, and applies it to cases to which 
it is not rightly applicable. I have now to notice a 
case of an opposite kind, in which he does not apply it 
where I do, and condemns me for using it in such 
a case. I had spoken of Kepler’s discovery of the 
Law, thp.t tlie planets move round the sun in ellipses, 
as an example of Induction. The separate facts of any 
planet (Mars, for instance,) being in certain places at 
certain times, are all included in the general proposi- 
tion which Kepler discovered, that Mars describes an 
ellipse of a certain form and position. This appears to 
me a very simple bufc a very distinct example of the 
operation of discovering general propositions ; general, 
that is, with reference to particular facts ^ which opera- 
tion Mr. Mill, as well as myself, says is Induction. But 
Mr. Mill denies this operation in this case to be Induc- 
tion at all (i. 357). I should not have been prepared 
for this denial by ^the previous parts of Mr. Mill’s book, 
for he had said just before (i. 350), “such facts as the 
magnitudes of the bodies of the solar system, their 
dis^ncos from each other, the figure of the earth and 
its rotation... are proved indirectly, by the aid of in- 
ductions founded on other facts which we can more 
easily re*ich.” If the figure of the earth and its rota- 
tion are proved by Induction, it seems very strange, 
and is to me quite incomprehensible, how the figure of 
the earth’s orbit and its revolution (and of course, of 
• the figure of Mars’s orbit and his revolution in like 
manner,) are not also proved by Induction. No, says 
Mr. Mill, Kepler, in putting together a numl>er of 
places of the planet into one figure, only performed an 
act of descriptim. “This descriptive operation,” he 



548 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 

adds (i. 359), ‘‘Mr. Whewell, by an aptly chosen ex- 
pression, has termed Colligation of Facts.^* He goes 
on to commend my observations concerning this pro- 
cess, but says that, according to the old and received 
meaning of the term, it is not Induction at ali. 

16. Now I have already shown that Mr. Mill him- 
selfi a few pages earlier, had applied the term Induction 
to cases undistinguishable from this in any essential 
circumstance. And even in this case, he allows that 
Kepler did really perform an act of Induction (i. 358), 
“namely, in concluding that, because the observed 
places of Mars were correctly represente<l by points in 
an imaginary ellipse, therefore Mai's would continue to 
revolve in that same ellipse; and even in concluding 
that the position of the planet during the time which 
had intervened between the two observations must 
have coincided with the intermediate points of the 
curve.^* Of course, in Kepler's Induction, of which I 
speak, I include all this; all this is included in si)eak- 
ing of the orbit of Mai*s : a continuous lino, a periodical 
motion, are implied in the term orbit I am unable to 
see, what would remain of Kepler's discovery, if we 
take from it these conditions. It would not only not 
be an induction, but it would not be a description, for 
it would not recognize that Mars moved in an orbit 
Are particular positions to be conceived as points in a 
curve, without thinking of the intermediate positions 
as belonging to the samo curve? If so, there is no law 
at all, and the facts are not bound together by any 
intelligible tie. 

In Another jdace (ii. 209) Mr. Mill returns to his 
distinction of Description and Induction; but without 
throwing any additional light upon it, so &r as I can 
see. 

1 7. The only meaning which I can discover in this 
attempted distinction of Description and Induction is, 
that when particular facts are bound together by their 
relation in space^ Mr. Mill calls the discovery of the 
connexion Description^ but when they are cCnnected 
>>y other general relations, as time, cause and the like, 
Mr. Mill terms the discovery of the connexion InduC’- 



MR. MILL'S LOGIC. 


249 

tion. And this way of making a distinction, would 
fall in with the doctrine of otiior parts of Mr. Milfs 
hook, in which he ascribes very peculiar attributes to 
space and its relations, in comparison with other Ideas, 
(as 1 should call them). But I cannot see any ground 
for this distinction, of c<.)nnexion according to space 
and other connexions of facts. 

To stand upon such a distinction, appears to me to 
be the M^ay to miss the general law,, ot the formation 
of science. For example: The ancients discovered 
that the planets revolved in recurring periods, and 
thus connected tlic observations of their motions ac- 
cording to the Idea of Kejder discovered that 

tlioy revolved in ellipses, and thus connected the ob- 
servations according to the Idea of Space. Newton 
discovered that they revolved in virtue of the Hun’s 
attraction, and thus connecti‘d the motions according 
to the Idea of Force. The first and tliird of these dis- 
coveries are recognized on all hands as processes of 
Induction. Why is the second to be called bj- a dif- 
ferent name? or wliat but confusion and perplexity 
can arise from refusing to class it with the other two? 
It is, you say, Description. But such Description is a 
kind of Induction, and must be spoken of as Induction, 
if wo are to speak of Induction as the process by which 
Hcieiicc is formed : for the three steps are all, the 
second in the same sense as the first and third, in 
co-ordination with them, steps in the formation of 
astronomical science. 

r8. But, says Mr. Mill (i. 363), ‘‘it is a faot surely 
that the planet does describe an ellii>se, and a fact 
which we could see if we had adequate visual organs 
and a suitable position.” To this I should reply : “ Let 
it be so; and it is a fact, surely, that the planet does 
move periodically : it is a fact, surely, that the planet 
is attracted by the sun. Still, therefore, the asserted 
distinction fails to find a ground.” Perhaps Mr. MJll 
would remind us that the elliptical form! of the orbit is 
a fact which we could see if we had adequate visual 
organs and a suitable position: but that force is a 
thing which we cannot see. But this distinction also 



250 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 


will not bear handling. Can we not see a tree blown 
down by a storm, or a rock blown up by gunpowder 
Do we not here force : — see it, tliat is, by its cflects, 

the only way in w^hich wo need to see it in the case 
of a planet, tor the purposes of our argument? Are 
not such operations of force. Facts which may be 
the objects of sense? and is not the operation of the 
sun’s Force a Fact of the same kind, just as much as 
the elliptical form of orbit which results from the 
actitm ? If the latter be ‘^surely a Fact,” the former 
Ls a Fact no less surely. 

T 9. In trutli, as I have repeatedly had occasion to 
remark, all attempts to frame an argument by the 
exclusive or emphatic a^ijffoinlation of the term Fact 
to* particular cases, are necessarily illusory and incon- 
clusive. There is no definite and stable distinction 
between Facts and Theories; Facts and Laws; Facts 
and Inductions. Inductions, Laws, Theories, which 
are true, are Facts. Facts involve Inductions. It is 
a fact that the moon is attracted by the earth, just as 
much as it is a Fact that an apple falls from a tree. 
That the former fact is collected by a more distinct 
and conscious Induction, does not make it the less 
a Fact. That the orbit of Mars is a Fact — a true 
Description of the path — does not make it the less 
a case of Induction. 

20. There is another argument which Mr. Mill 
employs in order to show that there is a difference 
between mere colligation which is description, and in- 
duction . in the more proper sense of lilie term. He 
notices with conunendation a remark which I had 
made (i. 364), that at different stages of the progress 
of science the facts had been successfully connected by 
means of very different condeptions, while yet the later 
conceptions have not contradicted, but included, so &r 
as they were true, the earlier: thus the andent Oreek 
r^resentation of the motions of the planets by means 
01 epicycles and eccratnes, was to a certain degree of 
accuracy true, and is not negatived, though superseded, 
by the modem representation of the planets as describ- 
ing ellipses round the sun. And he then reasons that 



MR. mill’s logic. 


231 


this, which is thus tnie of Descriptions, cannot he true 
of Inductions. He says (i. 367), “Different descrip- 
tions tiiercfore may be all time : but surely not different 
explanations ” He then notices the various explana- 
tions of the motions of the planets — the ancient doc- 
trine that they are moved by an hihcreiit virtue; the 
Cartesian doctrine that they are ni(>ved by impulse and 
l:)y vortices ; the Newtonian doctrine that they are 
governed by a central force; and he adds, “Can it be 
Hjiid of these, as Wiis said of the different descriptions, 
tliat they are all true as far as they go? Is it not 
true that one only' can be true in any degree, and thsit 
the other two must be altogether false?” 

21. And to this questioning, the history of science 
compels me to rejdy very distinctly and positively, in 
the way which Mr. Mill appears to think extrava- 
gant and absurd. I am obliged to say, TTndoubtedlv, 
all these explanations nmy be true and consistent with 
each other, and would be so if each hati been followed 
out so as to show in what manner it could ))C made 
consistent with the facts. And this was, in reality, 
in a great measure donc^ The doctrine that the 
heavenly bodies were moved by vortices was succes- 
sively modified, so that it came to coincide in its 
results with the doctrine of an inverse-quatlratic centri- 
petal force, as I have remarked in the History^. When 
this point was reached, the vortex was merely a 
machinery, well or ill devised, for producing such a 
centripetal force, and therefoim did not contradict the 
doctrine of a centripetal force. Newton himqelf does 
not appear to have been averse to explaining gravity 
by impulse. So little is it true that if the one theory be 
true the other must be false. The attempt to explain 
gravity by the impulse of streams of particles ffowing 
through the universe in all directions, which I have men- 
tioned in the Philosophy^ ^ is so far from being inoon- 


< On this subject see an Essay On the Trans/ormatim of Hypothetes, 
given In the Appendix. 

9 B. vii. 0. UL sect 3. 


« B. lil. c. ix. art 7. 



PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


siatent with the Newtonian theory, that it is founded 
entirely upon it. And even with regard to the doctrine, 
that the heavenly Ijodiea move by an inherent virtue ; 
if this doctrine had been maintained in any such way 
that it was brought to agree with the facts, the in- 
herent virtue must have had its laws determined; and 
then, it would liave been found that the virtue had a 
reference to the central body; and so, the “ inherent 
virtue” must liave coincided in its elfect with the 
Newtonian force; and then, the two explanations 
would agree, except so far as the word “ hdicrcnt” 
was concerned. And if such a jjart of an earlier theory 
as this word inherent indicates, is found to be unten- 
able, it is of cjoursG rejected in the transition to later 
and more exact tlieories, in Jiidiictions of this kind, 
as well as in what Mr. Mill calls Descriptions. Tlitjre 
is tlicrefore still no validity discoverable in the dis- 
tinction which Mr. Mill attempts to draw between 
“descriptions” like Kepler’s law of elliptical orbits, 
and other examples of induction. 

2 2, When Mr. Mill goes on to compare wliat he 
calls different predictions — the first, the ti*ue explana- 
tion of eclipses by the shadows which the planets and 
satellites cast upon one another, and the other, the 
belief that they will occur whenever some great cala- 
mity is impending over mankind, I must I’cply, fia I 
have stated already, (Art. 17), that to class such super- 
stitions as the last with cases of Induction, appears to 
me U) confound all use of words, and to prevent, as 
far as it goes, all profitable exercise of thought. What 
possible advantage can result from comparing (as if 
they were alike) the relation of two descriptions of a 
phenomenon, each to a certain extent true, and there- 
fore both consistent, with the relation of a scientific 
truth to a false and baseless superstition i 

23. But 1 may make another remark on this 
es^uiple, so strangely introduced. If, under the in- 
fluence of fear and superstition, men may make such 
mistakes with regard to laws of nature, as to imagine 
that eclipses portend calamities, are they quite secure 
from mistakes in description ? Do not the^veiy per- 



HR. hill’s logic. 


253 


sons who tell ns how eclipses predict disasters^ also 
describe to us fiery swords seen in the air, and armies 
fighting in the sky ? So that even in this extreme case, 
at the very limit of the rational exercise of human 
powers, there is nothing to distinguish Description 
from Induction. 

I shall now leave the reader to judge whether this 
feature in the history of science, — that several views 
which appear at fii*st quite dilferent are yet all true, — 
which Mr. JMill calls a curious and interesting remark 
of mine, and which he allows to be “ strikingly true” 
of the Inductions which he calls Description} 8 , (i. 364) 
is, as he says, “unequivocally false” of other Induc- 
tions. And I shall confide in having general assent 
with me, wJion I continue to speak of Kepler’s Induc- 
tion of the elliptical orbits. 

r now proceed to another remark. 

III. In Discovery a new Conception is introduced . — 
24. There is a difference betwew Mr. iSIill and me 
ill our view of the essential elements of this Induction 
of Kepler, which affects all other cases of Inductioji, 
and which is, I think, the most extensive and im- 
portant of the differences between us. I must there- 
fore venture to ilwell upon it a little in detail, 

I conceive that Kepler, in discovering the law of 
Mars’s motion, and in asserting that the planet moved 
in an ellipse, did this; — he bound together particular 
observations of separate jdaces of Mars by the notion, 
or, as 1 have called it, the conception^ of an ellipse^ 
which was mipplied by his own mind. Other persons, 
and ho too, before he made this discovery, had 'present 
to their minds the fiicts of such separate successive posi- 
tion.s of the planet; but could not bind them together 
rightly, because they did not apply to them tins con- 
ception of an ellipse. To supply this conception, re- 
quin^il a special preparation, and a special activity in 
the mind of the discoverer. He, and others before 
him, tried other ways of connecting the special fact.s, 
none of which fully succeeded. To discover such a 
connexion, .the mind must bo conversant with certain 
relations of s))ace, and with certain kinds of figures. 



254 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


To discover the right figure was a matter requiring 
research, invention, resource. To hit upon the right 
conception is a difficult step; and when this step is 
once made, the facts assume a different aspect from 
what they liad before : that done, they are seen in a 
new point of view; and the eatcliing this point of 
view, is a sjxicial mental operation, requiring special 
endowments and habits of thought. Before this, the 
facts arc seen as detached, separate, lawless; after- 
wards, they are seen as connected, simple, regular; as 
paiiis of one general fact, and thereby possessing innu- 
inenible new relations l)cforc unseen. Ke]iler, then,* 
I say, bound together the facts by superinducing upon 
them the conceptwn of an and this was an 

essential element in his Induction. 

25. And there is the same essential element in 
all Inductive discoveries. In all cases, facts, before 
detached and lawless, are bound together by a new 
thought. They are reduced to law, by being seen in 
a new point of view. To catch this new point of 
view, is an act of the mind, springing from its pre- 
vious preparation and habits. The facts, in other 
discovtiiies, are brought together according to other 
relations, or, as J have called them, Ideas ; — the 
Ideas of Time, of Force, of Number, of Hesemblance, 
of Elementary Composition, of Polarity, and tlie like. 
But in all cases, the mind performs the operation by 
an apprehension of some such relations; by singling 
out the one true relation ; by combining the apprehen- 
sion of the true relation with the facts ; bywapplying to 
them the Conception of such a relation. 

26. In previous writings, I have not only stated 
this view generally, hut I liave followed it into de- 
tail, exemplifying it in the greater j^art of the History 
of the princijial Inductive Sciences in succession. 1 
have pointed out what are the Conceptions which have 
been introduced in eveiy prominent discoveiy in those 
sciences; and have noted to which of the above Ideas, 
or of the like Ideas, each belongs. The peiformance 
of this task is the office of the greater part of my 
PhUosophy of the Inductive Sciences. For that work 



255 


MB. mill’s logic. 

is, in reality, no less historical than the History which 
preceded it. The History of ihs Iriiductivo Sciences is 
the history of the discoveries, mainly so far as con- 
cerns the Facts which wore brought together to form 
sciences. The FhUosopfty is, in the first ten Books, 
the history of the Idms and Conceptions^ by means of 
which the facts were connected, so as to give nse 
scientific truths. It would be easy for me to give a 
long list of the Ideas and Ooncei>Mons thus brought 
into view, but I may rcifer any reader who wislies to 
see such a list, to the I'ables of CV>n tents of the History^ 
|tnd of the first ton Books of the Ph ilosophy. 

27. That these Ideas and Conceptions are really 
ilistinct elements of the scituitific truths thus obtained, 

I conceive to bo proved beyond doubt, not only by 
considering that the discoveries lun^er Averc made, nor 
could be made, till the right Conception was obtained, 
and by seeing how difficult it often was to obtain this 
element; but also, by seeing thal the Idea and the 
Conception itself, as distinct JVoin tlie Facts, was, in 
almost every science, the subject of long and obstinate 
controvci'sios ; — coiitrovei'sies which tui*ned upon the 
j)0ssible relations of Ideas, much more than upon the 
actual relations of Facts. The first ten Books of the 
Fhilosop/ty to which I have refen ed, contain the his- 
tory of a great number of these controversies. Tlu^se 
controversies make up a large portion of the history 
i>f each science; a portion ((uite as important as the 
study of the facts; and a portion, at every stage of 
the science, quite as essential to the progi'css of truth. 
Men, ill seeking and obtjuuing scientific kncPwledge, 
have always shown that they found the formation of 
right conceptions in their own minds to be an essen- 
tial part of the process. . 

28. Moreover, the presence of a Conception ot the 
mind as a special element of the inductive process, 
and as the tie by which the particular facts are bound 
together, is further indicated, by there being some 
special new term or phrase introduced in every in- 
duction; or at least some ttuin or piirase thence- 
forth steadily applied to the facts, which had not been 



256 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

applied to them before; as when Kepler asserted that 
Mars moved roxind the sun in an elliptical orbUj or 
when Newton asserted that the planets gravitate to- 
wards the sun: these new terms, elliptical orhit^ and 
gravitate^ miu*k the new conceptions on which the 
inductions depend. . I have in the Philosophy'^ further 
illustrated this application of ‘‘technical terms/’ that 
is, fixed and settled terms, in every inductive disco- 
very; and have spoken of their use in enabling men 
to proceed from each such discovery to other disco- 
veries more geneml. But 1 notice these tenns here, 
for the purpose of sliowing the existence of a concept 
tion in the discoverer’s mind, coiTcsponding to the 
term thus introduced; which conception, tlie term is 
intended to convey to the minds of those to whom the 
discovery is communicated. 

29. But this element of discovery, — right concep- 
tions suijplied by the mind in order to bind the facts 
together, — Mr. MillMenies to be an element at all. He 
says, of Kepler’s discovery of the ellii>tical orbit (i. 
363), “It supei’added nothing to the particular facts 
which it served to bind together;” yet he adds, “ex- 
cept indeed ti*e knowledge that a resemblaiice existed 
between the planetary orbit and other ellipses;” that 
is, except the knowledge that it was an ellipse; — 
precisely the circumstance in wliicli the discovery con- 
sisted. Kepler, he says, “ asserted as a fact that the 
planet moved in an ellipse. But this fact, which 
Kepler did not add to, but found in tlie motion of 
the planet... was the very fact, the separate parts of 
which had been separately observed; it was the sum 
of the different oljservations.” 

30. That the fact of the elliptical motion was not- 
merely the sum of the different observations, is plain 
from this, that other ]>ersons, and Kepler himself be- 
fore his discovery, did not find it by adding together 
the observations. The fact of the elliptical orbit was 
not the sum of the observations merely; it was the 


7 B. L c. ilL 




MR. MILL'S LOGIC. 


257 

sum of tlie observations, seen under a nevj pohit of 
view, which point of view Kepler’s mind supplied. 
Kepler found it in the facts, because it wiui there, no 
doubt, for one reason; but also, forianother, because 
he had, in his mind, those relations of thought which 
enabled him to find it. We may illustrate tLis by a 
familiar analogy. We too fiud the law in Kepler’s 
book ; but if we did not undei'stand Latin, we should 
not find it there. Wc must Icjarn La+iTi in order to 
find the law in the book. In like maimer, a disco- 
verer must know the language of science, as well as 
Ipok at the book of nature, in order to find scienti6c 
truth. All the discussions and controversies respect- 
ing Ideas and Conceptions of which I have spoken, 
may be looked upon as discussions and controvei*sies 
respecting the grammar of the language in which na- 
ture speaks to the scientific mind. Man is the Inter- 
preler of Nature ; not the Spectator merely,, but the 
Interpreter. The study of the language, as well as 
the mere sight of the characters, is requisite in order 
that we may road the iuscj*i[>tious which are written 
on the face of the world. And this study of the lan- 
guage of nature, that is, of the necessary coherencies 
and derivations of the I’elations of phenomena, is to be 
pursued by examining Ideas, as well as mere pheno- 
mena; — by tracing the formation of Conceptions, as 
well as the occuinulation of Facts. And this is what 
I have tried to do in the books alrcatly referred to. 

31. Mr. Mill has not noticed, in any considerable 
degree, what I have said of the formation of the Con- 
ceptions which enter into the various sciences; *but he 
has, ii^ general terms, denied that the Conception ia 
anything difterent from the fiicts themselves. “ If,’^ 
he says (i. 301), “the facts are rightly classed under 
the conceptions, it is because there is in the facta 
themselves, something of which the conception is a 
copy.” But it is a copy which cannot be made by a 
person without peculiar endowments; just as a per- 
son cannot copy an ill-written inscription, so as to 
make it convey sense, unless he understand the lan- 
guage. “ Conceptions,” Mr. Mill says (ii. 2 1 7), “ do not 

s 



258 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY, 

develope themselves from within, but are impressed 
from without.” But what comes from without is not 
enough : they must have both origins, or they cannot 
make knowledge. Tho conception,” he says again 
(ii. 221), “is not furnished hy the mind till it has 
been furnished to tho mind.” But it is furnished to 
the mind by its own activity, opei'ating according to 
its own laws. No doubt, the conception may bo 
formed, and in cases of discovery, must bo formed, by 
the suggestion and excitement which the facts them- 
selves produce; and must be so moulded as to agree 
with the facts. But thi.s docs not make it .superfluous 
to examine, out of what materials such concc^ptioris are 
form«?<l, and how they are capable of being moulded so 
as to ex])ress laws of nature; especially, when we see 
how large a share this pai*t of discovery — the examina- 
tion how our ideas can bo nxodilied .so as to agree with 
nature, — ^holds, in the liistory of science. 

32. I have alAady (Art. 28) given, as evidence 
that tho conception outers as an element in every in- 
duction, the constant introduction in such cases, of a 
new fixed term or j^hriise. Mr. Mill (ii. 282) notices 
this introduction of a new phrase in such cases as 
impoiiiant, thougli he docs not appear willing to allow 
that it is necessary. Yet the necessity of the concep- 
tion at least, appeai-s to result fretm the considerations 
wliich he puts forward. “What darkness,” he says, 
“ would have been spread over geometrical demonstra- 
tion, if wherever the word circle is used, the definition 
of a circle was in.sci’ted instead of it.” “ If we want 
to make a jiarticular combination of ideas permanent 
in the mind, tliere is nothing which clenches it like a 
name specially devoted to express it.” In iny view, 
the new conception is the nail which connects the 
previous notions, and tho name, as Mr, Mill says, 
clenches the junction. 

33. I have above (Art. 30) referred to the diffi- 
culty of getting hold of the right conception, as a 
proof that induction is not a mere juxtaposition of 
facts. Mr. Mill does not dispute that it is often diffi- 
cult to liit upon tho right conception. He says (i. 360), 



MR. MILL S LOGIC. 


259 

that a conception of the mind is introduced, is in- 
deed most certain, and Mr.Wliewell has rightly stated 
elsewhere, that to liit upon the right conception is 
often a far more difficult, and more meritorious achieve- 
ment, than to prove its applicability when obtained. 
But,” he adds, “a conception implies and corresponds 
to something conceived ; and although the conception 
itself is not in tlio facts, but in our mind, it must be a 
conception of something which roa]}\ i.^ in tJie facts.” 
But to this 1 reply, that its being really in the facts, 
does not help us at all towards knowledge, if we can- 
not see it there. As the j)oct says. 

It 1*4 the mind that sees: the outward eyes 

J^resent the object, but the mind descries. 

And this is true of the .sight which produces know- 
ledge, as well as of the sight Avhich pri)duces pleasure 
aiifl pain, wliicli is refoired to iu the Tale. 

34. Mr. Mill puts hi.s view, as 4>ppose(l to mine, iu 
various ways, but, as will easily be understood, the 
answers which I have to offer arc in all cases nearly 
to the .same effect.. Thus, lie says (ii. 216), ‘Hhe tardy 
developnicnt of sevond of the physical sciences, for 
example, of Optics, Electricity, Mag^ictism, and the 
higher generalizations of Chemistry, IMr. Whcwell 
ascribes to the fact that mankind had not yet pos- 
sessed themselves of the idea of Polarity, that is, of 
opposite properties in op])osite dir(?ctions. But what 
was there to suggest such an idea, until by a sepai’ate 
examination of .several i»f these different branches of 
knowledge it was shown that the facts of each ^f them 
did jiresent, iu some instances at h*ast, the curious 
phenomena of opposite propcid-ics in opposite direc- 
tions?” But on this T observe, that these facts did 
not, nor do yet, piM'sont this conception to ordinary 
minds. Tho opposition of properties, and even tho 
opposition of directions, which arc thus apprehended 
by jirofound cultivators of science, are of an abstruse 
and recondite kind; and to conceive any one kind of 
polarity in its proper generality, is a process which 
few persons hitlierio appear to have mastered; still 
less, have men in gencr^ come to conceive of them all 



26 o 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 


as modifications of a genei*al notion of Polarity. Tlie 
description which I have given of Polarity in general, 

** opposite properties in opj>osite directions,” is of itself 
a very imperfect account of the manner in which cor- 
responding antitheses are involved in the portions of 
science into which Polar relations c*nter. In excuse 
of its imperfection, I may say, that I believe it is the 
first attempt to define Polarity in general; but yet, 
the conception of Polarity lias certainly been strongly 
and effectively present in the minds of many of tho 
sagacious men who have discovered and unravelled 
polar phenomena. They attempted to convey this 
conception, each in his own subject, sometimes by 
various and peculiar expressions, sometimes liy imagi- 
nary mecliaiiisin by which the antithetical results were 
produced ; them mode of expressing themselves being 
often defective or imperfect, often containing what 
was siipei*fluous; and their meaniiig was commonly 
very imperfectly apprehended by most of their hearers 
and readers. But still, the conception was there, gra- 
dually working itself into clearness and distinctness, 
and in the mean time, directing their experiments, and 
forming an essential element of their discoveries. So 
far would it be from a sufficient statement of tlie case 
to say, that they conceived polarity because they saw 
it; — that they saw it as soon as if came into view; — 
and that they described it as they saw it. 

35. The way in which such conceptions acquire 
clearness and distinctness is often by means of Discus- 
sions of Definitions. To define well a thought wliioh 
alreswly enters into trains of discovery, is often a diffi- 
cult matter. The businciss of such definition is a port 
of the business of discovery. Tliese, and other re- 
marks connected with these, which I had made in the 
Fhiloaophj/y Mr. Mill has quoted and adopted (iL 242). 
They appear to me to point very distinctly to the doc- 
trine to which he refuses his assent, — that there is a 
special process in the mind, in addition to the mere 
observation of facts, which is necessary at every stop 
in the progress of knowledge. The Conception must 
be formed before it can be dejmed. The Definition 



MR. mill’s logic. 


261 


gives the Jast stamp of distinctness to the Conception ; 
and enahles ns to express, in a compact and lucid 
form, the new scicntihc propositions into which the 
new Conception enters. 

36. Since Mr. Mill assents to so much of what has 
been said in^the FhHoso'phy^ with regard to the process 
of scientific discovery, how, it may be asked, would he 
express these doctrines so as to exclude that which he 
thinks erroneous] If lie objects to our saying that 
wJien we obtain a new inductive truth, we connect 
phenomena by applying to them a new Conception 
which fits them, in what terms wonhl he describe the 
process] Jf he will not agree to say, that in order to 
discover the law of the facts, we must find an a\>pro- 
priate Conception, what language w< 5 uld he use instead 
of this] Tills is a natural question; and the answer 
cannot fail to throw light on tlie relation in which his 
views and mine stand to e^ich other. 

Mr. Mill would say, I believe, tliat when we obtain 
a new inductive law of facts, we find something in 
which the facts resemble each other; and that the busi- 
ness of making such discoveries is tlie business of dis- 
covering such resemblances. Thus, he says (of me,) 
(ii. 2 1 1 ), his Colligation of Facts by means of appro- 
priate Conceptions, js but the ordinary i)i*occss of find- 
ing by a comparison of phenomena., in what consists 
their agreement or resemblance.” And the Metliods 
of experimental Inquiry winch he gives (i. 450, &c.), 
proceed upon the supjiosition that the business of dis- 
covery may bo tlins more properly described. , * 

37. There is no doubt that when we discover a law 
of nature by induction, we find some point in which 
all the particular facts agree. All the orbits of tlio 
planets agree in being ellipses, as Kepler discovered ; 
all falling l)odies agi'ee in being acted on by a uniform 
force, as Galileo discovered ; all refracted rays agree in 
having the sines of incidence and refraction in a con- 
stant ratio, as Snell discovered ; all the bodies in the 
universe agree in attracting each other, as Newton 
discovered; all chemical compounds agree in being 
constituted of elements in definite proportions, as 



262 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


Dalton discovered. But it appears to me a most scanty^ 
vague, and incomplete account of tliese steps in sci- 
ence, to say tliat the authors of them discovered some- 
thing in which the facts in each case agreed. The 
point in wliich the cases agree, is of the most diverse 
kind in the different cases — in some, a relation of 
space, in othci‘s, the action of a force, in others, the 
mode of composition of a substance; — and tlie point 
of agreement, visible to the discoverer alone, does not 
come even into his siglit, till after the facts have been 
connected by thoughts of his own, and regarded in 
points of view in which he, by his mental acts, places 
them. It would seem to me not much more inappro- 
priate to say, that an officer, who disciplbics his men 
till they move together at the wf>rd of command, does 
so by finding something in which they agree. If the 
power of consentaneous motion did not exist in the in- 
dividuals, he could not create it : but that power being 
there, he finds it and uses it. Of course I am aware 
tliat the parallel of the two cases is not exact; but in 
the one case, as in the other, that in which the pai*- 
ticular things are found to agree, is something formed 
in the mind of iiini who brings tiic agreement into 
view. 

IV. Mr, MilVs Four Methods Inquiry, — ^38. Mr. 
Myi has not only thus described the business of scien- 
tific discovciy ; he has also given rules for it, founded 
oil this description. It may l>e expected tliat wo 
should bestow some attention upon the methods of 
inquiry, which he thus proposes. I presume that they 
are regarded by his admii-ers as among the most valu- 
able parts of his book ; as ceHainly tliey cannot fail to 
be, if they describe methods of scientific inquiry in 
such a manner as to be of use to the inquirer. 

Mr. Mill enjoins four methods of experimental in- 
quiry, which he calls the Metitod of Agreement, the 
Metfiod of Difference, the Method of Residues, and the 
Method of ConcmiltanfU VariatiaHs^. They are all 


• B.iiic.viiL 




ME. mill’s logic. 


263 

described by formulae of this kind: — ^Let there be, 
in the observed facts, combinations of antecedents, 
ABG^ BGy A 1 )E^ <Src. and combinations of corre- 
sponding consequents, ahe^ be, ade, &c. ; and let the 
object of inquiry be, the consequence of some cause A, 
or the cause of some consequence a. The Method of 
Agreement teaches us, that when we find by experi- 
mcnit sucli facts as abe the consequent of A BG, and 
ade the consequent of ADE, then a i- the consequent 
of A. The Method of Dilference teaches us that 
wlien we find such facts as ahe the consequent of ABC, 
and he the consequent of BG, then a is the consequent 
of A , The Method of llesiducs teaches us, that if abe 
be the consequent of ABC, and if we have already as- 
certained that tlic eifcct of A is a, and the effect of B 
is h, then we may infer that the efiect of G is c. The 
Method of Concomitant Vanations teaches us, tliat if 
a phenomenon a varies according as another phenome- 
non A varies, there is some connexion of causation 
direct or indirect, between A and a, 

39. U[)on tlicse metliods, the obvious tiling to re- 
mark is, that tliey take for granted the very thing 
wliich is most difficult to discover, the reduction of the 
phenomena to fornrailie such as are here presented to 
us. When wo liave^ny set of comidex facts otTered to 
us; for instance, those whicli were offered in the cases 
of discovciy which T liave mentioned, — the fixets of the 
planetary paths, of falling bodies, of refracted rays, of 
cosmical motions, of chemical analysis; and when, in 
any of these cfises, wo would discover the law, of na- 
ture which governs them, or, if any one chooses so to 
term it, the feature in which all the cases agi-ee, where 
are w© to look for our A, B, G and a, h, e h Nature 
does not present to us the cases in this form ; and how- 
are we to reduce them to this form? You say, wJten 
we find the combination of ABG with ahe and ABD 
with abd, then we may draw our inference. Granted : 
but when and where are we to find such combinations] 
Even now that the discoveries are made, who will 
point out to us what are the A, B, G and a, 6, c ele- 
ments of the cases which have just been enumerated] 



264 PHILOSOPHY. OP DISCOVERY. 

Who will tell us which of the methods of inquiry 
those historically real and successful inquiries exem- 
plify 1 Who will carry these formulse through the 
history of the sciences^ as they have really grown up ; 
and show us that these four methods have been opera- 
tive in their fonnation; or that any light is thrown 
upon the steps of their progress by reference to these 
formula} ? 

40. Mr. Mill’s four methods have a gi’eat resem- 
blance to Bacon’s ‘‘Prerogatives of Instances;” for 
example, the Method of Agreement to the Iifistanti(B 
Ostemivw; the Method of Differences to the In stunt ice 
Absentiw in Froxinio^ and the InstanJtlm Cnicis; the 
Method of Concomitant Variations to the In^taniim 
Migrantes, And with regard to the value of such 
methods, I believe all study of science will convince 
us more and more of the wisdom of the remarks which 
Sir John Herschel has made upon tliem**. 

“It has always appeared to us, we must confess, 
that the help which the classification of instances 
under their different titles of prerogative, affords to 
inductions, hov/ever just such classification may be in 
itself, is yet more apparent than real. Tlie force of 
the insbmee must be felt in the mind before it can be 
referred to its place in the system:; and before it can 
be either referred or appreciated it must bo known; 
and when it is appreciated, wo are ready enough to 
weave our web of induction, without greatly troubling 
ourselves whence it derives the weight we acknow- 
ledge it to have in our decisions.... No doubt such in- 
stances as these are highly instructive ; but the diffi- 
culty in physics is to find such, not to perceive their 
force when found.” 

V. His Examples. — 41. If Mr. Mill’s four methods 
had been applied by him in his book to a large body 
of conspicuous and undoubted examples of disoovety, 
well selected and well analysed, extending along the 
whole history of science, we shguld have been better 


ft Disamm, Art 192. 




MB. mill’s logic. 


265 

able to estimate the yalue of these methods. Mr. Mill 
has certainly offered a number of examples of liis 
methods ; but I hope I may say, without offence, that 
they appear to me to be wanting in the conditions 
wliich I have mentioned. As I have to justify myself 
for rejecting Mr. MilFs criticism of doctrines -which I 
have put foiward, and examples wliich I have adduced, 
I may, I tnist, be allow^ed to offer some critical re- 
marks in return, bearing upon the ex.nmples which he 
has given, in order to illustrate his doctrines and 
precepts. 

42. The fii'st remark -which I have to make is, 
that a large proportion of liis examples (i. 480, <kc.) 
is taken from one favourite author^ wlio, however 
great his merit may be, is too recent a -writer to have 
had his discoveries confirmed by the corresponding 
investigations and s(iarching criticisms of other la- 
bourers in the same field, and placed in their proper 
and permanent relation to established truths ; these 
alleged discoveries being, at the same time, principally 
such as deal -wdth the most complex and slippery por- 
tions of science, the laws of vital action. Thus Mr. 
Mill has adduced, as examples of discoveries, Prof. 
Liebig’s doctrine — ^that death is produced by certain 
metallic poisons through their forming indecomposable 
compounds; that the effect of respiration upon the 
blood consists in the conversion of peroxide of iron 
into protoxide — that the antiseptic power of salt arises 
from its attraction for moisture — that chemical action 
is contagious; and otlicrs. Now supposing Aliat wc 
have no doubt of the tmth of these discoveries, we 
must still obsen^e that they cannot wisely be cited, 
in order to exemplify the nature of the progress 
of knowledge, till they have been verified by other 
chemists, and worked into their places in the general 
scheme of chemistry; especially, since it is tolerably 
certain that in process of verification, they will 
be modifi.ed and mpre precisely defined. Nor can I 
think it judicious to take so large a proportion of our 
examples from a region of science in -which, of all 
ports of our material knowledge, the conceptions both of 



266 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

ordinary peraons, and even of men of science themselves,- 
are most loose and obscure, and the genuine pnnciples 
most contested ; which is the case in physiology. It 
would be easy, I think, to point out tlio vague and 
indeterminate character of many of the expressions in 
which the above examples are proj^ounded, as well as 
their doubtful position in the scale of chemical gene- 
ralization; but I have said enough to show why I 
cannot give much w'cight to these, as cardinal exam- 
ples of the method of discovery ; and therefore I shall 
not examine in detail how far they support Mr. IVIiirs 
methods of inquiry. 

43. Mr. Liebig supplies the first and the majority 
of Mr. Mill’s examples in chapter ix. of liis Book on 
Induction. The second is an example for which Mr. 
Mill states himself to be indebted to Mr. Alexander 
Bainj the law established being this, that (i. 487) 
electricity cannot exist in one body without the simul- 
taneous excitement of th(* opposite} electricity in some 
neighbouring body, which Mr. Mill also coufinns by 
reference to Mr. Faraday’s experiments on voltaic 
wires. 

I confess I am quite at a loss to understand what 
there is in the doctrine here ascribed to Mr. Bain 
which was not known to the electricians who, from 
the tisne of Franklin, explained the phenomena of the 
Leyden vial. I may observe also that the mention of 
an ‘‘electrified atmosphere” implies a hypothesis long 
obsolete. The essential point in all those explanations 
was, that each electricity produced by induction the 
opposite electricity in neighbouring bodies, as I have 
tried to make apparent in the llwtory^^, Faraday has, 
more recently, illustrated this universal coexistence of 
opposite electricities with his usual felicity. 

But the conjunction of this fact with voltaic pheno- 
mena, implies a non-recognition of some of the simplest 
doctrines of the subject. “ Since,” it is said (i. 488), 
“ common or machine electricity, md voltaic electricity 


10 B. xi. c. xL 



MR. mill’s logic. 


267 

may bo considered for the present purpose to be iden- 
tical, Faraday wished to know, &c.*’ I think Mr. 
Faraday would be much astonished to learn that he 
considered electricity in equilibrium, and electricity in 
the form of a voltaic current, to be, for any purpose, 
identical. Nor do 1 conceive that he would assent to 
the expression in the next page, that “ from the nature 
of a voltaic charge, the two opposite currents necessary 
to the existence of each <ither are both accommodated 
in one wire.” Mr. Faraday has, as it appears to me, 
studiously avoided assenting ti> this hypothesis. • 

44. Tlic next example is the one already so co- 
piously dwelt upon by Sir Jolm TTei-schel, Dr. Wells’s 
researches on the production of Dew. I have already 
said” that “this investigation, although it has some- 
times been praised as an original discovery, was in fact 
only resolving the j)henomeiioii into principles already 
discovered;” namely, the doctrine of a constihieitt tern- 
perature of vapour, the different conducting power of 
different bodie.s, and the like. And this agrees in 
substance with what Mr. Mill says (i. 497); that the 
discovery, when made, was corroborated by deduction 
from the known laws of aqueous vapour, of conduc- 
tion, and the like. Dr. Wells’s researches on Dew 
tended much in this country to draw attention to the 
general principles of Atmology; and we may see, in 
this and in other cxainjdes whiclx Mr. INlill adduces, 
that the explanation of sj>ecial phenomena by means 
of generaFprinciples, already establislied, ha.s, for com- 
mon minds, a greater charm, and is more complacently 
dwelt on, than the discovery of tho general principles 
themselves. 

45. The next example, (i. 502) is given in order to 
illustrate tho Method of llesidues, and is the discoveiy 
by M. Arago that a disk of copper affects the vibra- 
tions of tho magnetic needle. But this apparently de- 
tached fact affords little instruction compared with the 
singularly sagacious researches by which Mr. Faraday 


u PMf.b.xiiLc.lx.art7. 


268 


PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY. 


discovered the cause of this effect to reside in the 
voltaic ciirrents which the motion of the magnetic 
needle developed in the copper. I have spoken of this 
discovery in the Mr. Mill however is 

quoting Sir John Herschel in thus illustrating the 
Method of Besidiics. He rigl)tly gives the Pertur- 
bations of the Planets and Satellites as better exam- 
ples of the method 

46. In the next chapter (c. x.) Mr. Mill speaks of 
Plurality of causes and of the Intermixture of effects, 
and gives examples of such cases. He here teaches 
.(i. 517) that chemical synthesis and analysis, (afi when 
oxygen and hydrogen com|K>sc water, and when water 
is resolved into oxygon and hydrogen,) is properly 
traufifovmatiou ; but that because we find that the 
weight of the compound is equal to the sum of the 
weights of the elements, we take up the notion of 
chemical composituyu, I have endeavoured to show^* 
that the maxim, that the sum of the weights of the 
elements is equal to the weight of the compound, was, 
historically, not proved from experiment, but assumed 
in the reasonings ujx)ii experiments, 

47. I hare now made my remarks upon nearly all 
the examples which Mr. JVlill gives of scientific in- 
quiry, so far as they consist of knowledge which has 
really been obtained. I may mention, as points which 
appear to me to intei-fcre with the value of Mr. Mill’s 
references to examples, expressions which I cannot 
reconcile with just conceptions of scientific truth j as 
when he says (i. 523), “some other force which im* 
pinges on the first force;” and very frequently indeed, 
of tlie “ tangential foresy'* as co-ordinate with the cen-* 
trijictal force. 

When ho speaks (ii. 20, Note) of “ the doctrine now 
universally received that the earth is a great natural 
magnet with two poles,” he does not recognize the 
recent theory of Gauss, so remarkably coincident with 

M B. xtlL c. viiL 

U Given also in the hiA Sc. b. xUL 0. viL sect 17. 
u iMdi h. vL c. Iv. 


MR- mill's logic. 


269 

a vast body of facts'®. Indeed in his statement, he 
rejects no less the earlier views proposed by Halley, 
theorized by Euler, and confirmed by Hansteen, which 
show that we ai*e compelled to assume at least four 
poles of terrestrial magnetism; which I had given an 
account of in the first edition of the H'istory, 

There are several other cases which he puts, in 
which, the knowledge 8pc»ken of not having been yet 
acquired, he tells us how he would set about aaiuiring 
it; for instance, if the question were (i. 526) whether 
mercuiy be a cure for a given disease ; or whether the 
brain be a voltaic pile (ii.' 21); or whether the moon 
be inliabited (ii. 100); or whether all crows are black 
(ii. 1 24) ; I confess that 1 have no expectatinn of any 
advantage to philosojihy from discussions of this kind. 

48. I will add also, that I do not think any light 
can be thrown upon scientific metho<ls, at present, by 
grouping along with such physical inquiries as I have 
been speaking of, sj)ecuhitions concerning the human 
mind, its qualities and operations. Thus lie speaks 
(i. 508) of human characters, as exemplifying the 
effect of plurality of causes; of (i. 518) the phenomena 
of our mental nature, \vhich are analogous to chemical 
rather than to dynamical phenomena; of (i. 518) the 
reason why susceptible persons are imaginative; to 
which I’ may add, the passage where he says (i. 444), 
“ let us take as an example of a phenomenon which 
we have po means of fabricating artificially, a human 
mind.” JJIieso, and othfer like examples, occur in the 
part of his work in which he is speaking of scientific 
inquiry in general, not in the Book on the Logic of 
the Moral Sciences; and are, I think, examples more 
likely to lead us astitiy 'than to help our. progress, in 
discovering the laws of Scientific Inquiry, in the or- 
dinary sense of the term. 

VI. Mr, MUl against Hypothesis, — 49. I will 
now pass from Mr. Mill’s methods, illustrated by such 
examples as those which I have been considering, to 


U See HitsL Ind Sc, b. xiL note n, In tbe eecond edition. 




2^0 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


the views respecting the conditions of Scientific In- 
duction to which 1 have been led, by such a survey as 
I could make, of the whole history of the principal 
Inductive Sciences; and especially, to those views to 
which Mr. Mill offers his objections^®. 

Mr. Mill thinks that 1 have been too favourable to 
the oTnidoymeiit of hy]3otheses, as means of discovering 
scientific truth; and that I have countenanced a lax- 
ness of method, in allowing hypotheses to be esta- 
blished, merely in virtue of the accordance of their 
results with the phenomena. I l)elieV6 I should be 
as cautious as Mr. jMill, in accepting mere hypotheti- 
cal explanations of phenomena, in any case in which 
we had the jihenoniena, and their relations, ])laced 
before both of us ‘in an equally clear light. I have 
not accepted the Undulatoiy theory of ITcat, though 
recommended by so many coincidences and analogies 
But I see some grave reasons for not giving any great 
weight to Mr. IVlill’s admonitions; — n^asems dniwn 


There arc some points in my doc- 
trines on the subject of the Classift- 
catory Sciences to which Mr. Mill 
objects, lii 314, &c.), but there la 
nothlDfr which 1 think it necessary 
to remark here, except one point. 
After Bpeaking of Classiflcation of 
organized beings in general, Mr. Mill 
notices (ii« us an additional sub- 
ject, the • arrangement of natural 
groups into a Natural Scries ; and he 
says, **all who have attempted 
a theory of natural arrangement, in- 
cluding among the rest Mr. Whcwell, 
have Btoppedahortofihist all except 
M. Comte." On this I have to ob- 
serve, that I sapped short «or 
rather passed by»^ the doctrine of a 
Series of organized beings, because I 
thought it bad and narrow idiUoso- 
pby: and that I sufflciently indi- 
cated that 1 did this. In Hheffittory 


(b. xvL c. vi.) I have snokon of the 
doctrine of Circular Progression pro- 
pounded by Mr. Maclcay, and have 
said, “ 80^ far as this view nefftitives a 
mere linear progression in nature, 
which would place each genus in con- 
tact with the preceding and succeed- 
ing ones, and so far lu it requires us 
to attend to tlie varied and 
ramified resemblances, there can be 
no doubt that it is supported by the 
result of all the attempts to fonn 
natural systems." And with regard 
to the difference between Cuvier and 
H. de BlalnvlHe, to which Ufi. Mill 
refers (U. 321), I certainly cannot 
think that M. Comte’s suffrage can 
add any weight to ttie opinion of 
'either of thpse great naturalists. 

17 ffitt note (va) In 

the second edHloxu 



MR. mill's logic. 


271 


from the language which he uses on the subject, and 
whiph appears to me inconsistent with the conditions 
of the cases to wliich he applies it. Thus, when he 
says (ii. 22) that the condition of a hypothesis account- 
ing for all the knoyn phenomena is “often fulfilled 
ecpially well by two conlllcting hypotheses,” I can 
imly say that I know of no such case in the history of 
Science, whence tlie phenomena are at all numerous 
and complicated; and that if such a were to oc- 
cur, one of the hy[)otheses might always be n\so]ved 
into the other. When he says, tliat “this evidence 
(tlio agreement of the results of the hypothesis wdth 
the phenomena) cannot be of the smallest value, be- 
cause we cannot have in the case of such an hypothe- 
sis the assurance that if the hypotliesis be false it 
must lead to results at variance with the true facts,” 
wc must T’cply, with due suhmission, that we have', in 
the case spoken of, the most complete evidence of this ; 
for any change in the hypothesis would make it inca- 
pable of accounting for the facts. When he says that 
“if wc give oui*selvcs the license of inventing the 
causes as well as tludr laws, a person of fertile imagi- 
nation might devise a hundred modes of accounting 
for any given fact;” I reply, that the question is about 
accounting for a lar^e and complex series of facts, of 
which the laws have been aseei*tairied : and as a test 
of Mr. Mill’s assertion, I would propose as a challenge 
to any person of fei*tile imagiiiati(»n to devise any one 
other hyii^thcsis to account for the pertni'bationa of 
the moon, or the coloured fringes of shadows, bcsi<les 
the hypothesis by which they have actually been ex- 
plained with such curious completeness. This challenge 
has been repeatedly offered, but never in any degree 
accepted > and I eiiter'tain no apprehension that Mr. 
Mill’s supposition will ever be verified by such a per- 
formaucok 

50. I see additional reason for mistrusting the 
precision of Mr. Mills views of that accordance of 
phenomena with the results of a hypothesis, in several 
others of the expressions which he uses (ii. 23). He 
q)eaks of a hypothesis being a ^^ptamible explanation 



272 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 


of all or most of the phenomena;” but the case which 
we have to consider is where it gives an eocaet repre* 
sentation of all the phenomena in which its results 
can be traced. He speaks of its being certain that 
the laws of the phenomena are some measure 
attaJogous'^ to those given by the h3rpothesis ; the case 
to be dealt with being, that they are in every way 
identical. He speaks of this an^ogy being certain, 
from the fact that the hypothesis can be “ for a moment 
tenable as if any one had recommended a hypothesis 
which is tenable only while a small part of the fiicts 
are considered, when it is inconsistent with others 
which a fuller examination of the case discloses. I 
have nothing to siiy, and have said nothing, in favour 
of hypotheses which are fwt tenable. He says there 
ai'e many such harmonies running through the laws 
of i)henomena in other respects radically distinct;” 
and ho gives as an instance, the laws of light and 
heat. I have never alleged such hannoiiies as gi^ounds 
of theory, unless they ohould amount to identities; 
and if they should do this, I have no doubt that the 
most sober tliinkeis will suppose the causes to be of 
the same kind in the two harmonizing instances. If 
chlorine, iodine and bromc, or sulphur and pho.sphoru8, 
have, a.s Mr. hfill says, analogous properties, I should 
call these substances a/nalogfrasr but I can see no 
temptation to frame an hy])othesis that they ai’c iden- 
tical (which he seems to so long as Chemistry 

proves them distinct. But any hypothesis of^n analogy 
iji the constitution of these elements (suppose, for in- 
stance, a resemblance in tlieir atomic foim or compo- 
sition) w^uld seem to me to have a fair claitn trial ; 
and to be capable of being elevated /rom dhe d^^gree 
of probability to another by the number, variety, and 
exactitude of the explanations of phenomena which it 
should furnish. . 

Vll. Against prediction of Facts, — 51. These ex- 
pressions of Mr. Mill have reference to a way in which 
hypotheses may be /corroborated, in estimating the 
value of which, it appears that he and I differ. It 
seems to be thought;” he says (ii 23), “ that an hypo*^ 



MB. MILL S LOGIC. 


273 


thesis of the sort in question is entitled to a more 
favourable reception, if, besides accounting for tlie 
fects p^viously Known, it has led to the anticipation 
and prediction of others which experience afterwards 
veritied.” And ho adds, “ Such predictions and their 
fulfil ment are indeed well caloulat<?d to strike the 
ignorant vulgar;” but it is strange, he says, that any 
considerable stress should be laid upon such a coinci- 
dence by scientific thinkers. However strange it may 
seem to him, there is no doubt that the most scientific 
thinkers, far more than the ignorant vulgar, have 
allowed the coincidence of results predicted by theory 
with fact afterwards obsen^ed, to produce ilie strongest 
effects upon their conviction; and that all the best- 
established theories have obtained their permanent 
place in general acceptance in virtue of such coinci- 
dences, moi*e than of any other evidence.' It was not 
the ignorant vulgar alone, who w'ere struck by the 
return of Halley’s comet, as an evidence of the New- 
tonian theory. Nor w*as it the ignorant vulgal’, who 
were struck witli those facts which did so much strike 
men of science, Jis curiously felicitous proofs of the 
undulatory theoiy of light, — ^tlie production of daik- 
iieas by two luminous rays inteifering in a special 
manner; the refraction of a single ray of light into 
a conical pencil; and*other complex yet precise results, 
predicted by the theory and vei’ified by experiment. 
It must, one would think, strike all persons in propor- 
tion to their thoughtfulness, that when Nature thus 
does our bidding, she acknowledges that we have 
learnt lier tine language. Tf we can predict new facts 
which we liave not seen, as well as explain those which 
we have seen, it must be because our explanation is 
not a mere formula of obseiwed facts, but a truth of 
a deeper kind. Mr. Mill says, ‘‘If the laws of the 
propagation of light agi-ee with those of the vibrations 
of an elastic fluid in so many respects as is necessary 
to make the hypothesis- a plausiblo explanatipn of all 
or most of the phenomena known vat the time, it is 
nothing strange that they sliould accord witH each 
other in one respect more.’* Nothing strange, if the 



274 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

theory be true ; but quite unaccountable, if it be not. 
If 1 copy a long series of letters of which the last 
half-dozen are concealed, and if I guess those aright, 
as is found to be the case when they are afterwards 
uncovered, this must be because I have made] out the 
import of the inscription. To say, that becaiise I have 
copied all that I could see, it is nothing strange that 
I should guess those which 1 cannot see, would bo 
absurd, without suppoHiiig such a ground for guessing. 
The notion that the discovery of the laws and causes 
of phenomena is a loose hap-huzard sort of guessing, 
which gives “plausible” explanations, accidental co- 
incidences, casual “ harmonies,” laws, “in some mea- 
sure analogous ” to the true ones, suppositions “tenable” 
for a time, appears to me to be a misap}>rehcnsion of 
the whole nature of science ; as it certainly is inappli- 
cable to the case to which it is principally applied by 
Mr. Mill. 

52. There is another kind of evidence of theories, 
very closely approaching to the verification of untried 
predictions, and to which, apparently, Mr. Mill docs 
not attach much importance, since he has borrowed 
the tenn by which I have described it, Consilience^ 
but has applied it in a dififerent manner (ii. 530, 
r»^3i 59C')* I have #pokcn, in the PhUosopht/^^y of 
the C(msilience of Inductions^ as* one of the Tests of 
Hypoihesesy and have exemplified it by many instances ; 
for example, the theory of uni versa! gravitation, ob- 
tained by induction froju the motions of the planets, 
was found to explain also that peculiar motion of 
the spheroidal earth which produces the Precession 
of the Equinoxes.^ This, 1 have said, was a striking 
and surprising coincidence which gave the theory a 
stamp of truth beyond the power of ingenuity to 
counterfeitw I may compare such occurrences to a 
case of interpreting an unknown character, in which 
two different inscriptions, deciphered by different 
persons, had given the same ali>habot. We should, 


u B. xl. a V. art. xi. 


HR. hill’s logic. 


275 

in such a case, believe with great confidence the 
alphabet was the true one ; and I will add, that I 
believe the history of science ofiers no example in 
which a theory supported by such consiliences, had 
been afterwards proved to be false. 

53. Mr, Mill accepts (ii. 21) a rule of M. Comte’s, 
that we may apjdy hypotheses, provided they are capa- 
ble of being afterwaids vcrifietl as facts, I have a 
much higher respect for Mr. Mill’s opinion than for 
M. Comte’s*®; but I do not think that this rule will be 
found of any value. It aippears to me to be tainted 
with the vice which I liavo already noted, of throwing 
the whole burthen of explanation upon the unex- 
plained word fact — unexplained in any permanent 
and definite opjiosition to theory. As I have said, 
the Newtonian theory ia a fact. Every true theory 
is a fact. Nor does the distinction become more clear 
by Mr. Mill’s examines. “The vortices of Descartes 
would have been,” he says, “a perfectly legitimate 
hypothesis, if it had been possible by any mode of 
explanation which wo could entertiiiii the hope of 
possessing, to bring the question whether such vortices 
exist or not, within the reach of our observing facul- 
ties.” But this w'as possible, and was done. The free 

— ji 


1 have given elsewhere (see last 
chaiituv) rea^ous why 1 cannot lussign 
to M. Comte’s PhUosoyhie ro»iUve 
any great value os a contribution to 
the philosophy of science. In this 
judgment 1 conceive that I am sup- 
IKirtcd by the best phllosoplicra of 
our time. AL Comte owes, £ think, 
much of the notice which has been 
given to him to Lis including, m Mr. 
Mill does, the science of society and 
of human nature in his scheme, 
and to his boldness in dealing with 
these. Tie appears to have been re- 
ceived with deforeiico as a mathe^ 
inatician : but Sir John Herschel has 
sliown that a supposed astronomical 


discovery of his is a mere assump- 
tion. I conceive tlmt I have shown 
that Ills roprewntation of the history 
of science is erroneous, both in its 
details and in its generalities. His 
distinction of the three stages of sci- 
ences, the theological, metaphysical, 
and i)ositive, is not at all supported 
by the facts of srientiftc history, 
fteal discoveries always involve what 
ho calls metaphysics; and the doc- 
trine of' final causes in physiology, 
the main element of science which 
can pro]>er1y bo called fAcoZogieol, 
is retained at the end, as weU as the 
beginuing of the science, by all ex- 
cept a peculiar school 


T 2 



276 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

passage of comets through the spaces in wliich these 
vortices should have been, convinced men that these 
vortices did not exist. In like manner Mr. Mill re- 
jects tlie hypothesis of a liiminiftjvous ether, “ because 
it can neither be seen, heard, smelt, tasted, or touched.*' 
It is a strange complaint to make of the vehicle of 
light, that it cannot be heard, smelt, or tasted. Its 
vibrations can bo seen. The fringes of shadows for 
instance, show its vibrations, just sis the visible lines 
of waves near the shore show the nndulations of the 
sea. Whether this can be touched, that is, whe- 
ther it resists motion, is hanlly yet clear. I am far 
from saying there arc not diriiciilties on this point, 
with regard to all theories which snp]>ose a medium. 
But there are no more dilficulties of this kind in the 
undulatory theory of light, than there are in Fourier's 
theory of heat, which M. Comte adopts as a model of 
scientific investigation ; or in the theory of voltaic 
currents, about which Mr, Mill appears to have no 
doubt; or of electric atniosp/ieres, which, though gene- 
rally obsolete, Mr. Mill appears to favour; for though 
it had been said that we /tel such atmosjiheres, no one 
had said that they have the other attributes of matter. 

VII I. Newton's Vera Causa, — 54. Mr. Mill con- 
ceives (ii. 17) that his own rule cojiceming hypotheses 
coincides with Newton's Rule, that the cause assumed 
must be a vera cav^a. But he allows that “Mr. 
Whe well... has had little difficulty in showing that his 
(Newton's) conception was neither precise nor consis- 
tent wit-h itself.” He also allows that “Mr. Whewell 
is clearly right in denying it to be necessary that 
the cause assigned should be a cause already known; 
else how could we cv«r become acquainted with new 
causes]" These points being agreed U].)on, 1 think thai 
a little further consideration will lead to the conviction 
tliat Newton’s Rule of philosophizing will best become 
a valuable guide, if we understand it as assorting that 
when the explanation of two or more different kmds 
of phenomena (as the revolutions of the planets, Ihe 
fall of a stone, and the precession of the equinoxes,) 
lead us to tlie same cause, such a coincidence gives a 



MR. mill’s logic. 


277 

reality to the cause. We have, in fact, in such a case, 
a Consilience of Inductions. 

55. When Mr. Mill condemns mo (ii. 24) (using, 
however, exprebsions of civility which I ghidly ac- 
knowledge,) foi’ having recognized no mode of Induc- 
tion except that of trying hypothesis after h}’|DOthe3is 
until one is found which fits the phenomena, I must 
beg to remind the readers of our works, that Mr. Mdl 
himself allows (i. 363) that the proce-ss uf finding a 
conception which binds together observed facts ‘4s 
tentative, that it consists of a succession of guesses, 
many being rejected until one at last occurs fit to be 
chosen.” i must remind them also that I have given 
a Section upon tlie 7 ^est 8 of llyjx>Uiese8^ to whicli I 
have just referred, — that I have given various methods 
of Induction, as the Afethod of Gradation^ the Method 
of Natural Classification^ the Method of Curves^ the 
Aiethod of Means, the Method of Least Squares, the 
Method of Mesiduea: all which I have illustrated by 
consY>icuous examples from the History of Science; 
besides which, I conceive that wliat I have said of the 
Ideas belonging to each science, and of the construc- 
tion and explication of conceptions, will point out in 
each case, in what region we are to look for the In- 
ductive Element ii^ order to^ make new discoveries. 
I have already ventured to say, elsewhere, that the 
met])ods which I have given, are as definite and prac- 
tical as any others which have been proposed, with the 
great additional advantage of being the methods by 
which all great discoveries in science have really been 
made. 

IX, Successwe Generalizations. — 56. There is one 
feature in the construction of science 'which Mr. Mill 
notices, but to which he does not ascribe, as I conceive, 
its due importance ; 1 mean, that process by which we 
not only ascend from particular facts to a genend law, 
but when this is done, ascend from the first general 
law to others more general ; and so on, proceeding to 
the highest point of generalization. This character of 
tile scientific process aves first clearly pointed out by 
Bacon, and is one of the most noticeable instances of 



278 PUILOSOPHY OF DISOOVEBT. 

his philosophical sagacity. ‘‘There are,” he says, “two 
ways, and can be only two, of seeking and finding 
truth. The one from sense and particulars, takes a 
flight to the most general axioms, and from these 
principles and their truth, settled once for all, invents 
and judges of intermediate axioms. The other method 
collects axioms from sense and particulars, ascending 
corUinuoualy and by degrees^ so tliat in the end it 
aiTives at the most general axioms:” meaning by 
axiovLs, laws or princijdes. The structure of the 
most complete sciences consists of Neveral such steps, 
—floors^ as Bacon calls them, of successive generaliza- 
tion; and thus this structure may be exhibited as 
a kind of scientific pjramid. 1 have constructed this 
pyi'amid in the case of the science of Astronomy : 
and I am gratified to find that the illustrious Hum- 
boldt approves of the design, and 8|>eak.s of it as 
executed with complete success The capability of 
being exhibited in this form of successive genemli- 
zatious, arising fi’oin particulars upward to some very 
general law, is the condition of all tolei’ably peiTect 
sciences ; and the steps of the successive generalizations 
are commonly the most important events in the history 
of the science. 

57 ; Mill does ^ot reject^ this process of ge- 
neralization; but he gives it no conspicuous place, 
making it only one of three modes of reducing a law 
of causation into other laws. “There is,” he says 
(i. 555), “the avlsvmption of one law under another;... 
the gathering up of several laws into one more general 
law wliich includes them all. Ho adds afterwards, 
that the general law is the smn of the partial ones 
(i, 557), an expression which appears to me inadequate, 
for reasons which I have already stated. The general 
law is not the mere sum of the particular laws. It is, 
as I have already said, their amount in a new point of 


^ J have alscH in tbe same plaoe, in order that, in reading In the ordl- 
given the Inductive Pjrramid for the naij waj, we may proceed to the 
aclence of Optica. These Fyramlda vertex. PhU, Ind, Sa K xL o. vL 
are neeesfiarily inverted in (heir form, n Coomoi, voL it note as 



MR. mill’s logic. 


279 

vi 4 V). A new conception is introduced; thus, Newton 
did not merely add together the laws of the motions 
of the moon and of the planets, and of the satellites, 
and of the earth ; ho looked at them altogether as the 
result of a universal force of mutual gravitation ; and 
therein consisted his generalization. And the like 
might be pointed out in other cases. 

58. I am the more led to apeak of Mr. Mill as not 
having given due importance to this process of suc- 
ceJjsive generalization, by the way in which he speaks 
in another place (ii. 525) of this doctrine of Bacon. 
He conceives Bacon “to have been radically wrong 
when he enunciates, as a universal mle, that induction 
should proceed from the lowest to the middle prin- 
ciples, and from those to the highest, never reversing 
that order, and consequently, leaving no room for the 
discovery of new principles by way of deduction** at 

59. I conceive that the Inductive *Table of As- 
troi:\omy, to which I have already referred, shows that 
in that science, — the most complete which has yet ex- 
isted, — the history of the science has gone on, as to its 
general movement, in accordance with the view which 
Bacon’s sagacity enjoined. The successive generaliza- 
tions, 80 far as tJiey^were ^nte,.were made by successive 
generations. I conceive also that the Inductive Table of 
Optics shows the same thing; and this, vdthoiit taking 
for granted the truth of the Undulatrry Theory ; for 
with regard to all the steps of the progress of the 
science, lower than that highest one, there is^ I con- 
ceive, no controversy, 

60. Also, the Science of Mechanics, although Mr. 
Mill more especially refers to it, as a case in which the 


^ The reader will probahly recol- 
lect that as Iiiiivjciiim means the in- 
ference of general propositions ftom 
partienlar casee,l>ediMtt^ 
inAoenee by the application of gene- 
ral proposittona to particular caaea, 
sod by combinin g atich appUcatlona; 


aa when from the most general piin- 
ciplea of Geometry or of Medmuica, 
we prove some less general theorem ; 
for instance, the number of the poaei- 
ble regular solidSi or the prlndtde of 
oiaoitNk 




28 o philosophy, of discovery^ 

highest generalizations (for example the I^aws of Mo- 
tion) were those earliest ascertained with any scientific 
exactness, will, I think, on a more careful examination 
of its history, be found remarkably to confirm Ihvcon’s 
view. For, in that science, we have, in the firat place, 
very conspicuous examples of the vice of the method 
pursued by the ancients in flying to the highest gene- 
ralizations first; as when they m^e their false distinc- 
tions of the laws of naiural and violent motions, and of 
terrestrial and celestial motions. Many erroneous laws 
of motion were asserted through neglect of facts or 
want of experiments. And when (lalileo and his school 
had in some measure succeeded in discovering some of 
the true laws of the motions of terrestrial bodies, thc^’ 
did not at once assert them as general : for they did 
not at all apply those laws to the celestial motions. 
As I have remarked, all Kepler’s speculations respect- 
ing the causes of the motions of the planets, went upon 
the supposition that the First Law of terresti'ial Motion 
did not apply to celestial bodies; but that, on the^ con- 
trary, some continual force was requisite to keep up, 
as well as to originate, the planetary motions. Nor 
did Descartes, though he enunciated the Laws of 
Motion with more generality -than his predecessors, 
(but not with exactness,) venture to tnist the planets 
to those laws; on the contraryj te invented his ma- 
chineiy of Vortices in order to keep up the motions 
of the heavenly bodies. Newjoii was tlie first who 
extended the laws of terrestrial motion to the celestial 
spac^; and in doing so, he used all the laws of the 
celestial motions which had previously been disebvered 
by more limited inductions. To these instances, I may 
add the gradual generalization of the third Law of mo- 
tion by Huyghens, the Bemoullis, and Herman, which 
I hav^ described in the History^ as preceding that 
Period of Peduction, to which the succeeding naiTative*^ 
' is appropriated. In Mechanics, then, we have a cardi- 
nal example of the historically gradual and successive 


» B.vic.y. 


•* c.yS. 




MU. hill’s LOOIO. 281 

ascent of science from particulars to the most general 
lawB. * 

61. The Science of Hydrostatics may appear to 
offer a more favourable example of the ascent to the 
most general laws, without going through the inter- 
mediate i>articular laws; and it is true, with reference 
to this science, as I have observed that it does exhibit 
the pecfuliarity of 'our possessing the most geneml 
principles on which the phenonuma depend, aiul from 
which many cases of special facts are cx]>lained by 
deduction ; while other cases cannot be so explained, 
from the want of principles intermediate between the 
highest and the lowest. And T have assigned, as the 
reason of this peculiarity, that the general principles 
of the Mechanics of Fluids Avere not obtained Avith 
lefevence to the science itself, but by extension from 
the sister science of the Mechanics of Solids. The 
two sciences are parts of the same Jnductivo ryniiiiid; 
and having reached the summit of this Pyramid on 
one side, we are tempted to descend on the other from 
the liighest generality to moj’e narrow laws. Yet even 
ill this science, the best jiart of our knowledge is 
mainly composed of inductive laws, obtained by in- 
ductive examination of particular chusses of facts. The 
mere riiaiheinaticaljjnve.stigations of the laAvs of Avaves, 
for instance, have iiotr Iwl to any results so valuable as 
the experimental rose.avches of Bremonticr, Emy, the 
Webers, and Mr. Scott Russell. And in like manner 
in Acoustics, the Mechanics of Elastic Fluids the 
deductions of mathematicians made on general^ princi- 
ples have not done so much h>r our knowledge, as 
the cases of vibrations of plates and pipes examined 
experimentally by Chladni, SaA’^art, Mr. Whea:tstono 
and. Mr. Willis. We see therefore, even in these 
sciences, no roiison to slight the wisdom which exhorts 
us to ascend fi*om particulars to intermediate laws, 
rather than to hope to deduce those latter better from 
the more general laws obtained once for all. 


HUt b, vL c. Vi «ecL 13. 
M HUU Ind Sc, b. viii. 




282 


PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


6i2. Mr. Mill himself indeed, notwithstanding that 
he slights Bacon’s injunction to seek knowledge by 
procee'ding from less general to more general laws, 
has given a very good reason why this is commonly 
necessary and wise. He says (ii. 526), “Before wh 
attempt to explain deductively, from more general laws, 
any new class of phenomena, it is desirable to have 
gone as far as is practicable in ascertaining the em* 
pirical laws of these phenomena; so as to compat*e the 
results of deduction, not with one individual instance 
after another, but with general propositions expressive 
of the points of agreement which have been found 
among many instances. For,” he adds with gieat 
justice, “if Newton had been obliged to verify the 
theory of gravitation, not by deducing fi*om it Kepler^s 
laws, but by deducing all the observed planetary posi- 
tions which had served Kepler to establish those laws, 
the Newtonian theory would probably never have 
emerged from the state of an hypothesis.” To which 
we may add, that it is certain, from the history of the 
subject, that in that case the hypothesis would never 
have been fiumed at all. 

X. Mr, MilVs Hope from Deduction. — 63. Mr. 
Mill expresses a hope of the eflScacy of Deduction, 
rather than Induction, in promo^jing the future pro- 
gress of Science ; which hope, so far as the physical 
sciences are concenied, ap{>ears to me at variance with 
all the lessons of the history of those sciences. He 
says {i. 579), “that the advances henceforth to be 
expected even in physical, and still more in mental and 
social science, will be chiefly the result of deduction, 
is evident from the genei'al considerations already 
adduced:*’ these considerations being, that the phe- 
nomena to be considered are very complex, and are 
the result of many known causes, of which we have 
to disentangle the results. 

64. I cannot l)ut take a very different view from 
this. I think that any one, looking at the state of 
physical science, will see that there are still a vast 
mass of cases, in which we do not at all know the 
causes, at least, in their full generality; and that the 



MR. mill’s logic. 


283 

knowledge of new causes, and the generalization of 
the laws of those already known, can only be obtained 
by new imludive discoveries. Except by new In- 
ductions, equal, in their efficacy for grouping together 
phenomena in new points of view, to any which have 
yet been performed in the history of science, how are 
Mr© to solve such questions as those which, in the 
survey of what we already know, force themselves 
upon our minds? Such as, to take only a few of 
the most obvious examples — "What is* the nature of 
the connexion of heat and light? How does heat 
produce the expansion, liquelkction and vaporization 
of bodies? What 'is the nature of the connexion 
between the optical and the chemical properties of 
light? What is the relation between optical, crystal- 
line and chemical polarity? What is the connexion 
between the atomic constitution and the physical quali- 
ties of bodies? What is the tenable detinition of a 
mineral species? What is the tine relation of the 
apparently different ty]>es of vegetable life (monoco- 
tyledons, dicotyledons, and c^J^ptogamous plants) ? 
What is the relation of the various types of animal 
life (vertebrates, articulates, radiates, &c.)? What is 
the number, and what are the distinctions of the Vital 
Powers? What is the internal constitution of the 
earth? These, aiA many other questions of equal 
interest, no one, I suppose, expects to see solved by 
deduction from principles already known. But we 
can, in many of them, see good hope of progreas by 
a large use of induction ; including, of course, copious 
and careful experiments and observations. * 

65* With such questions before us, as have now 
been suggested, 1 can see nothing but a most mischiev- 
ous narrowing of the field and enfeebling of the spirit 
of scientific exertion, in the doctrine that ‘^Dedhetion 
is the great scientific work of the present and of future 
ages;” and that revolution is peaceably and pro- 
gressively effecting itself in philosophy the reverse of 
that to which Bacon has attached his name."* I trust, 
on the contraij, that we have many new laws of 
nature still to dimver j and tibat our race is destined 



284 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

to obtain a sight of wider truths than any we yet dis- 
cern, including, as cases, the general laws we now 
know, and obtained from these known laws as they 
must be, by Induction. 

66. I can see, however, reasons for the compar# 
tively greater favour with which Mr. Mill lof»ks upoh 
Deduction, in the views to which he hfis mainly directed 
his attention. The explanation of remarkable pheno- 
mena by known laws of Nature, has, as 1 have already 
said, a greater charm fc^r many minds than the dis^ 
covery of the laws themselves. In the case of such 
explanations, the pi-oblem proposed is moi*e definite, 
and the solution hiorc obviously complete. For the 
process of induction includes a mysterious step, by 
which we pass from particulars to generals, of w'hich 
step the reason always seems to b(3 inadequately ren- 
dered by any words which we can iLse ; and this step 
to most minds is not deiuonstmtive, as to few is it 
given to jierform it on a great scale. But the process 
of explanation of facts by known laws is deductive, ami 
has at every step a ftree like that of demonstration, 
producing a feeling peculiarly gratifying to the clear 
intellects which are most capable of following the 
process. We may often see instances in which this 
admiration for deductive skill appears in an extrava- 
gant measure; as when men compare Laplace with 
Newton. Nor should l^think it my business to argue 
against such a preference, unless it were likely to leave 
us too well satisfied with what we know alremly, to 
chill our hope of scientific progress, and to prevent our 
making any further strenuous efforts to ascend, higher 
than we have yot done, the mountairi-chain which 
limits human knowledge. 

67. But there another reason which, I conceive, 
operates in leading Mr. Mill to look to Deduction as 
the principal means of future progress in knowledge,t 
and which is a reason of considerable weight in 
subjects of research which, 'as I conceive, he mainly 
has in view. In the study of our own minds and of 
the laws which govern the history of society, I do not 
think that it is very likely that we shall hereafter. 



MR. mill’s LOOIC. 


285 

arrive at any wider principlas than those of which we 
already possess some considerable knowledge ; and this, 
for a special i*eason; namely, that our knowledge in 
such cases is not gathered by mere external observation 
of a collection of external facts; but acquired by atten- 
tion to internal facts, our own emotions, thoughts, and 
spi'ings of actit)!) ; facts are connt;cte«l by ties existing 
in our own consciousness, and not in mere observed 
juxtaposition, succession, or similitude. How the 
character, for instance, is inllliencod by vlirious causes, 
(an Qxainple to which Mr. .Mill repeatedly refers, ii. 
518, &c.), is an impiiry which niay perhaps be best 
conducted by consideiing what we know of the influ- 
ence of education and habit, government and occupa- 
tion, hope and fear, vanity anti pride, and the like, 
upon men’s characters, and by tracing the various 
eftects of the inttjrmixture of such influences. Yet 
even here, there seems to be room for the disco veiy of 
in the way of experimental inquiry : for instance, 
yhat share race or family has in the fonnation of 
character ; a question which can hardly be solved to 
any purpose in any other way than by collecting and 
classing instances. And in the same way, many of 
the principles which regulate the material w'ealth, of 
states, are obtain ed,i if not exclusively, at least most 
clearly and securely, by induction from largo surveys 
of facts. Still, however, I am quite ready to admit 
that in Mentfil and Social Science, we are much less 
likely than^in Physical Science, to obtain new truths 
by any process which can be distinctively tercaed /n- 
duction; and that iniihose sciences, what may be called 
Deductions from principles of thought and action of 
which we are already conscious, or to which we assent 
when they are felicitously picked out of our thoughts 
and put into words", must have a lai‘ge share; and I 
may add, that this observation of Mr. Mill appears to 
me to be important, and, its present connexion, new. 

XI. Fiiridamental opposition of our doctrines . — 
68 . I have made nearly all the remarks which I 
now think it of any consequence to make upon Mr. 
Mill’s Logic^ so far as it liears upon the doctrines con- 
tained in my lliatory and Fhiloaophg. And yet tliere 



286 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 


remains still untouched one great question, involving 
probably the widest of all the differences between him 
and me. I mean the question whether geometrical 
axioms, (and, as similar in their evidence to tliese, aU 
axioms,) bo tniths derived from experience, or be neces- 
sary truths in some deeper .sense. This is one of the 
fitndamontal questions of philosophy; and all persons 
who take an interest in metaphysical discussions, know 
that the two opposite opinions have been maintained 
with great zeal in all ages of speculation. To me it 
appears that there are two distinct elements in our 
knowlerlg(', Experience, without, and the Mind, with- 
in. Mr. Mill derives all our knowledge from Exi>eri- 
ence alone. In a question thus going the root of all 
knowledge, the opposite argunmnts must needs cut deep 
on both sides. Mr. Mill cannot deny that our know- 
ledge of geometrical axioms and the like, seems to be 
necessary, I cannot deny that our knowledge, axiomatic 
as well as other; Clever is :icquired withoiU experienoe, 
6g, Perhaps ordinary readers may despair of fob 
lowing our i-casonings, when they find that they can 
only be made intelligible by supposing, on tJie one 
hand, a person who thinks distinctly and yet has never 
seen or felt any external object; and on the otlier 
hand, a person who is transferred, i-s Mr. Mill supposes 
(ii. 'Jj), to “distant parts of the stellar regions where 
the ])henomena may l>o entirely unlike tho.se with 
which we arc acquainted,” and where even^the axiom, 
that every effect must have a Ciiuse, docs not hold good. 
Nor, in truth, do 1 think it necessary hero to spend 
many words on this subject. Probably, for those wlio 
take an interest, in this discussion, most of the argu- 
ments on each side have already been put foiwards with 
sufficient repetition. T have, in an “Essay on the 
Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy,” and in some 
accompanying “ Remarks,” 'printed*^ at the end of the 
second edition o£ my Philosophyy given my reply to 
what has been fifaid on this subject, both by Mr. Mill, 
and by the author of u very able critique* on my His- 


^ Bepiintcd in the Appendix to this volunio. 




ME. mill’s LOGIjP. 


287 

Umj and Philosophy which appeared in the Qua/rterly 
Revmo in 1841 : and I will not here attempt to revive 
the general discussion. 

70. Perhaps 1 may be allowed to notice, that in 
one part of Mr. Mill’s work where this subject is 
treated, there is the appearance of one of the parties 
to the controversy pronouncing judgment in his own 
cause. Tliis indeed is a temptation which it is especi* 
ally difficult for an author to resisi., who writes .a 
treatise upon fallacies^ the subject of Mr. Mill’s fifth 
Book. In such a treatise, the writer has an easy way 
of disposing of adverse opinions by classing them as 
“ Fallacies, ” and putting them* side by side with opini- 
ons universally acknowledged to bo false. In tliis way, 
Mr. Mill has dealt with several points which are still, 
as I conceive, matters of controversy (ii. 357, &c.) 

71. But undoubtedly, Mr. Mill has given his 
argument against my opinions with great distinct- 
ness in another place (i. 319). In order to show 
that it is merely habitual association which gives 
to an experimental truth the character of a neces- 
sary truth, he quotes the case of the laws of motion, 
which were really discovered from experiment, but are 
now looked upon as tbe only conceivable laws; and 
esjiecially, what he jonceives as “ the rediictio ad ah- 
mrdum of the theory of incoiiceivableness,” an opinion 
which 1 had ventured to throw out, that if, we could 
conceive the Composition (>f bodies distinctly, we might 
bo able to see that it is necessary that the modes of 
their composition should be definite. I do nqji think 
that readers in general will see anything absurd in 
the opinion, that the laws of Mechanics, and even the 
laws of the Chemical Composition of bodies, may de- 
pend updn principles as necessary as tbe. prt)perties of 
space and number ; and that this nec€issity, though not 
at all perceived by persons .who have only the ordinary 
obscure and ponfused notions bn such subjects, may be 
evident to a mind which by effbiii! and discipline, 
rendered its ideas of Mechanical Causation, Elementary 
Compositioh and Difference of Kind, clear and precise. 
It may easily be, I oonceive> that while such necessary 



288 PHILOaOPHT OP DISCOVBEY. 

priaciples perceived to be necosHary only by a few 
minds of highly cultivated insight, such principles as 
the axioms of Oeometry and Arithmetic may per- 
ceived to be necessary by all minds which have any 
habit of abstract thought at all : and I conceive also, 
that though these axioms are brought into distinct 
view by a certain degree of intelleutnal cultivation, 
they may still bo much better described as conditions 
of experience, than as results of experience : — as laws 
of the mind and of its activit}-, rather^ than as facts 
impressed upon a mind merely j)as^ive. 

XIL Ahsarditles in Mr. MiWs Logic. — 72. I 
will not pursue the subject furtlnT * only, as the ques- 
tion has atiscii lespectiiig the absiirililieri to which 
each of the opposite doct lines leads. I will point out 
opinions connected witli tliis subject, which Mr. IVIill 
has stated in various }>arts of his book. 

He holds (i. 317) that it is merely fiom habit that 
we are unable to conceive the laisf point of space or 
the last instant of time He holds (li. 360) that it is 
strange that any one should rely uj^on the d priori 
evidence that space or extension is inhnite, or that no- 
thing can be mode of nothing *He holds (i. 304) that 
the first law of motion is rigorously true^ but that the 
axioms respecting tho lever are oiAy^approxlmatel y true. 
He holds (ii. no) that there may he sidereal firma- 
ments in which events succeed each other at random, 
without obeying any laws of causation ; although on© 
might suppose that even if sjMictj and cause are both to 
have tlieir limits, still they might terminate together : 
and then, even on this bold supposition, we should no 
where have a world in which events wore casual. He 
holds (ii. Ill) that the a%iom, that every event must 
have a cause, is established by means of an “ induction 
by simple enumeration and in like manner, that 
the principles of number and oi geometiy are proved 
by this method of simple enumeration alone. Ho 
ascribes the proof (i. 162) of the axiom, things which 
are equal to the same are equal to each other,’* to tho 
fact i^t this proposition has been perpetually 
true and ne\er fiilsc. He holds ( 1 . 338) that all 



'xIl jujibcb 

eoiiiAeindiig:^^^ » ^ditioik im- 
/|J|m vbicb IIOXM& 43f ikSm^^mfoti^he Ivue ;'«aujl 

ui^ con^ibm icr aa assumpti^ 

73. Mr. Mill fitrther lieids {i 50$}, iSitet it is a 
tehaxaotemtio ptt^rty of geozaetkcal forms, ihuit tlic^ 
SM capable of bd^ paiat^ in iiie iam^aatioa with a 
liistitLCtness equal to reality ; — that our ideas of forias 
eacactly resemble our sensatioaB: wbicli, it is iipplied, 
not the ease with regal'd to any oth^ class of o^ir 
ideas ;~tLat wo thus may have mental pictures of ^ 
possible combinationB of lines and angleb, which at^ 
as fit subjects of geometrical experimentation as the 
realities themselves. He says, that "we know 
the imaginary lines exactly resemble real ones and 
that we obtain this knowledge respecting the character- 
istic property of Ihc idea of space hjt experience ; though 
it dm not appear how we can compare our uieas with 
the reaiitWf since we know the realities only our 
ideasj or why this property of their resemblance should 
be oonfined to wie clash of ideas alone. 


74, X have now made such remarks as appeim to 
me to be neeesbary, on the most important parts of 
Mr. MUl*s criticism of my Philosophy. I hope I have 
avoided urging aiiy^ thing in a contentious manner ; as 
1 have certainly written with no desire of controversy^ 
but only \ritb a view to offer to those who may be wilL 


mg to receive it, some eyplanation of portions of my 
previous writings. I have already baid, that if this 
hadf not have been my especial object, I coyld 
pleusuru hBsfe noted the pafi>sages of Mr. MilFs Zogm 
Urhich I admire, rather than the points in which we 

£ I will in a very few wosds refer to some of 
points, as the most agreeable way of taking JeaVe ^ 
disputd^. f ‘i 

* 3 ^ .tay then that Mr. Mill appears to me especially 
JdlMltotiTe in his discussion of the nature of the pro^ ^ 
conveyed by the i^Uogism; and that 
^at the force of the syllogiaiA eonsisttrin m 
wiKh am interpr^oHM ^ 

happily the diffiewee which 

» ipt 



290 PHILOSOPHT OP DISCOVERT. 

other theories of this subject. I think that this doctrino 
of his is made still more instructive, by his excepting 
&om it the cases of Scriptural Theology and of Positive 
Law (i. 260), as cases in which general propositions, 
not particular facts, are our original data. 1 consider 
also that the recognition of Kinds (i. 166) as classes in 
which we have, not a finite but an inexhimstible body 
of resemblances among individuals, and as groups 
made by natui'e, not by mere definition, is very valu- 
able, as stopping the inroad to an endless train of false' 
philosophy. I conceive that he takes the right ground 
in his answer to Hume’s arguiiieut against miracles 
(ii. 183) : and I admire the Jicutcness with which he 
has criticized Laplace’s tenets on the Doctrine of 
Chances, and the candour with which he has, in the 
second edition, acknowledged ovei-sights on tliis sub- 
ject made in the first. 1 think that much, I may 
almost say all, wliich he says on the subject of Lan- 
guage, is very philosopliical ; for instance, what he 
says (ii. 238) of the way in which words acquire their 
meaning in common use. I especially admire the acute- 
ness and force with wliich he has shown (ii. 255) how 
moral principles expressed in words degenerate into 
formulas, and yet how the foimula cannot be rejected 
without a moral loss. This "perpetual oscillation in 
spiritual truths,” as he happily terms it, has never, 
I think, been noted in the same broad manner, and 
is. a subject of most instructive contemplation. And 
though I have myself refrained from associating moral 
and political with physical science in my study of the 
subject, I see a great deal which is fujl of promise 
for the future progress of moral and political know- 
ledge in Mr. Mill’s sixth Book, On the Logic of the 
Moral and Political Sciences.” Even hia arrangement 
of the various methods which havo been or may be' 
followed in ‘‘ the Social Science,” — “ the Chemical or 
Experimental Method,” *‘the G^metrical or Abstract 
Method,” ‘Hhe Physical or Concrete Deductive Me- 
thod,” ‘‘the Inverse Deductive or Historical Method,” 
tiiough in some degree ftnciful and forced, aboidids 
:with yaluable eniggeetions ; and his estimate of “the 



HB. MIIiL’S logic. 


291 

interesting philosophy of the Bentham school,” the 
main example of ‘'the geometrical method,” is in- 
teresting and philosophical. On some future occasion, 
I may, perhaps, venture into the region of which Mr. 
Mill has thus essayed to map the highways: for it 
is from no despair either of the gi‘cat progress to be 
made in such truth as that heie referred to, or of 
the effect of philosophical methofl in arri^iug at such 
truth, that I have, in what I have now wiitten, con- 
fined myself to the less captivating but moie definite 
p<irt of the subject. 


u 3 



CHAPTER XXIIL 


Political Economy as an Inductive Science. 


{Morat Sciences,) — i. Both M. Comte and Mr Mill, 
in speaking of the methods of advancing science, aim, as 
1 have saiJ^ at the extension of their methods ^ moral 
subjects, and aspire to suggest means foi* the augmen- 
tation of our knowledge of ethical, }>olitical, and social 
truths. I have not here ventured upon a like exten- 
sion of my conclusions, because I wished to confine my 
views of the philosophy of discovery to the cases in 
which all allow that solid and permanent discoveries 
have been made. Moreover in the case of moral spe- 
culations, wo have to consider not only observed exter- 
nal facts and the ideas by which they are colligated^ 
but also internal facts, in which the instrument of 
observation is consciousness, and in which observations 
and ideas are mingled together, and act and react in a 
peculiar manner. It may therefoi^o be doubted whether 
the methods which have been effectual in the discovery 
of physical theories will not reqmre to bo greatly mo- 
dified, or replaced by processes altogether different, 
when we would make advances in ethical, political, or 
social knowledge. In ethics, at least, it seems plain 
that we must t^e our starting-point not without but 
within us. Our mental powers, our affbetions, our rea- 
son, and any other faculties which wo have, must be the 
basis of our convictions. And in this field of know- 
ledge, the veiy form of our highest propositions is dif- 
ferent from what it is in the physical sciences. In 
Physics we examine what {s, in a form more or kss 
general: in Ethics we seek to determine what ouoht 
io be, as the highest rule, which is supreme over all 



•POLITICAL ECONOMY. 293 

others. In this case we cannot expect the methods of 
physical discovery to aid ns. 

But others of the subjects which I have mentioned, 
though strongly marked and influenced by this ethical 
element, are still of a mixed character, and require 
also observation of external facts of human, individual, 
and social conduct, and generalizations derived from 
such observations. Tlie facts of political constitutions 
and social relations in communities; of men, and the 
"histories of such communities, afford large bodies of 
materials for political and social science; and it seems 
not at all unlikely tliat such science may bo governed, 
in its formation and progress, by laws like those which 
govern the physical sciences, and may be steered clear 
of errora and directed towards truths by an attention 
to the foims which error and truth have assumed in 
the most stable and ceitain sciences. The different 
forms of society, and the principal motives which ope- 
rate upon men regarded in masses, may be classifled 
as &cts; and though our consciousness of what we our- 
selves are and the afiectlons which we ourselves feel 
are always at work in our inteq^retations of such facts, 
yet the knowledge which we thus obtain may lead us 
to bodies of knowledge which we may call Sciences, 
and compare with^the other sciences as to their form 
and maxims. 

{PolUical Economy ,) — 3. Among such bodies of 
knowledge, I may notice as a specimen, the science of 
PolUical Economy^ and may compare it with other 
sciences in the respects which have been referred to. 

M. Oomte has given a few pages to the discussion of 
this science of Political Economy'; but what he has 
said amounts only to a few tague remarks on Adam 
Smith and Destutt de Tracy; his main object being, 
it would seem, to introduce Ida usual formula, and to 
condemn all that has hitherto been done (with whioh 
there is no evidence that he is adequately acquaiiited) 
BA worthless, because it is ^theological,” ‘^metaphysi- 
oal,” “literaiy,” and not ** positive.*' 


1 



694 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

Mr. Mill has much more distinctly chaxaoterhsed the 
plan and form of Political Economy in his system ^ 
He regai'ds this science as that which deals with the 
results which take place in human society'* in conse- 
quence of the desire of wealth. He explains, however, 
that it is only for the sake of convenience that one of 
the motives which opciute upon man is thus insulated 
and treated as if it were the only one : — ^that there are 
other principles, for instance, the 2>riiiciples on which 
the progress of population depends, which co-operate* 
with the main principle, and materially modify its re- 
sults : and ho gives reasons why this mode of simplify- 
ing the study of social 2>henornciia tends to promote 
the progress of systematic knowledge. 

Instead of discussing these reasons, I will notice the 
way in which the speculations of political economists 
have exem2»lified tendencies to error, and corrections 
of those tendencies, of the SiUno nature as those 
which we have already noticed in S2)eaking of other 
sciences. 

{Wages^ FrofitSy and Meni.) — 3. We may regard as 
one of the iirst im|X)rtant steps in this science, Adam 
Smith’s remark, that the value or price of any article 
bought and sold consists of three elements, WageSy ProfitBy 
and Bent. Some of the most im{x>i'lant of subsequent 
speculations were attempts to determine the laws of each 
of these three elements. At hrst it might be supposed 
that there ought to be added to them a fourth element, 
Materieds. But upon consideration it will be seen that 
materialsi as an element of price, resolves itself into 
wages and rent; for all materials derive their value 
from tho labour which is bestowed upon them. The 
iron of the ploughshare costs just what it costs to sink 
the mine, dig up and smelt the iron. The wood of the 
frame costs what it costs to cut down the treei, together 
witji the rent of the ground on which it grows. 

{Premature GemaridisxUiom.) — 4. But what deteiv 
mines Wages? — ^The amount of persons seeking woxk;. 


s yX 9. y 




POLITICAL ECOKOMY. 


m 

thatis, speaking loosely, the population; and tUe amount 
of money which is devoted to the payment of wages. 
And what determines the population? It was replied, 
— ^the means of subsistence. And how does the popu- 
lation tend to increase? — In a geometrical ratio. And 
how does the subsistence tend to increase? — At most in 
an arithmetical ratio. And hence it was inferred tliat 
the population tends constantly to run beyond tlie 
means of subsistence, and will bo limited by a threat- 
*ened deficiency of these means. And the wages paid 
must be such as to form this limit. And therefore the. 
wages paid will always be such as just to keei> up the 
population in its ordinary state of progress. Here 
was one general proposition 'which was gathered fix)m 
summary observations of society. 

Again : as to Rent ; Adam Smith had treated Rent 
as if it were a monopoly price — tlie result of a mono- 
poly of the land by the landowners. But subsequent 
writem acutely remarked that land is of various de- 
grees of fertility, and there is souie land which ^rely 
pays the cultivator, if cultivating it he pay no rent. 
And rent can be afforded for other land only in so far 
as it is better than this bad land. And thus, there 
was obtained another general proposition; tliat the 
Bent of good lamj was just equal to the excess of its 
produce over the worat cultivable land. 

How these two propositions are examples of a hasty 
and premature gejieinlization, like that from which 
the sweeping physical systems of antiquity were de- 
rived. They were examples of that process which 
Francis Bacon calls anticipation; in which we leap at 
once from a few facts to propositions of the highest 
generality; and supposing these to be securely estar 
blished, proceed to draw a body of conclusions from 
them, and thus frame a system. 

Apd what is the sounder and wiser mode of pro- 
eeeding in order to obtain a science of such things} 
We must classify the facts which we observe, and take 
care that we do not asmbe to the &cts in our imme- 
diate neighbourhood or 8i)eGially under our notice, a 
gmii^ality of prevalence i|Uch does not belong to 



" pmwsoPHT op discotbjet. 

tjbiltob We must proceed by the ladder of InducUoii» 
and be sure we have obtain^ the najrrower generalisftt 
tioiia, before wo aspire to the widest. 

{Correction of them by Induction. Bent,\ — ^ Por in- 
stance; in the case of the latter of the al^ve two pro- 
pQsitioiis — ^that Bent is the excess of the produce of 
good soils over the worst — ^that is the case in England 
and Scotland; but is it the case in other countries) 
Let us see. Why is it the case in England) Because 
if the rent demanded for good land were nuyre than the* 
excess of the produce over bad land, the farmer would 
prefer the bad land as more gainful. If the rent de- 
manded for gocxi land were less than the excess, the 
bad land would be abandoned by the farmer. 

But all this goes upon the supposition that the far- 
mer can remove from good land to bad, or from bad to 
good, or apply his capital in some other way than 
farming, according as it is more gainful. This is true 
in England; but is it true all over the world) 

By no means. It is true in scarcely any other part 
of the world. In almost every other part of the world 
the cultivator is bound to the land, so that he cannot 
remove himself and his capital from it; and cannot, 
because he is not satisfied with his position upon it^ 
seek and find a position and a subsistence elsewhere* 
On the contraiy, he is bound by the laws and customs 
of the countiy, by constitution, history and character, 
so that he cannot, or can only with great difiSiculty, 
change his plan and mode of life. And thus over 
great part of the world the fundamental supposition on 
which resls the above generalization respecting Bent is 
altogether fidse. 

^ able political economist” has taken the step^ 
which as we have said, sound philosophy would have 
prescribed : he has classified the states of society which 
exist or have existed on the earth, as they bear on this 
point, the amount of Bent, He has classified the 
modes in which the produce is, in different countries 


s 0% JteiU, xSaa* 




POLITICAL tcomur, 


m 

and different stages of society, divided between tHo 
cultivator and the proprietor : and he finds th^t the na- 
tural divisions are these i-^Ser/ JRmU^ that is, labour 
rents paid by the Cultivator to the Landowner, as in 
Bussia : Metayer Rente^ where the produce is divided be- 
tween the Cultivator and the Landowner, as in Central 
Europe : Ryot Renta^ where a portion of the produce is 
paid to the Sovereign as Landlord, as in India : Cottier 
JRerttiB^ where a money-rent is paid b; a Cultivator who 
raises his own subsistence from the soil ; and Rwrmeri 
Rents, where a covenanted Bent is paid by a person 
employing labourers. In this last case alone is it true 
that the Bent is equal to the excess of good over bad 
soils. 

The error of the conclusion, in this case, arises from 
assuming the mobility of capital and labour in cases in 
which it is not moveable : which is mucli as if mecha- 
nicians had reasoned respecting rigid bodies, supposing 
them to be fluid bodies. 

But the error of method was in not classifying the 
facts of societies before jumping to a conclusion which 
was to be applicable to all societies. 

( Weiges.) — 6. And in like manner there is an error of 
the same kind in the assertion of the other general 
principles • — ^that wages are determined by the capital 
which is foidihcoming for the payment of wages; and 
that population is determined in its progress by wages. 
For there is a vast mass of population on the surface 
of the earth which does not live upon wages; and% 
though in England the greater part of the peqple lives 
upon wages, in the rest of the world the part that 
does so is small. And in this case, as in the other, 
we must class these facts os they exist in different 
nations, before we can make assertions of any wide 
generality. 

Mn Jones* classed the condition of labourers iu dif- 
ferent countries in the same inductive manner in which 
^ classed the tenure of land. He pointed oat that 


4 lAUrary JtmaliM, 




298 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

there are three broad distinct classes of them : Unhired 
LabowrerSf who cultivate the ground wliich they oc- 
cupy, and live on adf-produced riOagea; Paid Depeiid-- 
antSy wiio are paid out of the revenva or income of 
their employers, as the military retainei's and domestic 
artizanb of feudal times in Europe, and the greater 
part of the people of Asia at the present day; and 
^ Hirtfd Labourers^ who are paid 'wages from capital. 

This last class, though taken as belonging to the 
normal condition of society by many political econo-* 
mists, is really the excopiionaJ case, taking the world 
at large; and no propositions concerning the structure 
and I'olations of muks in society can have any wide 
generality which are founded on a consideration of 
this c«iso alone. 

(Population.) — 7. And again : with regard to the pro- 
position that the progress of pupuhitiou depends mei*ely 
on the rate of wages, a very little observation of dif- 
ferent communities, and of the same communities at 
different times, will show that this is a very rash and 
hasty generalization. When wages rise, whether or 
not population shall undergo a coiTCsponding incjtjase 
depends upon many other circumstances besides this 
single fact of the increase of wages. The efh^ct of a 
rise of wages u]K>n j)opulation is a^ected by the form 
of the wage's, the time occupied by the change, the 
institutions of the society under consideration, and 
other causes : and a due classification of the conditions 
of the society according to these circumstances, is re<r 
quisite in order to obtain any general proposition con- 
cerning fhe effect of a rise or fall of wages upon the 
progress of the pojmlation. 

And thus those precepts of the philosophy of dis- 
covery which we have I'cpeated so often, which are so 
simple, and which seem so obvious, have been neg- 
lected or violated in the outset of Political Economy 
as* in so many other sciences; — ^namely, the precepts 
that we must classify our facts before we generali^ 
and seek for narrower generalizations and inductions 
before we aim at the widest If these maxims hod 
been obeyed, they would have saved the earlier spoon- 



POLITICAL ECONOMY. 


299 

lators on this subject from some splendid errors; but^ 
on the other hand, it may bo said, that if these earlier 
speculators had not b(^n thus bold, the science could 
not so soon have assumed that large and striking form 
which mode it so attractive, and to which it probably 
owes a large part of its progress. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 
Modern Gerhan Philosophy^ 


I. Science is tke Idealization of Facte, 

I. 1 HAVE spoken, a few chapters back, of the Reao* 
tion against the doctrines of the Sensational School in 
England and France, in Germany also there was a 
Reaction against these doctrines; — ^but there, this move- 
ment took a direction different from its direction in 
other countries. Omitting many other names, Kant, 
Fichte, Schelling and Hegel may be regarded as the 
writers who mark, in a prominent maimer, this Ger- 
manic line of speculation. The problem of philosophy, 
in the way in which they conceived it, may best be ex- 
plained by reference to that Fundamental Antithesis of 
which I had occasion to speak in the Uistory of Scimt'yw 
Ideas^, And in order to characterize the steps taken 
by these modem German philosophers, I must return 
to what 1 have said concerning « the Fundamental 
Antithesis. 

This Antithesis, as I have there remarked, is stated 
in various ways : — as the Antithesis of Thoughts and 
Things ; of Ideas and Sensations ; of Theory and Facts ; 
of Necessary Truth and Experience ; of the Subjective 
and Objective elements of our knowledge; and in other 
phrases. 1 have further remarked that the elements 
thus spoken of, though opposed, are inseparable. We 
cannot have the one without the other. We cannot 
have thoughts without thinking of Things ; we can- 
not have things before us without thinking of them. 


I The lulMtavce of this Mid iho Soc. In X8401. 
iMrt chai^ iTMiiirl&ted M a com > Orln the euStoedUiotiatatiM 
iiMUiicatkni to fhe Cambild^ PhUo 9 ophyiif(h 4 ZndiM 9 tS^e^ 



MODERN GERMAN PHILOSOPHY. 3OI 

FttHher, it ^ been shown, I conceive, that our 
knowledge derives from the former of these two ele- 
ments, namely our Ideas, itis form and character of 
knowledge; our ideas being the necessary Form of 
knowledge, while the MaMer of our knowledge in each 
case is supplied by the ap2>ropriate perception or out- 
ward experience. 

Thus our Ideas of Spaee and Time are the neces- 
sary Forms of our geometrical and arithmetical know- 
ledge ; and no sensations or experience are needed as 
the matter of such knowledge, except in so far as sen- 
sation and experience are needed to evoke our Ideas in 
way degrea And hence these sciences are sometimes 
caUed Formal sciences. All other Scicucfs involve, 
along with the experience and observation ajipropriate 
to each, a development of the ideal conditions of know- 
ledge existing in our minds; and I have given the 
history, both of this development of ideas and of the 
matter derived from experience, in two former works, 
the llistory of Hcimtifc Ideas, and the History of tlie 
Inductive Sciences. I havo there traced this history 
through the whole body of the physical sciences. 

But though Ideas and Perceptions arc thus separate 
elements in our philosophy, they cannot in fact be 
distinguished andi separated, but aro different aspects 
of the same tiling. And the only way in which we can 
approach to truth is by gradually and successively, in 
one instance after another, advancing from the x^^i*cep- 
tion to the idea; from the fact to the theoiy. 

2. I would now further observe, that in^ this pro- 
gression from fact to theory, we advance (when the 
theory is complete and completely xiosseased by the 
mind) firom the apprehension of truths as to 

the apprehension of them as necessary; and thus Facts 
which were originally observed merely as Facts become 
the consequences of theory, and are thus brought with- 
in the domain of Ideas. That which was a part of the 
objective world becomes also a part of the subjective 
world ; a necessary part of the thoughts of the theorist. 
And in this way the progress of true theoiy is the 
IdealizaHon qf Fetets, 



302 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

Thus the Progress of Science consists in a per^ 
petiud reduction of Facts to Ideiis. Portions are per- 
]>etually transferred fiom one side to another of the 
Fundamental Antithesis: namely, from the Objective 
to the Subjective side. The Centre or Fulcrum of the 
Antithesis is sliifteil by every movement which is 
made in the advance of science, and is shifted so that 
the ideal side gains something from the real side* 

3, I will proceed to illustrate this Proposition a , 
little further. Necessary Truths belong to the Sub- 
jective, Obseiwod Facts to the 0]>jective side of our 
knowledge. Now in the progress of that exact 
speculative knowledge wliieh wo call Science, Facts 
which were at a jirevioua period merely Oi>scrvcd 
Facts, come to be known as Neceasary Truths; and 
the attempts at new advances in science generally 
introduce the representation of known truths of fact, 
as included in higher and wider truths, and therefore, 
so far, necessary. 

We may exemplify this progress in the history 
of the science of IMechanics. Thus the property of the 
lever, the inverse proportion of the freights and arms, 
was known as *i fact before the time of Aristotle, and 
known as no more ; for he gives many taiitastical and 
inapplicable reasons for tbe fact. B^it in the writings 
of Archimedes we find this fact brought within the 
domain of necessary truth. It was there transferred 
from the empirical to the ideal side of the Fundar 
mental Antithesis; and thus a progressive step was 
made in ^science. In like manner^ it was at first 
taken by Galileo as a mere foot of experience, that in 
a falling body, the velocity increases in proportion 
the time; but his followers have seen in this the 
necessary effect of the uniform force ofjj^vity. In 
like manner, Kepler’s empuical Laws vere shown by 
Newton to be necessary results of a central force 
attracting inversely as the square of the distance. 
And if it be still, ** even at present, doubtful wheitfi^r 
this is the necessary hm of a central forc^ as some 
philosophers have filainwned that it iSi tre cannot 
doubt that if mow or hereafter, tiliose phlloscpheri 



MODERN GERMAN PHILOSOPHY* 303 

could establish their doctrine as certain, they -would 
make on important step in science, in addition to 
those already made. 

And thus, such steps in science arc made, whenever 
empirical facta are discerned to be neceasaiy laws ; or, 
if I may be allowed to use a briefer expression, when- 
ever /acls are idealized. 

4. In oi-der to show Low widely this statement is 
applicabie, I will exemplify it in Hjine of the other 
^scienccs. 

In Chemistry, not to speak of earlier stops in 
the science, which might be presented as instances of 
the same genend process, we may remark that the 
analyses of various compounds into their elements, 
accorrling to the quantity of the elements, fonn a vast 
multitude of facts, which were previously einpii'ical 
only, but wliich are reduced to a law, and therefore 
to a certain kind of ideal necessity, by the discovery 
of their being com^iounded acconling to definite and 
multijde proportions. And again, this very law of 
definite proportions, which may at first be taken as 
a law given by experience only, it has been attempted 
to make into a iiecessaiy truth, by asserting that 
bodies must necessarily consist of atoms, and atoms 
must necessarily <jombine in definite small numbers. 
And however doubtful this Atomic Theory may at 
present be, it will not be questioned that any chemical 
])hilosopher who could establish it, or any other 
Theory which would produce an equivalent change 
in the aspect of the science, would mako^ a great 
scientific advance. And thus, in tliis Science also^ 
the Progress of Science consists in the transfer of 
fisLcts firom the empirical to the necessary side of 
the antithesis ; or, as it was before expressed, in the 
idealmation of &cts. 

5, We may illustrate the same process in the 
Natural History Sciences. The discovery of the 
prinoiple of Morphology in plants^ was the reduction 
of a vast mass of Facts to a^ Idea ; as Schiller said 
to Qdthe when he explained the discovoty ; although 
the latter, chei^iing a horror of the term 



304 PEIL080PHT OP BISCOTJEET* 

wHdbt perliaps is quite as commoa in as iu 

Qemany, was extremely vexed at being told tbat he 
possessed such furniture in his mind. The applioatiims 
of this Principle to special cases, for instance^ to 
Euphorbia by Brown, to Beseda by Lindley, have 
been attempts to idealize the facts of these special 
oases. 

6. We may apply th^ same view to steps in 
Science which are still under discussion ; — ^the question 
being, whether an advance has really been made iif 
science or not. For instance, in Astronomy, the 
Nebular Hypothesis has been propounded, as an 
explanation of many of the observed phenomena of 
the Universe If this Hypothesis could be conceived 
eyjfc to be established as a true Theory, this must be 
d<me by its taking into itself as necessary parts of 
the whole Idea, many Facts which have already been 
observed, such as the various form of nebulse ; — ^many 
Facts which it must require a long course of years to 
observe, such as tlic changes of nebulm from one form 
to another ; — and man;y facts which, so fiir as we can 
at present judge, are utterly at variance with the Idea, 
such as the motions of satellites, the relations of the 
material elements of planets, the existence of vegetable 
and animal life u|)on their surfaces^ But if all these 
Facts, when ftiUy studied, should appear to be in^ 
daded in the general Idea of Nebular Condensation 
according to Laws of Nature, the Facts so 
idealized would undoubtedly congtituto a very remark- 
able advance in science. But then, we are to recollect 
that we are not to suppose that the Facts will agree 
with the Ide^ merely because the Idea, considered hy 
itself, and without carefully attending to the Faets^ is 
a large and striking Idea. And we are also to re^ 
collect that the Facts ma^ be compared with anoth^ 
Idea, no less large and striking ; and that if we take 
into our account, (as, in forming an Idea of the CouiM 
of the Universe^ we must do,} not only vegetaUt ii|d 
animal, but aho human life, this other Idea 
likely to take into it a &r larger portion of the known 
Facts, than the Idea of the Nebular Hypothesise 



MOBBBK OmUAJSf PBILOSOPHT. . 305 

TM other Idea iirhich 1 speak of ja the Idea of Man 
as the principal Object in the Creation; to M^hose 
sufltenance and dev^opment the other parts of the 
TJnmrse are subservient as means to an end; and 
although, in oiir attempts to include all known Facts 
in this Idea, we again meet with many difficulttea, 
and find many trains of Facts which have no apparent 
odngruity with the Idea; yet we may say that, 
taking into account the Facts of man's mtollectual 
dnd moral condition, and his history, as well as 
the mere Facts of the material world, the di€i- 
culties and apparent incongruities aie far less 
when we attempt to idealize the Facts by reference 
to this Idea, of Man as the End of Creation, than ac- 
cording to the other Idea, of the World as ti|e 
result of Nebular Condensation, without any conce*- 
able Ebid or Purpose. I am now, of course, merely 
comparing these two views of the Universe, os sup- 
posed steps ill science, according to the general notion 
which 1 have just been endeavouring to explain, that 
a step in science is some Idealization of Facts. 

7. Perhaps it will be objected, tliat what I have 
said of the Idealization of Facts, as tho manner in 
which the progress of science goes on, amounts to 
no more than the u^ual expressions, that the progress 
of science consists in reducing Facts to Theories. 
And to this T reply, that the advantage at which I 
aim, by the expression which I have used, is this, to 
remind the reader, Fact and Theory, in every 
subject, are not marked by separate and prominent 
features of difference, but only by their * present 
opposition, which is a transient relation. They are 
related to each other no otherwise than as the poles 
of the fundamental antithesis : the point which 
separates those poles shifts with every advance of 
science ; and then, what vras Theory becomes Fact 
As I have already said elsewhere, a true Theory is a 
Fact/ a Fact is a familiar Theoxy. J£ we bear this 
in mind, we express the view on which I am new 
inaistmg wW we say that the progress ef soimee 
comets in reducing Facts to Theories. But I think 

* X 



3 o6 philosophy op disoovbbt. 

tiiat speaking of Ideas as opposed to Facts, ve express 
more pointedly the original Antithesis, and the 
subsequent identifioation of the Facts with the Idea. 
The expression appears to be simple and apt, when 
wo say, for instance, that the Facts of Geography are 
identified with the Idea of globular Eartli ; the Facts 
of Planetiiry Astronomy with tlic Idea of the Helio- 
centric system ; and ultimately, with tlio Idea of Uni- 
versal Gravitation. 

8. We may further remark, that though by suc- 
cessive atei>s in science, successm' Facts are reduced 
to Ideas, this process can never be complete. How- 
ever the j)oint may shift which bcpai*ates the two 
poles, the two ]x^lcs will always remain. However 
fiir the ideal element may extend, there will always 
be something beyond it. llowev^er f.u' the jdienomena 
may bo idealized, there will always remain some 
wliicJi are not idealized, and whicli are mere pheno- 
mena. This also is implied by mjikiiig our expressions 
refer to tlie fumlameiiial antithcHis : for because the 
antithesis is fundamental, its two elements will 
always be present j the objective as well as the 
subjective. And thus, in the contemplation of the 
universe, however much we understand, there must 
always be something which wc jlo not understand ; 
however far we may trace necessary timths, there 
must always bo things which are to our apprehension 
arbitrary : howev<‘r far we may extend the sphere of 
our internal world, in which wo feel power and see 
light, it must always be surroimded by our external 
world, in which wo see no light, and only feel resist- 
ance. Our subjective being is inclosed in an objective 
shell, which, though it seems to yield to our efforts, 
continues entire and impenetrable beyond our reach, 
and even enlarges in its extent while it appoars to 
give up to us a portion of its substance. 

II. Successive Germari Philosophies, 

9. The doctrine of the Fundamental AnUihesis 
of two elements of wMch the union is involved in atl 



MODBRN GEEMAN PHILOSOPHY. 307 

Ijcnowledge, and of which the separation is the task of 
all philosophy, affords us a special and distinct mode 
of criticizing the philosophies which have succeeded 
each other in the world ; and wo may apply it to the 
German Philosophies -of which we have s{)oken. 

The doctrine of the Fundamental Antithesis is briefly 
this : 

Thait in every act of knowledge (i) tftjere are two 
opposite elements which we 7 nay call Ideas and Percep-* 
Aons; but of which the opposition appears in various 
other antitlieses; as Thouglits and Things^ Theories 
and FactSy Necessary Trxdhs and Experiential Truths; 
and the like: (2) that our knowledge de/rives from the 
former of these elements^ nawdy our IdeaSy its form 
and character as knowledge, our Ideas of space and 
time being the necessary forms, for instance, of owr 
geometrical and arithnjnetical knowledge; (3) and in 
like mayvner, all our other knowledge involving a 
develop’ment of the ideal cojidUions of knowledge exists 
ing in our minds : (4) hut that though ideas axid per^- 
eeptions are thus separate elenunts in our philosophy, 
they cannot, in fact, he distingnishsd and separate, 
but are different aspects of the saim thing; (5) that the 
only way in which we can approach to truth is by 
gradually and successively, in one instance after 
amothsr, advancing from the perception to the idea; 
from the fact to the theory ; from the apprelmtsion of 
truths as actual Ic the apprehension of them as necessary, 
(6) This successive awl various progress from fact to 
theory constitutes the history of science; (7) apd tids 
progress, though always leading us mover to that 
central uniJty of which both the idea and the fact are 
emcmationsf ea/n never lead us to that point, nor to cmy 
msoiSurcMe proximity to ity or definite cotnpreJwifisiofi 
gf its plate and nalure, 

to. Now the doctrine being thus statech succes$ive 
sentence of the statement contain successive steps of 
German philosophy, as it has appeared in the series of 
c^ebrated authors whom I have named. ^ v , , 

Jdea^ and Perceptions or Sensations, being regarded 
W, the two elements of our knowledge Locke, or at 



308 PHlIiOSOPHY OP DIBOOYBET. 

least the successors of Locke, had rejected the former 
element, Ideas, and professed to resolve all our know^ 
ledge into Sensation. After this philosophy had pre- 
vailed for a time, Kant exposed, to the entire conviction 
of the great body of German speculators, the untenable 
nature of this account of our knowledge. He taught 
(one of tlio first sentences of the above statement) 
that (2) Owr knowledge derives from our Ideas its form 
and character as knowledge ; our Ideas of space and 
time being y for instaneCy t!ie necessary forms of oar geo- 
metrical and arithmetical knowledge, Fichte earned 
still further this view of our knowledge, as derived 
from our Icleas, or from its nature as knowledge ; and 
held that (3) all o%ir knowledge is a development of the 
ideal conditions of knowledge existing m ovr minds 
(one of our next following sentences). But when tlie 
ideal element of our knowledge was thus exclusively 
dwelt upon, it was soon seen that this ideal system 
no more gave a complete explanation of the real nature* 
of knowledge, than the old sensational doctrine had 
done. Both elements, Ideas and Sensations, must bo 
taken into account And this was attempted by 
Schelling, who, in his earlier works, taught (as wo 
have also stated above) that (4) Idea^ and Facts 
different aspects of the same ihin^ : — this thing, the 
central basis of truth in which both elements are in- 
volved and identified, being, in Schelling’s language, 
the AhsoluiCy while each of the separate elements is 
eubjected to condUions arising from their union. But 
this AJisolute, being a {x>int inaccessible to us, and 
inconceivable by us, as our philosophy teaches (as 
above), cannot to any purpose be made the basis of 
our philosophy : and accordingly this Philosophy of 
the Absolute has not been more permanent t^n its 
predecessors. Yet the philosophy of H^el, which 
still has a wide and powerful sway in Germany, is, 
in the main, a development of the same prindple as 
that of Sdtielling ; — the Identity of *the ide^ toft the 
fact ; and Hogel’s IdenMty-Systefj% is rather a more 
meftodtea^and technioaJr exposition of Schdliug’s 
Phttosoph^ of the Atwolute than a new systemi But 



MOI>ERN GERMAN PHILOSOPHY. 3O9 

H^gel traces the manifestation of the identity of the 
idea and tact in the progress of human knowledge > 
Olid thus in some measure approaches to our doctrine 
(above stated), that (/j) tits way in wlddk we approach 
to truth is by gradually and successively^ in one imtance 
after anotltsr^ that is, historically, cuii andng from ths 
perception to the idea, from the fact to ilte theory: while 
at the same time Hegel has^not carried out this view 
in any comprehensive or complete jiuuiuer, so as to 
sliow that (6) this pioress constitutes the history of 
science: and as with SchelHng, Ids system shows an 
entire want of the conviction (above expressed as 
})art of our doctrine), (7) that we can 'never, in our 
speculations reach or approach to the central imity 
of whidt, both idea and fact are emanations. 

1 1. This view of the relation of the Sensational 
School, of the Schools of Kant, Fichte, Schelling, and 
Hegel, and of the fundamental defects of all, may be 
further illustrated. It will, of course, l)e uuderstood 
that our illustratiou is given only as a slight and im- 
perfect sketch of these philosophies ; but their relation 
may perhaps become more apjiarent by the very brevity 
with which it is stated ; and the object of the present 
chapter is not the detailed criticism of systems, but 
this very relation of systems to each other. 

The actual and the ideal, the external and the in- 
ternal elements of knowledge, were called by the 
Crennans the objective and the subjective elements re- 
spectively. The forms of knowledge and especially 
space and time, were pronounced by Kaiit to be 
essentially subjective; and this view of the nature 
of knowledge, more fully unfolded and extended to 
all knowledge, became the s^ibjective ideality of Fichte, 
But the subjective and tlie objective are, as we 
havQ said, in their ultimate and supreme fom, one; 
and hence we are told of the subjective-objective, a 
phrase which has also been employed by Ittr. 
Coleridge. Fichte had spoken of the subjective ele- 
ment as the Me^ (das Ich); and of the olgective 
element as the Ifot-me, (das Kichi-Ichlj and has 
deuced the from the Me. Scheling, on the 



310 PniliOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT* 


contmry, laboured with great subtlety to deduce 
the Me fi*om the AhsohUe which includes both. And 
this Absolute, or Subjective-objective, is spoken of by 
Schell ing as unfolding itseU* into endless other anti- 
theses. It was held that from the assumption of such 
a principle might be deduced and exj^lained the oppo- 
sitions which, in the contemplation of nature, present 
themselves at every step, as leading points of gexveral 
philosophy : — for example, the opjK)&ition of matter as 
passive and active^ as dead and oryanhedy as nytcon- 
adorn or conscious; the opposition of individual and 
sipeciss^ of will and moral rule. And this antitlietical 
development was carried further by Hegel, who taught 
that the AKsoliite Idea developos itself so as to assume 
qualities, limitations, and seeming oppositions, and 
Aen completes the cycle of its develojiuicnt by return- 
ing into unity, 

1 2. That there is, in the history of Hcicnce, much 
which easily lends iisolf to such a formula, the views 
which I have endeavoured to expound, show and ex- 
emplify in detail. But yet the attmnpts to cany this 
view into detail by conjecture — by a sort of divination 
— ^with little or no attention to the historical progress 
and actual condition of knowledge*, (and such siro those 
which have been made by the philosophers whom I 
have mentioned,) have led to arbitrary and baseless 
views of almost every branch of knowledge. Such 
oppositions and differences as arc found to exist in, 
nature, are assumed as the representatives of the 
elements of neccssarj^ antitheses, in a manner in which 
scientific ti'uth and inductive reasoning are altogether 
slighted. Thus, this peculiar and necessary auU* 
thetical character is assumed to be displayed in 
attraction and repulsion, in contrip(*tal and centrifugal 
forces, in a supposed positive and negative electrimtyi 
in a supposed positive and negative magnetism; in 
still more doubtful positive and negative elemenf^ of 
light and heat ; in the different elements of the atmo- 
sphere, which are, quite groundlessly, assumed to have a 
imuliar antithetic^ chan^r : in animal and v^ei- 
; able life : in the two sei^^ : in gravity and li{^ 



^omm gbrSean philosophy. 311 

These ^ and many others, are given by Schelling, as 
instances of the radical opposition of forces and ele-* 
ments which necessarily pervades all nature. I con- 
ceive that the heterogeneous and eiToneous principles 
involved in these views of the material world show us 
how unsiifo and misleading is the philosophical as- 
sumption on which they rest. And the Triads of 
Hegel, consisting of Thesis, A^ntithesis, and Union, arc 
still more at variance with all sound science. Thus 
T^e are told that matter and motion are determined as 
iwrliay impuhioji, fall ; that Absolute Mechanics de- 
termines itself as c&ntripelal force^ centinfugal force^ 
universtd gravitation. Light, it is taught, is a secon- 
daiy determination of matter. Light is the most 
intimate element of nature, and miglit be called the 
Me of nature : it is liuiit<^ by what we may call 
negative light, which is darkness. 

13. In these rash and blind attempts to construct 
physical science h priori^ we may see how imperfect 
the Hegelian doctrines are as a complete pliilosophy. 
In the views of moral and political subjects the results 
of such a scheme are naturally less obviously absiud, 
and may often be for a mom<mt striking and attme- 
tive, os is usually the case with attempts to reduce 
history to a formula. Thus we arc told that ih 4 ^ 
/Stofe appears under llie following determinations; — first 
as one, substantial, self-included : next, varied, indivi- 
dual, active, disengaging itself from the substantial and 
motionless unity : next, as two principles, altogether 
distinct, and placed fi*ont to front in a marked and 
active opposition : then, arising out of the ruifis of the 
preceding, the idea appears afresh, one, identical, 
harmonious. And the J^t, Greece, Rome, Germany, 
are declared to be the historical forms of these succes- 
sive determinations. Whatever amount of real his» 
torical colour there niay be for this representation, it 
will hardly, I think, be accepted as evidence of a pro- 
found political philosophy ; but on such parts of the 
flubjeet I shall not here dwell 

14, I may observe that in the series of philosophi- 
cal systems now describe^ the two elements pf the 



3ZS FHILOSOFBT OF OXSCOVBBT. 

V 

FandaJQeutal Antitheds are altematdtj dwelt upon 
in an exaggerated degree^ and then confounded. The 
Sensational School could see in human knowledge 
nothing but facta : Kant and Fichte fixed their atten- 
tion almost entirely upon ideas : Schelling and lli^el 
assume the identity of the two, (a point we never can 
reach,) as the origin of their philosophy. The exter- 
nal world in Locke’s school was all in all. In the 
speculations of Kant this external world became a dim 
and unknown region, Things were acknowledged to 
be soniethmg in themselves, but what^ the philosopher 
could not tell. Besides the plic^ionhenon which we 
see, E^nt acknowknlged a nouTtienon which we think 
of ; but this assumption, for such it is, exercises no 
influence upon his philosophy. 

15, We may for the sake of illustration imagine to 
ourselves each system of philosophy os a Drama in 
which Things are the Dramatis Persona; and the Idea 
which governs the systcmi is the Plot of the drama. 
In Kant’s Drama, Things in themselves are merely a 
kind of *Mute Personages,’ ic<i><^d TTpocrooTro, which stand 
on the stage to be pointed at and talked about, but 
which do not tell us anything, or enter into the action 
of the piece. Fichte carries this fuiijher, and if we go 
on with the same illustration, we m^y say that he makes 
the whole drama into a kind of Monologue ; in which 
the author tolls the story, and merely names the 
persons who appear. If we would still carry on the 
image, we may say that Schelling, going upon the prin- 
ciple that the whole of the drama is merely a progress 
to the l)enouemeui, which denouement contains the 
result of all the preceding scenes and events, stkrts 
with the last scene of the piece ; and bringing all the 
characters on the stage in their final attitudes, would 
elicit the stoiy firom thia While the true mioda of 
proceeding is, to follow, the drama Beene by Scene, 
learning as much as we can of the Action and the 
Characters, but knowing that we shall not be allowed 
to see the Denouement, and that to do so is probably 
not the lot of our species on earth. So far as any 
philosopher has thus followed the historical progress of 



MODERN GERMAN FHItOSOPHT. $1^ 

tike grand Bp^t^cle offered to the eyes of speculatiye 
moOf in which tibe Phenomena of Nature are the 
Scenes, and the Theoiy of them the Plot, he has taken 
the comse by which knowledge really has made its ad- 
vances. But those who have partially done this, have 
often, like Hegel, assumed that they had dinned the 
whole eourso and end of the story, and have thus 
criticised the scones and .the charactoi*s in a spirit 
^uite at variance with that by whicli any real insight 
into the import of the representation can be obtained. 

If it be asked wliich position we can assign, in this 
dramatic illustration, to those who Ik ?Id that all our 
knowledge is derived from facts only, and who reject 
the supposition of ideas; we may say that they look 
on with a belief that the drama has no plot, and that 
these scenes are improvised without connexion or pur- 
pose. 

1 6. I will only offer one more illnstration of the 
relative position of those successive philosophies. Kant 
compares the change which he iatioduced into philoso- 
phy to the change which (ytipeniicus introduced into 
astronomical theoiy. When Copernicus found that 
nothing could be made of the phenomena of the hea- 
vens so long as everything was maile to tuni round 
the spectator, he tped whether the matter might not 
be better explained if he made the spectator turn, and 
left tho stars at rest. So Kant conceives that our 
experience is regulated by our own faculties, as the 
phenomena of the heavens are regulated by our own 
motions. But accepting and caiTyiiig out this illus- 
tration, we may say that Kant, in explaining *the phe- 
nomena of tho heavens by means of the motions of the 
earth, has almost forgotten that the planets have their 
own proper motions, and has given us a system which 
hardly explains anything besides broadest appearances, 
such as the annual and daily motions of the sun; and 
that Fichte appears as if he wislied to deduce all the 
motions of the planet;^ as well as of the sun, from the 
conditions of the spectator; — while Schelling goes to 
the origin of the system, like Descartes, and is not 
oontent to diow how the bodies move, without also 



314 PHILOSOPHY OP PISCOVEBT. 

proving that from some assumed original condition, 
all the movements and relations of the system must 
necessarily be what they are. It may be that a theory 
which explains how the planets, with their orbits and 
accom]>aniinente, hav6 come into being, may offer itself 
to bold spcculatoi-s, like those who have framed and 
produced the nebular hypothesis. But I need not 
remind my roiiders* eithey how pr(.H3arious such a 
hypothesis is; or, that if it be capable of being con- 
sidered probable, its proofs must gradually dawn upoif 
us, step by step, age after age : and that a system of 
doctiiue which assumes siieh a selieme as a certain 
and fundamental truth, and deduces the whole of 
astronomy from it, must ueeds bo arbitrary, and liable 
to the gravest error at every stop. Such a precarious 
and premature philosophy, at best, is that of Schclling 
and Jfcgel ; especially as applied to those sciences in 
which, by the past progress of all sure knowledge, we 
are taught what the real aause and progress of know- 
ledge is : while at the «ime time we may allow that all 
those forms of pliilosophy, sinco they do recognize the 
condition and motion of the spectator, as a necessary 
element in the explanation of the phenomoua, are a 
largo advance upon the Ptolemaic scheme — the view of 
those who appeal to phenomena alone as the source of 
our knowledge, and say tliat the sun, the moon, and the 
planets move as we see them move, and that all further 
theory is imaginary and fantastical. 



CHAPTER XXV. 


The Fundamental Antithesis as it exists in the 
Mobal Wobld. 


have hitherto ^okcn of the Fundamental 
• V T Antithesis as the ground of our speculations 
concerning the material world, at least maiidy. Wo 
have indeed been led by the physical sciences, and es- 
pecially by Biology, to^the borders of Psychology. We 
have had to consider not only the mechanical etfects of 
muscular contraction, but the sensations wliich the 
nerves receive and convey : — the way in which sensar 
tioiis become perceptions ; the way in which perceptions 
determine actions. In this manner we have been led 
to the subject of volition or will \ and this brings us 
to a now^ field of speculation, tlie moral nature of man ; 
and tliis moral nature is a matter not only of specula- 
tive but of pi'acticjil interest. On this subject I shall 
make only a few brief I'emarks. 

2. Even in the most purely speculative view, the 
moral aspect of man’s nature difters from the aspect oi 
the material universe, in this respect, that in the 
moral world, external events arc governed in some 
measure by the human will. When wo Speculate 
concerning the laws of material nature, we suppose 
that the phenomena of nature follow a coui’sc and 
order which we may perhaps, in some measure, dis- 
cover and understand, but which we cannot change 
or control. But when we consider man as an agent, 
we suppose him able to determine some at least of 
the events of the external world; and thus, able to 
determine the actions of other men, and to lay down 


1 



3 i6 philosophy op discovebt. 

laws for them. He cannot alter the propertied of 
fire and metals, stones and fluids, air and light; but he 
can use fire and steel so as to compel other men’s actions j 
stone-walls and ocean-shores so as to control other 
men’s motions ; gold and gems so as to have a hold on 
other men’s desiros; articulate sounds and intelligible 
symbols so as to direct other men’s thoughts and znoYO 
their will. There is an external world of Facts ; and 
in this, the Facts are such as he makes them by his 
Acts. 

3. But besides this, there is also, standing over 
against this external world of Facts, an internal world 
of Ideas. The Moral Acts without are the results of 
Moral Ideas within. Men have an Idea of Justice, for 
instance, according to which they are led to external 
acts, as to ust^ force, to make a promise, to perform a 
contract, as individuals ; or to make war and peace, to 
enact laws and to execute them, as a nation. 

4. Some such interaal moral Idea necessarily ex- 
ists, along with all properly human actions. Man feels 
not only pain and anger, but indignation and the senti^ 
inent of ’wrong, which feelings imply a moral idea of 
right and wrong. Again, what he thinks of as wrong, 
he tries to prevent ; what he deems right, he attempts 
to realize. The Idea gives a chiv^acter to the Act; 
the Act embodies the Idea. In the moral world as in 
tbe natural world, the Antithesis is universal and in- 
separable. It is an Antithesis of inseparable elements. 
In human action, there is ever involved the Idea of 
what is right, and the external Act in which this idea 
is in some measure embodied. 

5. But the moral Ideas, such as that of Justice, 
of Bightness, and the like, are always embodied 
completely in the world of external action. Althofi|^t 
men’s actions are to a great extent governed by Se 
Ideas of Justice, Bightness and the like; (for it must 
be recollected that we include in their action^ lawii^ 
and the enforcement of laws;) yet there is a 
portion of human actions which is not govern^ by sudh 
ideas : (actions which result from mere desire, ^ 
violations of law), llliere is a perpetual Antithesis 



THE ANTITHESIS IN MORALS. 317 

I<Ieas and Facts, whicli is tLe fundamexita! basis of 
moml as of natural xihilosophy. In the former as in 
the latter subject, besides what is ideal, there is an 
Actual which the ideal does not include. This Actual 
is the region in which the results of mere desire, of 
caprice, of apparent accident, are found. It is the 
region of histoiy, as opposed to justice; it is the 
region of what is, as distinct from what ought to be. 

6. Now what I aspecially wish here to remark, is 
1;his ; — that the progress of man as a moral being con- 
sists in a constant extension of the Idea into the region 
of Facts. This progi’ess consists in making human 
actions conform more and more to the moral Ideas of 
Justice, Bightness, and the like; including in hnman 
actioiis, as we have said, Laws, the enforcement of 
Laws, and other collective acts of bodies of men. The 
History of Man as Man consists in this extension of 
moral Ideas into the region of Facts. It is not that 
the actual history of what men do has always consisted 
in such an extension of moral Ideas; for there has 
ever been, in the actual doings of men, a large portion 
of facts which had no moral character ; acts of desire, 
deeds of violence, transgressions of acknowledged law, 
and the like. But such events are not a part of the 
genuine progress humanity. They do not belong to 
the history of man as man, but to the history of map 
as brute. On the other hand, there are events which 
belong to the history of man as man, events which 
belong to the genuine progress of humanity; such as 
the establishment of just laws ; their enfbrcement ; 
their improvement by introducing into them* a fuller 
measure of moral Ideas. By such means there is a 
constant progress of man as a moral being. By this 

of moral Ideas there is a constant progress 
of Humanity. 

7 , I have made this reflection, because it appears 
to me to bring into view on analogy between the pro- 
gress of Science and the Progress of Man, or of Hu^ 
numity, in the sense ja which I have used the. term. 
In both these lines of Pre^pess, Facts are more and 
more identified with Ideas. In both, there is a funda- 



3i8 philosophy op discovbbt^ 

mental Antithesis of Ideas and Facsts, and progress; 
consists in a constant advance of the point whicK 
separates the two elements of this Antithesis. In 
both, Facts are constantly won over to the domain of 
Ideas. But still, there is a difierence in the two cases ; 
for in the one case the Facts are beyond our control. 
Wc cannot make them other than they are ; and all 
that wc can do, if we can dp that, is to shape our Ideas 
so that they shall coincide with the Facts, and still 
have the manifest connexion which belongs to them arf* 
Ideas. In the other case, the Facts are, to a certain 
extent, in our power. They are what we Tiiake them, 
for they are what we do. In this cjisc, the Facts ought 
to come towards the Ideas, rather than the Ideas 
towards the Facts. As we called the former process 
the Idealization of Facts, we may call this the Ecaliza- 
tion of Ideas ; and the analogy which I have here 
wished to bring into view may be expressed by saying, 
that the Progress of Physical Science consists in a 
constant successive Idealization of Physical Facts ; and 
the Progress of man’s Moral Being is a constant suc- 
cessive Bealiziition of Moral Ideas. 

8, Thus the necessary co-cxistence of an objective 
and a subjective element belongs not only to human 
knowledge, as was before explained^ but also to human 
action. The objective and the subjective element are 
inseparable in this case as in tlie otlier. We have al- 
ways the Fact of Positive Law, along with the Idea of 
Absolute Justice; the Facts of Gain or Loss, along 
with the Idea of Bights. The Idea of Justice is in- 
separable from historical facts, for justice gives to each, 
his own, and history determines what that is, , We 
cannot even conceive justice without society, or society’ 
mthout law, and thus in the moral and in tiie natur^ 
world the fundamental antithesis is inseparable, even 
in tl^ught. The two elements must always subsist ; for 
however fetr the moral ideas be realized in the world, 
there trill always remain much in tlie world which is 
not conformable to moral ideas^ oven if it were only 
through its neccesary dependence on an unmoral and 
immoral past. As in the physical world so m the 



THE ANTITHESIS IN MORALS. • 319 

morale however much the ideal sphere expands, it is 
surrounded by a region which is not conformable to 
the idea» although in one case the expansion takes 
place by educing ideas out of facts, in the other, by 
pix)ducing facts from ideas. 

I shall hereafter venture to pursue further this 
train of speculation, but at present I shall mako some 
remarks on writers who nviy bo regarded as the suc- 
cessors amongst ourselves of theso German schools of 
PMlosophy. 



CHAPTER XXVt 

Of the “Philosophy op the IifFum®.” 


f 


I N the last Chapter but one T stated that Schclling 
propounded a Philosophy of the Absolute, the Abso- 
lute being the original basis of trutli in which the two 
opposite elements, Ideas and Facts, are identified, and 
that Hegel also founded hi^. philosophy on the Identity 
of these two elements. These German philosophies 
appear to me, as 1 have ventured to intimate, of small 
or no value in their bearing on the history of actual 
science. I have in the history of the sciences noted 
instances in which tliese wiiters seem to me to miscon- 
ceive altogether the nature and meaning of the facts of 
scientific history; as where* Bchelling condemns New- 
ton’s Opticks cM a fiibric of fallacies ; and where” Hegel 
says that the glory due to Kepler has been unjustly 
transferred to Newton. As it appears to me important 
that English philosupliers should £>nu a just estimate 
of Hegel’s capacity of judging and pronouncing on this 
subject, 1 will print in the Appendix a specif discus- 
sion of what he has said respecting Newton’s dis- 
covery of the law of gravitation. 

Receiitly attempts have been made to explain to 
English r^ers these interns of German phlloecphyi 
and in these attempts there are some points which may 
deserve our notice as to their bearing on the philosophy 
of science. I find some difficulty in discussing these 
attempts, for they deal much with phrases which ap- 
pear to me to offer no grasp to man’s power of reason. 
What, for instance, is the Ahsohute^ which occsupies m 








PH^OSOFHT OF THE INPINITB. 

place in these expositions^ It is, as I have 
stated, in ^helliiig, the central basis of truth in which 
thipgs and thoughts are united and identified. To at- 
tempt ^ reason about such an Absolute^’ appears to 
me to 1^ an entire misapprehension of the power of rea- 
son. Again ; one of the most eminent of the expositors 
has spoken of e^h system of this kind as a PhUoaophy 
of the Unconditioned^ But what, we must asic, is the 
Unconditioited 1 That which is subject to no con- 
ditions, is subject to no conditions which distinguish it 
from any thing else, and so, cannot be a matter of 
thought. But again ; this Absolute or Unconditioned is 
(if I rightly understand) said to be described also by 
various other names; unity ^ identity y auhstaocej abaofvie 
ea/uae, the infinitCy pure thought y <&c. As each of these 
terms expresses some condition on which the name fixes 
our thoughts, I cannot undei‘stand why they should any 
of them be called the U nconditioned, and as they ex- 
press very difterent thoughts, I cannot understand why 
they should be called by the same name From specu- 
lations starting from such a |K)int, I can expect nothing 
but confusion and jHjrplexity ; nor can I find that any- 
thing else has come of them. They appear to me more 
barren, and more certain to lie bari’en, of any results 
which have any pla^c in our real knowledge, than the 
most barren speculations of the schoolmen of the mid- 
dle ages : which indeed they much resemble in all their 
features — their acuteness, their learniug, their ambi- 
tious aim, and their actual failure. 

2 . But leaving the Absolute and the Uncopdition- 
ed, as nptionB which cannot be dealt with by our reason 
without £^ng something entirely different from their 
defibitiotis, we may turn for a moment to another no- 
tion which is combined with them by the expositors of 
whom I speak, and which has some beailng upon our 
positive science, becanse it enters into the reasonings of 
mathematics : I mean the notion of Infinite. Soi&e of 
those who hold that we can know nothing concerning 


» CHr W. Hsauilon*! Koto on Oto ThiSUmntva pf ^ rtpfsaAmmd. 



322 


PHILOSOPHT OP DISCOVERT. 


the Absolute and the TTnconditioned, (which tibej 
pretend to prove, though concerning auch words 1 ^ 
not oono^ve that anything can be true or ftlse,) 
also that the Infinite is in the same condition 
we can know nothing concerning what is Infinite 
therefore, I presume, nothing concerning infinite spaee» 
infinite time, infinite number, or infinite degrees. 

To disprove this doctrine, it might be sufficient to 
point out that there is a vast mass of mathematical 
science which includes the notion of infinites, aiA 
leads to a great body of propositions concerning Infi-* 
nites. The whole of the infitesimal calculus depends 
upon conceiving finite magnitudes divided into an in* 
finite number of parts : these parts are infinitely small, 
and of these parts there are other infinitesiinal parts 
infinitely smaller still, and so on, as far as we please 
to go. And even those methods which shun the term 
as Newton’s method of Ultimate Ratios, the 
method of Indivisibles, and the method of Exhaustions 
of the ancient geometers, do really involve the notion 
of infinite ; for they imply a process continued without 
limit. 

3, But perhaps it will be more useful to point out 
the fallacies of the pretended proofs that we can know 
nothing concerning Infinity and infinite things. 

The argument offered is, that of infinity we have no 
notion but the negation of a limit, and tliat from 
native notion no positive result can be deduced 

But to this I reply: It is not at all true that 
^ notion ,of what is infinite is merely that it is UkoJt which 
has no limit. We must ask further that that 

space? that time? that number? — ^And if that spaoe^ 
that what kind of space? That line? that surfime? 
that ipUd space? — ^An4 if that line, that line boiui^^ 
at one that surffioe^ tki^t auiA^ 

bounded on one^ or on two, or on three aides? or on 
none? However any of these questions are fmawutnd, 
we may stUI have an infinite space, ^lill ihey are 
answered, we can assert nothing about the' space; not 
because we can assert uothing about infinites; but 
because we are net told whi^ %ind of infinite we are 
talking o£ 



PatniDSOPflT OP tHB INPINltB. 323 

In reality the definitiozL of an Infinite Quantity is 
not negative merely, but contains a positive part as 
vdl. We assume a quantity of a certain kind which 
may be augmented by carrying onward its limits in 
one or more directions; this is a finite quantity of a 
given kind. We then — ^when we have thus positively 
determined the kind of the quantity — suppose the 
limit in one or more directions to be annihilated, and 
thus we have an infinite quantity. But in this infinite 
*qaantity there remain the positive properties firom 
which we began, as well as the negative property, 
the negation of a limit; and the positive properties 
joined with the negative property may and do supply 
grounds of reasoning respecting the infinite quantity. 

4. This is lore so elementary to mathematicians 
that it appears almost puerile to dwell upon it ; but this 
seems to have been overlooked, in the proof that we can 
have no knowledge concerning infinites. In such proof 
it is assumed as quite evident, that all infinites are 
equal. Yet, as we have seen, infinites may differ infi- 
nitely among themselves, both in quantity and in kind. 
A German writer is quoted* for an “ingenious” proof 
of this kind. In his writings, the opponent is supposed 
to urge that a line BAG may be made infinite by 
carrying the extremity G infinitely to the rights and 
again infinite by carrying the extremity B infinitely to 
the left; and thus the line infinitely extended both 
ways would be double of the line infinite on one side 
only. The supposed reply to this is, that it cannot 
so, because one infinite is equal to another ; and more- 
over that what is bounded at one end Ay cannot be 
infinite: both which assumptions are without the 
smallest ground. That one infinite quantity may be 
double of another, is just as dear and certain tis that 
ofie fiiuto quantity may. For instancy if one leaf of 
the book which the reader has before him were pro- 
duced infinitely upwards it would be an infinite space, 
though bounded at the bottom and at both sides. If 


« WeMnf^ls Stt Mr. MwomI’s Ledure$, 11 NolS 15 * 

T 2 



3*4 PflIWSOPHY Of WSOOVERT. 

the other leaf were in like manner produced infinitely 
upwards it would in like manner be infinite; and the 
two together^ though each infinitei would be double of 
either of them. 

5. As I have said, infinite quantities are conceived 
by conceiving finite quantities increased by the transfer 
of a certain limit, and then by n^ativing this limit 
altogether. And thus an^infiuito number is conoeiv-' 
ed by assuming the series i, 2, 3, 4, and so on, u]g 
to a limit, and then removing this limit altogether. 
And this shows the baselessness of another argument 
quoted from Wereiifele. The opponent asks, Are there 
in the infinite line an infinite number of fbetl Then 
in the double line there must bo twice as many ; and 
thus the former infinite number did not contain aJl the 
(possible) unities ; (numerus infinitus non omnes habet 
unitates, sed prseter eum concipi i)o&sunt totidem um- 
tates, quibus ille careat, eique possunt addi). To which 
I reply, that the definition of an infinite number is not 
that it contains all possible imities; but this — ^that 
the progress of numeration being begun according to 
a certain law, goes on without limit. And accordingly 
it is easy to conceive how one infinite number may be 
larger than another infinite number, in any proportion. 
If, for instance, we take, instead of the progression of 
the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. and the progression of 
the square numbers i, 4, 9, 16, &c. any term of the 
latter series will be greater than the corresponding term 
of the other series in a ratio constantly increasing, and 
the infinite term of the one, infinitely greater tbm the 
corresponding infinite term of the other. 

6. In the some manner we form a conception of in* 
finite time, l>y supposing time to begin now, and to go 
on, after tw nature of time, without limit ; or by going 
back in thought from the present to a p^ nnd 
by continuing this retrogression without limit, .^d 
thus we have time infimte a parte emte and ct pm/ria 
pasty as the phrase used to run; and time infinite b^ 
ways includes both, and is the most complete notion of 
eternity. 

7. Perhaps those who thus maintain that we cannot 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE INFINITE. 325 

coneeiTe anything infinite, mean that we cannot form 
to ourselves a definite image of anything infinite. And 
this of course is trua We cannot form to ourselves an 
image of anything of which one of the characteristics 
is that it is, in a certain way, unlimited.' But this im- 
possibility does not prevent our reasoning about infinite 
quantities; oombining as elements of our reasoning, the 
absence of a limit with othdr positive characters. 

. 8. One of the consequences which is drawn by the 
assertors of the doctrine that we cannot know any- 
thing about Infinity, is that we cannot obtain from 
science any knowledge concerning God : And I have 
been the more desirous to show the absence of proof of 
this doctrine, because I conceive that science doeB give 
Us some knowledge, though it be very little, of the 
nature of God : as I shall endeavour to show here- 
after. 

For instance, I conceive that when we say that Ood 
is iin etenud Being, this phiuseology is not empty 
and unmeaning. It has been used by the wisest and 
most thoughtfd men in all ages, and, as 1 conceive, 
may be used with undiminished, or with increased 
IHopriety, after all the light which science and phi- 
losophy have thrown upon such declarations. The 
reader of Newton will recollect how emphatically he 
uses this expression along with others of a cognate 
character* God is eternal and infinite,... that is, He 
endures ftom eternity to eternity, and is present from 
infinity to infinity.. .He is not eternity and infinity, 
but eternal and infinite. He is not duration ai^d space, 
but He endures and is present He endures always, 
&nd is present eveiywhere, and by existing always and 
everywhere He constitutes duration and space.” We 
dfftll see shortly that the viewto which we ere led may 
be very fitly expressed by this language. 

But I will first notice some other aspects of this 
philbeophy. 


< SfMiim Omtrtdt at tli6 end of the 



CHAPTER XXVIL 


Sib William Hakiltob on Inertia and Weight. 


I N a preceding chapter I have spoken of Sir William 
Hfiunilton as the expositor, to English readers, of 
modem German systems, and especially of the so-called 
“Philosophy of the Unconditioned.** But the same 
vrriter is also noticeable as a continuator of the specu- 
lations of English and Scottish philosophers concerning 
primaiy and secondary qualities; and these specula- 
tions b^r so far upon the philosophy of science that it 
is proper to notice them here. 

I. In our survey of the sciences, we have spoken of 
a class which we have termed the Secondary Mechani- 
cal Sciences; these being the sciences which explain 
certain sensible phenomena, as sound, light, and heat, 
by means of a medium interposed between external 
bodies and our oigans of sense, dn these cases, we 
ascribe to bodies certain qualities : we call them reso- 
nant, bright, red or green, hot Or cold. But in the 
sciences which relate to these subjects, we explain these 
qualities by the figure, size and motions of the parts 
of the qie^um which intervenes between the oljeot 
and the ear, eye, or other sensible organ. And those 
former qualities, sound, warmth and colour, are called 
%ecmdary qualitieB of the bodies; while the latter, 
figure, size and motion, are called the primary qwUir 
ties of body. 

2. This distincUon, in its substance, is of great an- 
tiquity. The atomic theory which was set up aA an 
early period of Greek philosophy was an attempt to 
account for the seconda^ qualities of bodies by means 
of their primary qualities. And this is really the 
scientific ground of the distinction. Those are primary 



HAMILTON ON SECONDAHY QUALITIES. 327 

qualities or attributes of body by means of which we, 
in a scieutifio view^ explain and derive their other 
qualities. But the explanation of the sensible quali- 
ties of bodies by means of their opemtion through a 
medium has till now been very defective, and is so 
still. We ^ve to a certain extent theories of Sound, 
Light and Heat, which reduce these qualities to scales 
and standards, and in some measure account mechani- 
cally for their differences and gradations. But we have 
as yet no similar theory of Smells and Tastes. Still, 
we do not doubt that fragrance and flavour are per- 
ceived by means of an aerial medium in which odours 
float, and a fluid medium in which sapid matters are 
dissolved. And the special odour and flavour which 
are thus perceived must depend upon the size, figure, 
motion, number, &c. of the particles thus conveyed to 
the organs of taste and smeU : that is, those secondary 
qualities, os well as the others, must depend upon the 
primary qualities of the parts of the medium. 

3. In this way the distinction of primary and second- 
ary qualities is definite and precise. But when men 
attempt to draw the distinction by guess, without any 
scientific principle, the separation of the two classes is 
vague and various. I have, in the History of Scientific 
pointed 01^ some of the variations which are 
to be found 011 this subject in the writings of jjhilo- 
sophers. Sir William Hamilton’ has given an accouijt 
of many more which he has compared and analysed 
with great acuteness. He has shown how this distinc- 
tion is treated, among others, by the ancient atomists, 
Leucippus and Democritus, by Aristotle, Qalen, Gar 
lileo^ Descartes, Boyle, Malebranche, Locke, Beid, 
Stewarty Boyer-Coll^. Ho then proceeds to give 
his own view; which is, that we may most properly 
divide the qualities of ladies into thr^ classes wbidh 
he calls Primaryf Seemdo-primary^ and Seeonda/^. 
The fonner he enumerates as r, Extension; 2, Divisi- 
bility; Size; 4, Density or Barity; 5, Figure; 


1 B.lv.aL 

s Keld'B iror1», Sappkme&taiy miaertatlim D. 



3s 8 tEuiiOiifiQfBT oar 

tioQ. ' ^ Q«Mritf , OolMaktOf 

'{fieitiai, ' f!ti« mo^dme^r Mre those oont* 

sMxilj B> (^ed, Ooloar, .^hbwI, Havout, 8«vour, and 
Tnttttctd 3ed!satioit} ton vrhioh he says may be added 
th^* ^lAsciilar and cutaneous sensation which accom- 
pany the perception of the Secundo-primary qualitLea. 
^‘Sttchy though leas directly the result of foreign 
causes, ate Titillation, Sneezing, Horripilation, Shud- 
dering, the feeling of what is c^led Setting-the-teeth* 
on-edge, ifcc.” 

The Secundo-primary qualities Sir William Haanil* 
ton traces in further detail. He explains that with 
reference to Gravity, bodies are heav^ or lujht. With 
reference to Cohesion, there are many coordinate pairs^ 
of which he enumerates these: — Jm/rd and ao/h; firm 
and fiuid, — the fluid being subdivided into and 
Ain; viscid and friable; tough and brittle; rigid and 
fkxMe ; JiasUe and infisaile; ductile and inductile; retrae^ 
tile and irretractile; rimgh and smooth; slippery and 
tenoMoUfS, With reference to Repulsion he gives these 
qualities: — compressHble and incompressible; blastlc and 
ifhelastic. And with reference to Inertia he mentions 
only moveable and immoveable, 

I do not see what advantage is gained to phibsophy 
by such an enumeration of qualities as tUi^^ whichy 
alter all, does not pretend to completeness; nor do X 
see anything either precise or fundamental in such 
distinctions as that of elasticity, a mode of cohesioD, 
and elasticity, a mode of repulsion. But a question in 
which our j^ilosophy is really concerned is how Aeix 
any of these <]^ualiti6s are umversal qualities of matter. 
Sir W. Hamilton holds that they are none of them 
necessary qualities of matter, and therefore of course 
not univerml, and argues this point at some length* 
With regard to one of his Secundo-primary qualitieiy 
I will make some lemarka 

4* discussing the Ideas which enter iis* 

to the Mechanioal Sciences*, X have stated that the Idea 






tSAxn/r^^ OK Ikkkvu. 

of Ibrcea&d * 

are theneoe 38 aigir^i»Q^y|p)^ 

1*01:00 eaniiot aot to aot 

coanot exist witbetit Fot^ to keqi ita to^tiber 
and to keep it in its place. But Fprce OctiM 
matter may either be Force producing rest^ o^F^hse 
produdng motion. If we consider Force producing 
motion^ the motion produced, that is, the Velocity 
jproduced) must depend upon the quantity of matter 
moYed. It cannot be that the same x^ower, acting in 
the same way, shall produce the same velociiy 
pushing a small pebble and n. large rock. If this were 
so, we could have no science on sucli matters. It 
must needs be that the same force produces a smaller 
Telocity in the larger body; and this according to 
some measure of its largeness. The measure of the 
degree in which the body thus resists this communica- 
tion of motion is inertia. And the inertia is neces- 
sarily supposed to be proportional to the quantity of 
matter, because it is by this inertia that this existence 
and quantity of the matter is measured. If therefore 
any Soieqbe concerning Force and Matter is to exist, 
matter must have inertia, and the inertia must be 
proportional to tho quantity of matter. 

5. 8 m W. Hamiltcm, in opposition to this, says, 
that conceive a l^dy occupying space, and yet 

without attraction or repulsion for another body, and 
wholly indifierent to this or that X)08ition, in space, 
to motion and to rest. He infers thence that inertia 
is not a necessary quality of bodies. ^ 

To this I reply, that even if we can conceive such 
bodies, (which in fact man, living in a world of matter 
cannot conceive,) at any rate we cannot conceive any 
eeienee about such bodies. If bodies were indifferent 
to motion and rest, Forces could not be measured hf 
thfior effects; nor could be measured or known in any 
vray. Such bodies might float about like clouds, vfoi* 
Uo totibe eye, butinti^bley and governed by no laws 
of motion. But if we have any soienee about bodies, 
they must be tangible, and governed by laws of mo- 
tioxL No(^ then, from any observed ^properties of 



330 PHILOSOPHY OP OISOOVBRT. 

bodies, but from the possibilitj of anj science about 
bodies, does it follow that all b^ies have inertia. 

Gravity , — Beasoning of the same kind may be 
employed about weight. We can conceive, it is urged, 
matter without weight But I reply, we cannot con-* 
ceive a science which deals with matter that has no 
weight : — a science, I mean, which deals with the quan*» 
tity of matter of bodies, as atising from the sum of their 
elements. For the quantity of matter of bodies is and^ 
must be measured by those sensible properties of mat- 
ter which 'undergo quantitative addition, subtraction 
and division, as the matter is added, subtracted, and 
divided. The quantity of matter cannot be known 
in any other way. But this mode of measuring the 
quantity of matter, in order to be true tit all, must be 
univers^ly true. If it were only partially true — if 
some kinds of matter had weight and others had not — 
the limits of the mode of measuring matter by weight 
would be arbitrary : and therefore ^e whole procedure 
would be arbitrary, and as a mode of obtaining philo^ 
sophical truth, altogether futile. But we suppose 
ti*uth rcs^jecting the composition of bodies to be at- 
tainable; therefore we must suppose the rule, which is 
the necessary basis of such tntth, to be itself true. 

Sir W. Hamilton has replied te these arguments, 
but, as 1 conceive, without sheeting the force of them. 
I will repeat here the answer which I have already 
given^, and will reprint in the Appendix the Memoir 
by which his objections were occasioned. 

He says, (i), that our reasoning assumes that we 
must necema^y have it in our power to ascertain the 
Quantity of h&tter; whereas this may be a problem 
out of the reach of human determination. 

To this I reply, that my reasoning does assume that 
there is a science, or sciences, whi<£ make assertions 
conoeming the Quantity of Matter : Mechanics and 
Chemistry are such sciences. My assertion is, that tx> 
make such sdenoes possihle^ Quantity of Matter must 






HAHILTON ON WEIGHT. 


331 

proportional to Weight If my opponent deny that 
Meohanios and Chemistry can exist as science, he may 
invalidate my proof; but not otherwise, 

(2) He says that there are two conceivable ways of 
estimating the Quantity of Matter: by the Space occu- 
pied, and by the Weight or Inertia; and that I assume 
the second measure gratuitously. 

To which I reply, that the most elementary steps in 
Mechanics and in Chemistry contradict the notion that 
\he Quantity of Matter is proportionate to the Space. 
They proceed necessarily, on a distinction between 
Sp^e and Matter : — ^between mere Extension and ma- 
terial Substance. 

(3) He allows that wc cannot make the Extension of 
a body the measure of the Quantity of Matter, because 
he says, we do not know if ‘‘the compressing force” is 
such as to produce “ the closest compression.” That is, 
he assumes a compressing force, assumes a “closest com- 
pression,” assumes a peculiar (and very improbable) 
atomic hypothesis; and all this, to supply a reason why 
we are not to believe the first simple principle of 
Mechanics and Chemistry. 

(4) He speaks of “a scries of apparent fluids (aslight 
or its vehicle,; the Caloriflo, the Electro-galvanic, and 
Magnetic agents) vdiich we can neither denude of their 
character of substance, nor clothe with the attribute of 
weight.” 

To which my reply is, that premsely because I cannot 

clothe” these agents with the attribute of Weight, I 
do “ denude them of the character of Substance.” They 
are not substances, but agencies. These Imponderable 
Agents are not properly called “ Imponderable Fluida** 
This I conceive that I have proved ; and the proof is 
net* [^baken by denying the conclusion without showing 
angr defect in the reasoning. 

(5) Fmally, my critic speaks about “a logical canoiii’* 
and about “a criterion of truth, subjectively necessary 
and objectivelv ^certain . whi^ matters I shall not 
^iraste ike reaaeris time by discussing. 



CHAPTER XXVIIL 


Influence of Gekman Systems of Philosophy in 
Britain. 


T he philosophy of Kant, as I have already said, 
involved a definite doctrine on the subject of the 
Fundamental Antithesis, and a correction of some of the 
errors of Locke and his successors. It was not however 
at first favourably received among British philosophers, 
and those who accepted it wore judged somewhat ca- 
priciously and captiously. I will say a word on those 
points'. 

I. (Stewart) — Dugald Stewart, in his Dissertatim 
on the Progress of the Moral Sciences, repeatedly men- 
tions Kant’s speculations, and always unfavourably. 
In note I to Part 1. of the Dissertation he says, 
our own times, Kant and his followers seem to have 
thought that they had thrown a strong light on the 
nature of space and also of time, when they introduced 
the word form (form of the intellect) as a common 
term applicable to both. Is not this to revert to the 
scholastic folly of verbal generalization?” And in 
Part IL ^ho gives a long and laborious criticism of a 
portion of Kant’s spec^tions; of which the spirit 
may be collected from his describing them as resulting 
in ‘‘the metaphysical commdrum, that the human mind 
(considered as a no^mmon and not as a pherwmenar^ 
neither exists in sp^ nor time.” And after mention-* 
ing Meiners and H^er along with Kant^ he adda^ 


> The xemerke oontidBed In ibU LtUer lb ikt AvIBier ((f ProUgesma 
duq^erluKre for the moat pert been iogicot iSse. 

SlMdr printed and cireaUfced In a 



STEWART ON KANT. 


333 

** I am ashamed to say that in Great Britain the only 
one of these names which has been much talked of 
is Kant.” And again in Note EE, he translates some 
portion of the German pliilosopher, adding, that to the 
expressions so employed he can attach no meaning. 

Htewart, in his criticism of Kant’s doctrines, re- 
marks that^ in asserting tlmt the human mind pos« 
sesses, in its own ideas, aa element of necessaiy and 
universal tnith, not derived from experience, Kant had 
Hbeen anticipated by Price, by Cudwi)i'th, and even by 
Plato; to whose Tfiaa^tetus botli Price and Cudworth 
refer, as containing views similar to their own. And 
undoubtedly this doctrine of ideas, as indispensable 
sources of necessary truths, was promulgated and sup- 
ported by weighty arguments in tlie Tkeo'tetua; and 
has ev.er since been held by many philosophers, in 
opposition to tLe contmiy doctrine, also extensively 
hold, that all truth is derived from cx[)erieuce. But, 
in pointing out this circumstance as diminishing the 
importance of Kant’s speculations, Stewart did not 
sufficiently consider that doctrines, fundamentally the 
same, may discliargc a very different office at different 
periods of the history of philosophy. Plato’s Dia- 
logues did not destroy, nor even diminish, the value of 
Cudwortli’s “Immutable Morality.” Notwithstanding 
Cudworth’s publications, Prices doctrines came out a 
little afterwards with the air and with the effect of 
novelties. Cudworth’s assertion of ideas did not pre- 
vent the rise of Hume’s skepticism ; and it wiis Hume’s 
skepticism which gave occasion to Kant’s new assertion 
of necessaiy and universal truth, and to his examina* 
tion into the grounds of the possibility and reality of 
auoh truth. To maintain sucli doctrine after the appear- 
ance of intermediate speculations, and with reference 
to them, was very different fixim maintaining it before ; 
and this is the merit which Kant’s admirers claim for 
him. Nor can it bo denied that his writings produced 
au immense effect upon the mode of treating such 
questious in Germany; and have had, even in this 
country, an influence far beyond what Mr. Stewart 
would have deemed their due. 



334 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEltT. 

a. {Mr, &. H. Lewea .) — But as injustice has thus 
been done to Kant by confounding his case with that of 
his predecessors of like opinions, so on the other hand, 
injustice has also been done, both to him and those 
who have followed him in the assertion of ideas, by 
confounding thdr case with his. This injustice seems 
to me to be committed by a writer on the History of 
Philosophy, who has given'^n account of the successive 
schools of philosophy up to our own time; — has as- 
signed to Kant an important and prominent place 
in the recent history of metaphysics ; — ^but has still 
maintained that Kant’s philosophy, and indeed eveiy 
philosophy, is and must be a failure. In order to 
prove ^is thesis the author naturally has to examine 
Kant’s doctrines and the reasons assigned for them, 
and to point out what he conceives to be the fallacy of 
these arguments. This accordingly he professes to do ; 
but as soon as he has entered uix>n the argument, he 
substitutes, as his opponent, for the philosopher of 
Kbnigsberg, a writer of our own time and country, 
who does not profess himself a Kantian, who has been 
repeatedly accused, with whatever justice, of misrepre- 
senting what he has borrowed from Kant^ and whose 
main views are, in the opinion of the writer himself, 
very different from Kant’s. IVIr. iewes®, in the chap- 
ter entitled Examination of Kant’s Fundamental 
Principles,” after a preliminary statement of the points 
he intends to consider, says *^Now to the ques- 
tion. As Kant confessedly was led to bis own system 
by the speculations of Hume,” and so on; and forth- 
with he introduces the name of Dr, Whewell as the 
writer whose views he has to criticize, without stating 
how he connects him with Kant, and goes on aiguing 
against Mm for a dozen pages to the end of the Chapter. 


* moQrajhicail SMorj/ af JPhUo«h well, in order to OTerthiow Knat. 
fhy, 1846. In a more recent edition So ftir as hie arguments affect my 
the author of this work has modified philoscqiihy, th^y are. es I ooifoelve, 
his expressions, but stfU employs Answered in the rarious eyposttlons 
himself in arguing against Dr. Whe- whldi Ihavegiven of thatphilosopliy. 



MR. G. H. LEW£3 ON KANT. 335 

3 * It is true, howevet, that I liad adopted some of 
views, or at least some of his arguments. The 
chapters^ on the Ideas of S|)ace and Time in the Phi* 
losophy of the JnAuciim Sciences^ were almost literal 
translations of chapters in the KriUk der Heinen Ver~ 
nunft Yet the author was charged by a reviewer at 
the time, with explaining those doctrines ‘4n a manner 
incompatible with the clear views of Emanuel Kant” 
It appcai'od to be assumed by the English admirers 
*of the Kantian philosopliy, that Kant’s views were 
true and clear in Germany, but became untenable 
when adopted in England. 

4. (Mr. Marked) — But tlie most important of my 
critics on this ground is Mr. Mansel, who has revived 
the censure of my speculations as not doing justice to 
the Kantian philosophy. ** It is much to be regretted,” 
he says^ “that Dr. \^ewell, who has made good use 
of Kantkn principles in many parts of his Philoaojihy 
of the Inductive ScienceSj^ has not more accurately ob- 
served Kant’s distinction between the necessary laws 
under which all men think, and the contingent laws 
under which certain men think of certain tliuigs. And 
further on Mr. Mansel, after giving great piuise to the 
general spirit of the Philosophy of <Ae Inductwe Sd- 
snces, says, “ It is Jo bo regretted that the accuracy of 
his theory has been in so many instances vitiated by a 
stumble at the threshold of the Cintical Philosophy.” 
Mr. Mansel is, indeed, by much the most zealous 
English Kantian whose writings 1 have seen; — among 
those, I mean, who have brought original powers of 
philosophical thought to bear upon such subjects; and 
have not been, as some have been, enslaved by an 
admiration of German systems, just as bigotted as the 
contempt of them which others feel. And as Mr. 


s B. 11. The PhUosophy of the tU. Of the Idea of lime. Chi|i.Tili. 
Pure Sciences. Chep. 11, Of the Idea Of some peculiarities of the Idea of 
of Space, Chap. lU. Of some pecu- Time. 

Hatties of the Idea of Space. Chap. 

^ IVolv0mnKiXK}0ioa,b7KUMaiuel,M A 




33^ PHILOSOPHY OP DIBOOYBBT. 

Manadi haa stated ^tinctljr some of tbe pcdutS' in 
wbioh ha ooncelves timt I hare erred in deriating 
from the doctrines of Kant, 1 should wish to make a 
few remarks on those points. 

5 . Kant considers that Space and Time arc con*- 
ditions of perception, and hence sources of necessary 
and universal truth. Dr. Whewell agrees with Kant 
in placing in the min<l certain sources of necessary 
truth; he culls these fundamental Ideas, and i-eckons, 
besides Space and Time, others, as Cause, Likeness,* 
Substance, and several more. Mr. Mill, the most 
recent and able expounder of tlio opposite doctrine, 
derives all truths from Observation, and denies that 
there is such a separate source of truth as Ideas. Mr. 
Hansel does not agree either with Mr. Mill or Dr. 
Wliewell; he adheres to the original Kantian thesis, 
that Space and Time are sources of necessary truths, 
but denies the office to the other fundamental Ideas 
of Dr. Whewell, In reading what has been said by 
Mr. Mill, Mr. Mansel, and other critics, on the subject 
of what I have called Fundamental IdeaSy I am led to 
perceive that I Lave expressed myself incautiously, 
with regard to the identity of character between the 
first two of these fundamental Ideas, namely, Space 
and Tim^ and the othciB, as Forep, Composition, and 
the liker* And 1 am desirous of explaining, to those 
who take an interest in these speculations, how far I 
claim for the other Fundamental Ideas the samd cha* 
racter and attributes as fur Space and Time. 

6 . The special and characteiistic property of all 
the Fundamental Ideas is what I have already men^ 
tioned, that they are the mental sources of necessary 
and universal scientific truths. 1 call them Ideae^ 
as being something not derived from sensation, but 
governing sensation, and consequently giving form to 
our experience ; — Fwadamemldlf as being the founda- 
tion of knowledge, or at least of Science. And the 
way in which those Ideas become the foundations of 
Science is, that when they are clearly and distinctly 
entertained in the mind, they give rise to inevitabhai 
convictiens or^intuitio|is^ which may be expressed as 



mvr AXIOMS POSSIBLE. 33 f 

Aichm^/ an 4 these Axioms are the foundati<ms ot 
Sciences respective uf each Idea. The Idea of Space, 
\rhen clearly possessed, gives rise to geometrical Ax- 
ioms, and is thus the foundation of the Science of Geo- 
metry. The Idea of Mechanical Force, (a modification 
of the Idea of Cause,) when clearly developed in the 
mind, gives birth to Axioms which are the foundation 
of the Science of Mechanic.!. The Idea of Substance 
gives rise to the Axiom which is univoroally accepted, 
that wo cannot, by any process, (for instance, by 
chemical j)rocosses,) create or destroy matter, but can 
only oombiue and se])arate elements; — and thus gives 
rise to the Science ol Chemi.stry 

7. Now it may be observed, that in giving this 
account of the foundation of Science, I lay stress on 
the condition ihat the Ideas must be clmrly and dis- 
tiactly 2>os8e88ed. The Idea of Space must be quite 
clear in the mind, or else the Axioms of Geometry 
will not be been to be true : there will he no hUuUio7i 
of their truth; and for a mind in such a state, there 
can bo no Science of Geometry, A man may have a 
confused and perplexed, or a v.icant and inert state of 
mind, in which it is not clearly apparent to him, that 
two straight lines cannot inclose a space. But this is 
not a frequent case. ^ The Idea of Space is much more 
commonly clear in the minds of men than tiSS other 
Ideas on which science depends, as Force, or Sub- 
stance. It is much more common to find minds in 
which these latter Ideas are not so clear and distinct 
as to maho the Axioms of Mechanics or of Chemistry 
self-evident. Indeed the examples of a state ot mind 
in which the Ideas of Force or of Substance are so 
clear as to be made the basis of science, are compara- 
tively few. They are the examples of minds scienti- 
fically cultivated, at least to some extent. Hence, 
though the Axioms of Mechanics or of Chemistry may 
bo, in their own nature, as evident as those of Geo- 
metry, they are not evident to so many persons, nor 
at so early a period of intellectual or scientific culture* 
And this being the case, it is not surprising that some 
p^nons should ^oubt whether these Axiosis are evident 

z 



33® PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

at all; — should think that it is an error io assoi't 
that there exist, in sach sciences as Mechanics or 
Chemistry, Fundamental Ideas, fit to be classed with 
Space, as being, like it, the origin of Axioms. 

In speaking of all the Fundamental Ideas as being 
alike the source of Axioms when clearly possessed, 
without dwelling sufficiently upon the amount of 
mental disci])lmc which i$ requisite to give the mind 
this clear possession of most of them ; and in not 
keeping before the reader the different degrees of evi- 
dence which, in most minds, the Axioms of different 
sciences natimilly have, I have, as I have said, given 
occasion to my readers to misunderstand me. I will 
point out one or two passages which show that this 
misunderstanding has occurred, and will try to re- 
move it 

8. The character of axiomatic truths seen by in- 
tuition is, that they are not only seen to be true, but 
to be necessary; — that the contrary of them is not 
only false, but inconceivable. But tliis inconceivablc- 
ness dei)ends entirely upon the clearness of t)ie Ideas 
which the axionis involve. So long as those Ideas 
are vague and indistinct, the contrary of an Axiom 
may be assented to, though it cannot be distinctly 
conceived. It may be assented to, not because it is 
possible, but because we do not see clearly what w 
possible. To a person who is only beginning to think 
geometrically, there may appear notiiing absui'd in the 
assertion, that two straight lines may inclose a space. 
And in the same manner, to a person who is only 
beginning to think of mechanical tinths, it may not 
appear to be absurd, that In mechanical processes, Re- 
action shotild be greater or less than Action; and so, 
again, to a person who has not thought steadily about 
Substance, it may not appear inconceivable, that by 
chemical operatious, we should generate new matter, 
or destroy matter which already exists. 

Here then we have a difficulty : — ^the test of Axiemis 
is that the eontraiy of them is inconceivable; and yet 
per^na, till they have in some measure studied ' the 
subject^ do not see this inccmceivableneiKa Hence our 



AXIOMS PO^IBLIU 


339 

Axioms must be evident only to a small number of 
thinkers; and seem not to deserve the name of self* 
evident or necessary truths. 

This difficulty has been strongly urged by Afr. Mill» 
as supporting his view, that all knowledge of truth 
is derived from experience. And in order that the 
opposite doctrine, which I have adv^ocated, may not 
labour under any disadvantages which really do not 
belong to it, I must explain, that 1 do not by any 
{neans assert that those truths which I regard as 
necessary, are all equally evident to common thinkers, 
or evident to persons in all stages of intellectual deve- 
lopment. I may even say, that some of those truths 
which I regard as necessary, and the necessity of which 
I believe the human mind to be capable of seedng, by 
due preparation and thought, are still siich, ‘that this 
amount of prei)amtion and thought is rare and pecu- 
liar; and I will willingly grant, that to attain to and 
])reservo siioli a clearness and siibtlety of mind as this 
intuition requires, is a task of no ordinaiy difficulty 
and labour. 

9. This doctrine, — that some truths may be seen 
by intuition, but yet that the intuition of them may 
-be a rare and difficult attainment, — T have not, it 
would seem, conveyed with sufficient clearness to ob- 
viate misapprehension. Mr. Mill has noticed a pas- 
sage of my Philosophy on this subject, which he has 
understood in a sense different &om that which 1 in- 
tended. Speaking of the two Principles of Chemical 
Science, — that combinations are definite in kind, and 
in quantity, — had tried to elevate myself to the 
point of view in which these Principles are seen, not 
only to be time, but to be necessary. I was aware 
thai even the profoundest chemists had not ventured 
to do this ; yet it appeared to me that there were con- 
siderations which seemed to show that any other role 
would imply that the world was a world on which the 
human mind could not employ itself in scientific spe^ 
oulalion at alL These considerations I ventured to 
put Jbr wards, not as views which could at present be 
generally accepted, but as views to wM<^ chemical 



340 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY, 

philosophy appeared to me to tend. Mr. Mill, not 
unnaturally, I must admit, supposed me to mean that 
the two Principles of Chemistry just stated, ai'e selfr 
evident, in the same way and in the same degree as 
the Axioms of Geometry are so. I afterwards ex- 
plained that what 1 meant to do was, to throw out an 
opinion, that if we could conceive the composition of 
bodies distinctly^ we might be able to see that it is 
necessary that the modes of this composition sliould 
be definite. This Mr. Mill does not object to®: buc 
he calls it a great attenuation of my former opinion ; 
which he understood to be that we, (that is, men in 
general,) already sec, or may see, or ought to see, this 
necessity. Such a general ai)preheiision of the neces- 
sity of definite chemical composition I certainly never 
reckoned upon; and even in my own mind, the 
thought of such a necessity was rather an anticipation 
of what the intuitions of philosophical chemists iu 
another generation would be, than an assertion of what 
they now are or ought to be; much less did I expect 
that persons, neither chemists nor philosophera, would 
already, or perhaps ever, see tliat a proposition, so 
recently disoovei*ed to be true, is not only tnio, bub 
necessary. 

lo. Of the bearing of this vie^ on the question at 
issue between Mr. Mill and me, I may hereafter speak ; 
hut I will now notice other persons who have mis- 
understood me in the same way. 

An ^tble writer in the Edinburgh Review^ has, in 
like m^ner, said, ** Dr. Whewell seems to us to have 
gone much too far in reducing to necessary truths 
what assuredly the generality of mankind will not feel 
to be so.” It is a fact wlu<^ I do not at all contest, 
4hat the, gemredUy of mankind will not feeltlie Axion^ 
of Chemistry, or even of Mechanics, to be neces&a^ 
truths. But I had said, not that the generalify of 
man^nd would feel this necessity, but (in a passage 
just befoi*e quoted by the Beviewer) that the mind 


A Ldffk, I p. 37^ 3rd edit 


• No. i^p.a9> 


MR- MAKSEL'S KANTIANISM. 34I 

iiiidler certain circumstances aUains a point of vieio 
from which it can pronounce mechani^l (and other) 
fundamental truths to be necessaiy in their nature^ 
though disclosed to us by experience and observation. 

Both the Edinburgh Reviewer and Mx. Mansel ap- 
pear to hold a distinction between the fundamented 
truths of Geometry, and tliose of the other subjects 
which I have classed with them. The latter says, 
Jhat perhajis metaphysicians may hereafter establish 
the existence of other subjective conditions of intui- 
tions (or, as I should call them, Fundamental Ideas,) 
besides Space and Time, but that in asserting such to 
exist in the science of Mechanics, I certainly go too 
far : and he gives as an instance my Essay, — “ Demon* 
stration that all matter is hea^y.” I certainly did 
not expect that the Principles asserted in that Essay 
would be assented to as readily or as generally as the 
Axioms of Geometry; but I conceive that I have 
there proved that Cliemical Science, using the balance 
as one of its implements, cannot admit imponderable 
bodies” among its elements. This impossibility will, 
I think, not only be found to exist in fact, but seen 
to exist necessarily, by chemists, in proportion as 
they advance towards general propositions of Chemical 
Science in which the so-called “imponderable fluids” 
enter. But even if I be right in this opinion, to how 
few will this necessity be made apparent, and how 
slowly will the intuition spread ! I am as well aware 
as my critics, that the necessity will probably never be 
apparent to ordinary thinkers. • 

II. Though Mr. Mansel does not acknowledge any 
subjective conditions of intuition besides Space and 
Time, he does recognize other kinds of necessity^ which 
I should ^equally refer Fundamental Ideas; because 
^they are^ no less than Space and Time, the foundations 
of universal and necessary truths in science. Such 
are^ the Principle of Substance; — All Qualities exist 
in some subject; and the Principle of Oausalilyj-nr 


> Frd, log, p. 12^ 




34 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

Every Event hit» its Cause. To these Principles he 
ascribes a ‘^metaphysical neoessi^/’ the nature and 

{ rounds of which he analyses with great acuteness. 

(at what I hare to observe is, that whatever differ-- 
enees may bo pointed out between 3 ie grounds of the 
necessity, in this case of Tnetaphyhical necessity, and in 
that which Mr. Mansel calls nuUhemcUical ncoeadty 
which belongs to the Conditions or Ideas of Space 
and of Titne; still, it is not the less true that tfa<4 
Ideas of Sub^nce and of Cause, do afford a fbund^ 
tion for necessary tniths, and tliat on these truths aio 
built Sciences. That every Cliange must have a Cuuse, 
with the corresponding Axioms, — ^tliat the Cause is 
known by tho Effect, and Measured by it, — is the 
basis of the Science of Meclianics. That there is a 
Substance to which qualities belong, with the corre- 
sponding Axiom, — that wo cannot create or destroy 
Substance, though we may alter Qualities by combin- 
ing and separating Substances, — is the basis of tho 
Science of Chemistry. And that this doctrine of the 
Indesti^ctibility of Substance is a primary axiomatic 
truth, is certain j both becausq it has been universally 
taken for granted by men seeking for general tniths ; 
and because it is not and cannot be proved by expe- 
rience®. So that I have here, evtn according to Mr. 
ManseFs own statement, other grounds besides Space 
and Time, for necessary truths in Science. 

12, "^Besides mathematical and metaph3rsical necessity, 
Mr. Mansel recognizes also a logical necesst^. 1 will 
not pretend to say that this kind of neqeBsity is ex* 
actly represented hy any of those Fundament^ Ideas 
which are the basis of Science; but yet I think it will 
be found that this logical necessity mainly operates 
through the attribution of Karnes to thin^; and that 
a large portion of its cogency arises fbom these maxims,, 
— that names must be so imposed that Qeneral^Fro* 
positions shall be ms 8 ible,-^nd so that Beaaonftig 
shall be possible Kow these maxima are really tm 


• 'SeePti/. ImL Sc,h.yl6. tU. 



UR. UANSEL S KANTIANISM. 343. 

i 

basils of Natural Bistoiy, and are so stated In the Phi- 
hsephy of the Jndudtive Sdenoea. The fcNnner maxim 
is the principle of all Classification; and though we 
have no j^Uogisms in Natural Histoiy, the apparatus 
of genua^ epecke^ydifferenlia^ and the like, which was 
inti'odiiccd in the analysis of syllogistic reasoning, is 
really more constantly applied in Natural History 
than in any other scienca * 

13^ Besides the different kinds of necessity which 
*Mr. Manscl thus acknowledges, I do not see why he 
should not, on his own principles, recognize others; as 
indeed he appears to me to do. He acknowledges, I 
think, the distinction of Primary and Secondary quali- 
ties; and this must involve him in the doctrine that 
Secondary Qualities arc necessarily perceived hy means 
of a Medium, Again: he would, I think, acknow<*> 
ledge that in organized bodies, the 2>a*rts exist for a 
Purpose; and Pur|)osc is an Idea which cannot be in- 
fevr^ by reasoning from facts, without being possessed 
and applied as an Idea. So tliat there would, I con- 
ceive, exist, in Ids j^hilosophy, all the grounds of pieces- 
saiy tnith which I have teimed Fundamental Ideas; 
only that he would fur^er subdivide, classify, and ana- 
lyse, the kinds and grounds of this necessity. 

In this he wouldp do well ; and some of his distinc- 
tions and analyses of this kind arc, in my judgment^ 
very instructive. Bui I do not see what objection 
there can be to my 2)xiiiing together all these binds of 
necessity, lyhen my purpose requires it ; and, inasmuch 
as they iH are the bases of Science, I may call them 
by a general name; for instance, Grounds of Scientific 
Necessity; and those are i)reoisely what I mean by 
jPundamented Ideas. 

That soxhe steady thought, and even some progress 
in the ooDatruction of Science, is needed in order to 
see the necessity of the Axioms thus introduced, is 
and is repeatedly asserted and illustrated in the 
of the Sciences. The necessity of such 'Axioms 
is seen, but it is not seen at first. It becomes clearer 
and clearer to each person, and^ clear to one person 
after another, as the hxunan mind dwells more and 



$44 09 disootkbt* 

V 

labile att^fbdUr W ^ mTerel aubjao^ of speciilaticm^ 
3!%im 0irB*me^'^ tr^Uha wkUbh*^ seen by 
Vai ikia ifUuiUfyi^ ia progresaive* lliis k the remark 
VkUjh I wiHh tc^ make in anewop to those of my critics 
jWho^have ohjtoeted that tmtha 'vtrhich I haTO fsro- 
poanded as Alxioms, are not evident to all. 

, X4* Tbit tihe Axioms of Science '"bi'C not evident to 
allf ia true enough# and too' true. Take the Axiom of 
Substance: — 'ihat*w^ may change th^ con^itipn of a^ 
substance in. vanous vrays, but cannot destroy it. This 
has been asa^etl as evidm4 by philDsophers in all 
ages ; bnt if w ask an ordinary person whctlier a body 
can be destroyed by fire, or diminished^ 'will he un- 
hesitatii;kgly reply, that it cannot^ It retires some 
thoUjgki' io say^, as the philosopher eaid, that the 
Wj^g^t of the smoke is to ^ found by subtracting the 
of the ashes fi^om that of the fuel; hay, even, 
whenthk 4 smd, it appears, at first, rather an epigram 
th^ atf soientifie truth. Yet it is by thinking only, not 
byf^axL expOiifiient, that, fi*Qm a happ]^«gUQs»'h^ becomes 
a a^eri^tifio truth. And th# thought is the basisl^, not 
the ren^lt^ of experimental truths, for which reason I 
ascribe it to a Fundamental Idea. And so, such truths 
the genuine growth of the human mind, not in- 
naib, as if they needed not to giuv; still less, dead 
plucked^ from ei^rience and stuck in from with-* 
(pjit; juot universal, as if they grew up everywhere; 
but t&bdw, under favourable circunmtetice8| ths 
genmiie growth ofi^the scientific intellect > 

15. vNot cmly do I hold that the Axioms, on which 
the ^ths of^seiange rest, grow from Jesses into Ak- 
lobes' tStcrarlous ways, and often gradually, and at dif- 
fer^ periods in different miuds, and purtii^, even 
in the end; but I conceive that this dnay be mfwn by 
the history of science, fiaving^SOally^ hap{>ene^«,iyith 
regard tj^all the most cogspiepMid of such prjpoiplea 
The sci^tific insight -wmm enabled disosSMtrers to 
uchi^ dieir exploits, implied that they were^among 


I Kant. 


AXIOMS AHE KOt 9BOK ^45 

the first to aoquire a^L intuitive eonTtetiou of the Ax< 
ioms of their the contaroveqEBiee vrbieh form sO 

large a portion of fjie histoiy of scienoe^ affee the 
struggles botMreen the clearsighted and the-Sio^fatOd, 
beWeeu thobe who were forvords andlSio&e TO^were 
backwards in the progress of ideas ; and these contwt* 
vetsies have very often ended in diffusing ^geheraDv 4 
clearness of thought, on thd oontrovertoA stohject, 
at fii*st^ the few only, or perhaps not even they/^jkniH 
sessed. The History of Science conbists of the HiirtoryiP 
of Idcas^ as well as of the tHistory of ^perienoo and 
Observation. The latter portion of the^ihjed formed 
the prineipat matter of my JlUtort/ of the tudnofivo 
Sciences , the formen occupied a large portion of the 
Philcwypliy of -the Inductive Scienees'®; whiehn^ Pmay 
perhaps ^ allowed to explain, is, for the most part^ h 
Historical Workoio less than the other j; and was wnt-» 
ten in a great measOro, at the same time, and from the 
same survey of the works of scientifio'^writinm < * * 

id, I^am that the explanation ^nmch I ifiave 
given, may naturally provoke the opponents of thd 
doctrine of scientific necessity to repeat their Ordinary 
fundamental objections,^ in a form awiapted tb the ces:* 
pressions which 1 have usefi. They may say, llm 
that theso so'called Axioms thus become evident bnly' 
during the progress of experieuqp, proves that thq^ psA 
derived from experience: they may, in roply to onV 
image, sajiythat truths are stuck into thet&ad^by ex- 
perience, as seeds are stuck into thd ground; aj^that 
to maintain tliat they can grow undbr any other con- 
ditions, is ta hold the doctrine of spoatsineous genera 
ton, which is equally untenable in the intelledihai iQid 
in the {^sical world. I shall not however here* re- 
sume t»B general discussion; but shall only say briefiy 
iu la^ly, tlmt Axioms, — ^for instance, this Axiom^ that 
mater^ created or annikilated by 

any prpm^ whkik we (^3m^4/ipply^ — ^though il becomes 
evident in the progress of experience, cannot Se ^|^ved 


^ fi6Dabli8h«d M Th4 Siston/ tfecuntffic Zdeot, 



34^ PHILOSOPHY OP OISOOVISRT. 

from experience; for it is a proposition which never 
has nor con be proved by experience; but which, 
nevertheless, has been always assumed by men, seeking 
for general truths, as necessarily time, and as control^ 
ling and connecting all possible experience« And with 
regard to the image of vegetable development, I may 
say, that as such development implies both inherent 
Ibms in the living seed, and nutritive powers in earth 
and air ; so the development of our scientific ideas im- 
plies botli a fonnative power, and materials acted on; 
and that, though the analogy must be very defociive, 
we conceive that w^ best follow it by placing the form- 
ative power in the living mind, and in the external 
world the materials acted on : while the doctiine that 
all truth is deiived from expeneucc only, appears to 
reject altogether one of these elemehts, or to assert the 
two to be one. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

NfiCSSSiiRT TbUT^X is PROaRBSSlVE. 
Objections considered. 


T he doctrine that iiGcessary truth is progressive 
is a doctrine very impoHant in its bearing upon 
the nature of the human mind ; arid, as I conceive, in 
its theological bearing also. But it is a doctrine to 
which objections are likely to be made from various 
quarters, and 1 will consider some of these objections. 

j. Necessary tinitlis, it will bo said, cannot in- 
crease in numl^r. New ones c«innot be added to the 
old ones. For necessaiy trutljis ai’e those of which the 
necessity is plain and eviderit to all mankind — to the 
common sense of man; atich as the axioms of geo- 
metry. But that which is evident to *all mankind 
must bo evident from the ilrst : that which is plain to 
the common sense of iriaii cannot require scientific dis- 
covery : that which is nocessaidly true cannot require 
accumulated proo^ '' 

tfo this^ that necessary truths require for 

their apprehension a certain growth and development 
of the httmau mind. Though it is seen that they are 
necessarily true, tliis is seen Duly by riiosc who think 
steadily and clearly, and to think steadily and clearly 
on any kind of subject, requires time and attention ; — 
requircis mental culture. This may be seen even in 
the case of the axioms of geometry. These axioms 
are self-evident: but to whoin, are they self-evident? 
Not to uncultured savages, or young children ; or per^ 
sons of loose vague l^bits of thought. To see the 
truth and necessity of geometrical kxioms^ we need 
geometrical culture. 

Therefore that any axioms are not evider^ wit)iaut 
patient thought and continued study of t!he subject, 
does not disprove their necessity, rrinoiples may "be 



348 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

axiomatic and necessaiy, althongh they require time, 
and the progi*css of thought and of knowledge, to bring 
them to light. And axioms may be thus gradually 
brought to light by the progress of knowledge. 

Nor is it difficult to give examples of such axioms, 
other than geometrical. There is an axiom wffiich has 
obtained currency among thoughtful men from the 
time that imin began to speculate about himself and 
the universe: — E niliih nil fit: Nothing can be made 
of nothing. No material substance can be produced 
or destroyed by natural causes, though its form and 
consistence may be changed indefinitely. Is not this 
an axiom? a necessary truth? Yet it is not evident 
to all men at fii-st, and without mental culture. At 
first and before habits of steady and consistent thought 
are formed, men think familiarly of tlio creation and 
destruction of matter. Only when the mind has 
received some pliilosophical culture does it sec the 
truth and necessity of tlxe axiom of substance, and tlmh 
it does see it. 

And the axioms on which the science of mechanics 
rests, that* the cause is measured by the effects, that 
reaction is equal and opposite to action, and the like,—* 
are not these evident to a mind cultivated by steady 
thought on such subjects? and do * they not require 
such culture of the mind in order to see them 7 Are 
they not obscure or uncertain to those who are not so 
cultured, that is to common thinkers ; to the general 
bulk of mankind? Thus then it requires the discipline 
of the science of mechanics to enable the mind to see 
the axioms of that srience. 

And does not this go further, as science and the 
careful study of the grounds of science go further? To 
a person well disciplined in mechanical reasoning it 
has become, not a conclusion, but a principle, that in 
mechanical action what is gained in power is lost in 
time : or that in any change, the force gained is equal 
to the force lost, so that new force cannot be generated^ 
any more than new matter, by natural changes. Is this 
an axiom? a necessary fundamental truth? It appears 
eo ^ at least one great thinker and discoverer no^ 



I 9 EGESSART TRUTH IS FROGRESSIYE. 349 

alive among us* If it^do not appear so to us^ or not 
in the same sense, may not thm be because we have 
not yet reached his point of view? May not the con- 
viction which is now his alone become hereafter the 
conviction of the philosophical world? And whatever 
the case may be in this instance, have there not been 
examples of this progress? Did not Galileo and the 
disciples of Galileo reduce several mechanical prin->‘ 
ciplcs to the character of necesstiry truths, after they 
had by experiment and reasoning discovered them to 
be actually true? And have we not in these cases so 
many proofs that neces^iy truth is progressive, along 
with the progi-ess of knowledge ? 

2. But, it will be said, the necessary character 
claimed for such truths is an illusion. The pro- 
positions so brought into view are really established 
by observation : by the study of external facts : and 
it is only the edect of habit and familiarity which 
makes ihen of science, when they well know them 
to be true, think them to be necessarily true. They 
are really the results of experience, as their history 
shows ; and therefore cannot be necessaiy and d ^rioH 
truths. 

To which I reply ; Such principles as I have men- 
tioned, — ^that m^iial substance cannot be produced 
ox: destroyed — that the cause is measured by the effect 
—that reaction is equal and opposite to action : aro 
not the results of experience, nor can be. No experi- 
ence can prove them ; they are necessarily a^umed as 
the interpretation of cxi^eiience. They were not proved 
in the course of scientiiic investigations, but brought 
to light as such investigations shewed their necessity. 
They are not the results, but the conditions of experi? 
mental sciences. If the Axiom of Substance wero i^ot 
true, and wore not assumed, we could not have such a 
Boiexice as Chemistry, that is, we could have no know-» 
ledge at al l respecting the changes of ibrm of sujxatances. 
Xf the Axioms of Mechanics were not line and wore 
assumed, we coxdd have no science pf Mechanics^ 
ihai is, no ^owledge of the laws of force ou 

Ji^tter. It is not any special of ;ihe SeWpe 



350 


PHILOSOPHY OP DI800TEBT* 


ia sacL cases; bnt the existfkce, the possibUityy of 
any science, which establishes the necessity of these 
axioms. Tliey are not the consequences of knowledge, 
acquired from without, but the internal condition of 
our being able to know. And when we are to know 
concerning any new subject contained in the universe, 
it is not inconceivable nor strange that there should 
be new conditions of our knowledge. 

It is not inconceivable or strange, therefore, that as 
new sciences are formed, new axioms, the foundations 
of such sciences, should come into view. As the light 
of clear and definite knowledge is kindled in suc- 
cessive chambers of the universe, it may disclose, not 
only the aspect of tliose new apartments, but also 
the form and structuie of tlie lamp which man is thus 
allowed to carry from point to point, and to transmit 
from hand to hand. And though the space illumined 
to man’s vision may always bc» small in comparison 
with the immeasumble abyss of darkness by which it 
is surrounded, and though the light may be dim and 
feeble, as well as partial ; this need not make uu doubt 
that, so far as we can by the aid of this lamp, we see 
truly : so &r as wo discern the necessary laws of the 
universe, the laws are true, and their truth is rooted 
in that in which the being of the u^' verse is rooted. 

And, to dwell for a moment longer on this image, 
we may also conceive that all that this lamp— the 
intellect of man cidtivated by science, — does, by the 
light wUdi it gives, is this — ^that it <&3pels a dark- 
ness which is dark for man alone, and discloses to 
him somb things in some measure as all things lie in 
clear and perfect light before the eye of God. To 
the Divine Mind aU the laws of the universe are 
plain luid clear in all their multiplicity, extent and 
depth. The human mind is capable of seeing some 
of these laws, though only a few; to some extent, 
though but alittle way; to some depth, though never to 
the wttom. But the Human Mind, can, in the course 
of ages and generations^ by the long exerdse of thoug^i^ 
successfully employed in augmenting knowlddgei im- 
prove its powers of vision ; and may thus come to see 



KEOESSAKY HtUTH IS PBOGRESSIVE. 35I 

more laws tlian at first, to trace their extent more 
lai'gely, to understand them more thoroughly ; md 
thus the inward intellectual light of man may b^ome 
broader and broader from age to age, though ever 
naiTOw when compared with completeness. 

3. Is it strange to any one that inward light, as 
well as outward knowlc^e, should thUs increase in 
the course of man’s earthly care^? that as knowledge 
extends, the foundations of knowledge should expand ? 
that as man goes on discovering new truths, he should 
also discover something coucemiug the conditions of 
truth 1 Is it wonderful that as science is progressive 
the philosophy of science also should be prggi'essive 1 
that as we know more of everything else, we should 
also come to know moi’e of our powers of knowing 1 

This does not seem tc* have been supposed by philo- 
sophers in general ; or rather, they have assumed that 
they could come to know more about the powers of 
knowing by thinking about them, even without taking 
into account the light thrown upon the nature of 
kncTwledgc by the progress of knowledge. Prom Plato 
downwards, through Aristotle, through the Schoolmen, 
to Descartes, to Locke, to Kant, Sohelliiig and Kegel, 
philosophers have been perpetually endeavouring to 
explore the nature, the fonudations, the consequences 
of our knowl^ge. But since Plato, scarcely one of 
them has ever pi'oceeded as if new light were thrown 
upon knowledge by new knowledge. They have^ 
many or M of them, attempted to establhfh funda* 
mental tmths, some of them new fundamental truths^ 
about the human mind and the nature aiM conditions 
of its knowledge. These attempts show that they tio 
not deny or doubt that there may bo such new fiin- 
damental truths. Such new fundamental truths re<* 
specting the human mind and respecting kndwledge 
must in many cases at least, (as it wjU be seen 
that they are, on examining tho systems proposed 
hy the philosophers just motioned,) seen by their own 
light to be true. They are new cm&me in philosophy. 
These philoscmhera therefor^ or their disciples, cannot 
consistently blame us for holding the possibility of 
new axioms being introdoeed into philosophy from age 



35^8 


PHIMSOPHT OP WSCOTBUT, 


to age, as there arise philosophers more and more 
clear-sighted. 

4 * But thoitgh the^ have uo ground fpr rejecting 
tmr new axioms merely because th^ are new, we may 
have good ground for doubting the value of their new 
axioms, that is of the foundations of their systems; 
becattsc they are new truths about Imowledgo gathered 
by merely exploring the old fif?lda of knowledge. We 
found our hopes of obtaining a larger view of the 
constitution of the human mind than the early philo- 
sophers had, on this : — that we obtain our view by 
studying the operation of the human mind eince their 
time; its progress in acquiring a large stock of uucou- 
tesied truths and in obtaming a wide and real know- 
ledge of the universe. Here are new materials which 
the ancients had not ; and which may therefore justify 
the hope that wo may build our philosophy higher than 
the ancients did. But mudom philoso]ihers who use 
only the same materials as the ancient philosophers 
usi^ have not the same grounds for hope which wo 
have. If they borrow all their examples and illustra- 
tions of man’s knowledge of the universe, from the con- 
dition of the univer'>e as existing in Space and Time, 
that is, from the geometrical condition of the universe, 
they may fail to obtain the light which might be 
obtained if they considered that the *bnivcrso is also 
subject to conditions of Substance, of Cause and Effect, 
of Force and Matter: is filled with Kinds of things, 
in whose stincture we assume Design and Ends; and 
so on ; and if they reflected that these conditions or 
Ideas are laOt mere vague notions, but the bases of 
sciences which all thoughtfiil persons allow to be cer- 
tain and real. 

It is then, as I have said, firom taking adv^int^e of 
th^ progressive character which physical science, m the 
history of man, has been found to possess, that I hope 
to learn more of the wture and prospects of the hu- 
man mind and soul, than those cap learn who still take 
tb^r stand on the old limited grqund of man’s know- 
ledge. The knowledge of Geometry by the Greeks 
was the staMng-point of their sound philosophy* Ijb 
^owed that something might be certainly known, an4 



ISECKSSABY TfttTS Ifil YHOOMSSIVB. 355 

it i^owed, in some hovr it tms kaow^ 'It 

thus refuted the skepticism whioh yraa destroying plu-^ 
losopby, and offered specimens of solid truth for the 
philosopher to analyse. But the Greeks tried to go 
beyond geometry in their knowledge of the universe. 
They tried to construct a science of Astronomy— of 
Harmonics — of Optics — of Mechanics In the two 
former subject**, they sudbeeded to a vejy considerable 
extent The question then aioso, What was the pbilo* 
sophical import of these new sciences? What light did 
they throw on the nature of the universe, on the nature 
of knowledge, on the nature of the human mind? These 
questions Plato attempted to answer. He said that 
the lesson of these now sciences is this:— that the 
universe is framed upon the Divine Idem; that man 
cau to a certain extent obtain sight of these Ideas; and 
that when he docs this, ho knows concerning the uni- 
vci'se. And again, he also put the matter otherwise : 
there is an Intelligible Worlds of which the Visible and 
Sensible world is only a dim image. Science consists 
in understanding the Intelligible World, which man is 
to a certain extent able to do, by the nature of his 
understanding. This was Plato’s philosophy, founded 
upon the progress which human Imowledge had made 
up to his time. Since his time, knowledge, that is 
science, has made a large additional progress. What 
is the philosophical lesson to be derived from this pro- 
gress, and from the new provinces thus added to 
human knowledge? This is a question which I have 
tried to answer. I am not aware that anjr one since 
Plato has taken this line of speculation ; — I mean* hiui 
tried to spell out the lesson of philosophy which is 
taught us, not by one specimen, or a few only, of the 
knowledge respe^iug the universe whidi man has 
acquired ; but by including in bis survey all the pro^ 
vinces of human knowledge, and the whole history^of 
each. At any rate, whatever any one else may Imve 
done in this way, it seems to me that new uffer^nces 
remain to be drawn, of the nature of those whjkh Pteto 
drew: and those I here attempt to deduce and to 
illustrate. 

A A 



CHAPTER XXX. 


The Theological Beabckg op the Philosophy op 
Disco vi^iY. 


r TAT necessary truth is progressiyc ; — lliat science 
is the idi*ali/a,tion of facts, and that this process 
goes on from age to ago, and advances with tlio ad- 
vance of sci(‘ntiiic di&covory; — those are dootiinos 
which I have endeavoured to establish and to eluci- 
date. If these doctrines are true, they aie so import 
ant tliat I may be excused should 1 rotiuu to them again 
and again, and trace their consequences in various di- 
rections. Especially I would examine the bearing of 
those doctrines upon our religious philosophy. I have 
liithcido abstained in a groat moasuie fiom discussing 
religious doctrines, but such a reserve carried too far 
must deprive our philosophy of all coniplotencss. No 
philosophy of science can be compl(2;tc which is nut 
also a philosophy of the univeise, and no philosophy 
of the universe can satisfy thoughtful men, liich does 
not include a reference to the power by wJiich the uni- 
verse came to be what it is. Su 2 >posiiig, then, such "a 
i^renoe to l>e admitted, let us sec wliat aspect our 
doctrines ftive to it. 

1 . (/foio cam tJuere he nece'^sary tmiJis coneeniing 
ikfP actual universe 1) — In looking at the bearing of our 
doctrine oh the philosophy of the universe, we are met 
by a difficulty, which is indeed, only a fonuer difficulty 
under a Hisw aspect When wo are come to the con* 
clud.on that' science consists of facts idealized, we are 
led to ask, Hbw this can be) How can facts be ideal-' 
]^ow can that which is a ffict of external obsor- 
become a result of internal thought) £|!ow can 
> that which was known A posteriori become known A 



ITS THEOLOGICAL BEABING. 


355 


priori? How can the world of thii;igs be identified 
with the world of thoughts? How can we discover a 
necessriry connexion among more phenomena? 

Or to put the matter otherwise : How i| it tlmt the 
deductions of the intellect are verified in the world of 
sense ? How is it that the tnitlis of science obtained 
d priori are exemplified in the general rules of facta 
observed h po^iteriori 2 How is it that facts, in science^ 

^ always do correspond to our ideas! 

J have propounded this paradox in various forms, 
because I wish it to be seen that it is, at first sights a 
real, not merely a \crbal contradict ion, or at least a 
difficulty. If we can discover the solutuui of this dif- 
ficulty in any one form, ]»robal)ly we can transpose 
the answer so as to suit the other forms of tho 
question. 

3. fiuppo!>e the case to be as I have stated it ; that in 
^ some sciences at least, laws which were at first facts of 
observation came to be seen as necessary truths; and 
let us see to what this amounts in the several sciences. 

It amounts to this: the truths of Oeoinctiy, such as 
wo discern them by the exercise of our own thoughts, 
are always verified in tlie world of observation. T3ie 
laws of fmaco, derived from our Ideas, lU'e universally 
ti'ue in the external world. 

In tho same way, as to number : the Laws or tiaiths 
respecting number, which are deduced from our Idea of 
Number, are universally true in the external world. 

In the .same way, as to the science which deals 
with matter and force : the tniths of wliiijji 1 liavo 
spoken as derived from Ideas ; — that action equal to 
I’eaction ; and that causes arc measured by tbeir offe<rt;& ; 
— are universally verified in all tho laws of phenomenia 
of the external world, which are disclosed by the 
science of Mechanics. 

In the same way with regard to the composition^and 
Resolution of bodies into their elements; the tiutlie 
derived from our Idea of Matter ; — ^that no compositjM^ 
or resolution can increase* or diminish the quantity of 
matter in the world, and that the propcriiw of com- 
pounds are determined by their composition; — are 

AA 9 ' 



356 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

truths derived from Ideas of quantity of matter, and 
compasition and i*esolution ; but these truths are uni- 
versally verified when we come to the iaots of Che- 
mistiy. 

In the same way it is a truth flowing from the Ideas 
of the Kinds of things, (as the ^>08sible subject of g^ioral 
I)ropositioDS expressed in language,) that the kinds of 
things must be definite; and this law is veiified when- 
ever we express general projmitions in general terms : 
for instance, when we distinguish species in Mine- 
ralogy. 

3. This last example irnty a}>pear to most readers 
doubtful. I have purposely i)urbued the enumeration 
till I came to a doubtful example, because it is, and I 
conceive always will be, impossible to extend this gene- 
ral view to all the Sciences. On the eontiaiy, this doc- 
trine applies at present to only a very few of the sci- 
ences, even in the eyes of those who hold the existence 
of ideal truths. The doctrine extends at present to a 
few only of the sciences, even if it extend to one or 
two besides those which have been mentioned — Gco- 
metiy, Mechaiiies, Chemistry, Mineralogy: and though 
it may hereafter appear tJiat Ideal Truths are possible 
and attainable for a few other sciences, yet the laws 
disclosed by sciences which caimot<l e reduced to ideal 
elements will, J conceive, always veiy far outnumber 
those which can be so reduced. The great body of our 
scientific knowledge will always be knowledge obtained 
by mere observation, not knowledge obtained by the 
use of theories alone. 

4. The survey of the history and philosophy of the 
Sciences which we have attcmjited in previous works 
enabled us to ofier a sort of estimate of the relative 
portions of science which have and which have not 
thus been idealized. For the Aphorisms^ which we 
have collected from that survey, conhiin Axioms which 
may be iregai*ded as the Ideal portions of tlie various 
sciences ; and the inspection of that series of aphorisms 
wifi show us to how such* a portion of scieuco, any^ 


^ Giren in the Organon Eenoeatom. 




ITS THEOLOGICAL BEARING. 


357 


thing of this axiomatic or ideal character can be ap^ 
plied. These Axioms are the Axioms of Geometry 
(Aphorism XXVT); of Arithmetic (XXXVI); of 
Causation (XLVIl) ; of a medium for the sensation of 
secondary qualities (LVIII), and their measure (IXIX); 
of Polarity (LXXII); of Chemical Affinity (LXXVI); 
of Substance (LXXVIl) ; of Atoms (LXXJX). 

Have we any axioms in* the sciences which succeed 
these in our survey, as Botany, Zoology, Biology, Pa- 
Iteontologyl 

There is the Axiom of Symmetry (LXXX) ; of Kind, 
(already in some measure spoken of, (LXXXIII)) ; of 
Pinal Cause (CV) ; of First Cause (CXVI>, 

5. {Small extend 0/ necessary trviJt.) — It is easily 
seen ho'w small apportion of each of these latter sciences 
is included in these axioms : while, with regard to the 
sciences first mentioned, the Axioms include, in a man* 
ner, the whole of the science. The science is only 
the consequence of the Axioma The whole science of 
Mechanics is only the development of the Axioms con- 
cerning action and reaction, and concerning cause and 
its measures, which I have mentioned as a part of our 
Ideal knowledge, • 

In fact^ beginning from Geometry and Arithmetic, 
and going througlidtfie sciences of Mechanics, of Second- 
ary Qualities, and of Chemistry, onwards to the sci- 
ences which deal with Organized Beings, we find that 
our ideal truths occupy a smaller and smaller share of 
the sciences in succession, and that the vast variety of 
facts and phenomena which nature offers to ^ is less 
and less subject to any rules or principles which we 
can perceive to be necessary. 

But still, that there are principles, — ^necessary princi- 
jdes, which prevail universally even in these higher 
parts of the natural sciences, — appears on a careful cqn^ 
sideration of the axioms wMch I have mentioned: — that 
in symmetrical natural bodies the similar parts arq 
similarly affected ; — ^that every event must have a cause; 
— ^that there must be a First Cause, and the Uke. 

d. It being established, then, that in the progress 
of fidence, facts are idealized — that d posUfiiyn truths 



358 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

become A pricn'i truths ; — ^that the world of things is 
identified with the world of thoughts to a certain ex- 
tent ; — ^to an extent which grows larger as we see into 
the world of things more clearly; the question recurs 
wliich I liave alreiidy asked: How Ciin this be? 

How can it be that tbe world without us is thus in 
some respects identical with the world within us? — 
that is our question. 

7. [How did things come to be (is they are ?) — It 
woul<l seem that we may make a step in the solution 
of this question, if we can answer this other: How 
did the world without us and the world within us come 
to be what they are? 

To this (question, two very different answers are re- 
turned by tliose wlio do and those who do not believe 
in a Supreme Mind or Intelligence, as the cause and 
foundation of the world. 

Those who do not believe that the world has for its 
cause and foundation a Supreme Intelligence, or who 
do not connect their philosophy with this belief, would 
reply to our inquiry, tlmt the reason why man’s 
thoughts aud ideas agree with the world is, that they 
are borrowed from thh world ; and that the pemuasion 
tliat these Ideas and truths derived from them have 
any origin except the world without us, is an il- 
lusion. * 

On this view I shall not now dwell ; for I wish to 
trace out the consotpiences of the opposite view, that 
there exists a Supreme Mind, which is the cause and 
foundation of the univei’se. Those who hold this, and 
who also hold that the human mind can become poa- 
seased of necessary truths, if they are asked how it is 
that these necessary truths aro universally verified in 
the material world, will reply, that it is so because the 
Supreme Oi'cative-Mind has made it so to be: — that the 
truths which exist or can be generated in man’s mind 
agree with the laws of the universe, because Ho who 
hsa made and sustains man and the universe has 
caused them to agree : — that our Ideas correspond to 
the Facts of the world, and the Facts to our Ideas, 
because our Ideas are given us by the same power 



ITS THEOLOGIOAL BEARING, 350 

which made the world, and given so that these can 
and must agree with the world so mada 

8 . ( View of the Theiet), — This, in its genera] form, 
would be the answer of the theiaty (so we may call 
him who believes in a Supreme Intelligent Cause of 
the world and of man,) to the questions which we 
have propounded — ^the perplexity or paradox which 
we have tried to bring iifto view. But wo must en-* 
deavour to trace this view — ^thiss answer — more into 
detail. 

If a Supreme Intelligence be the cause of the world 
and of the Laws which prevail among its phenomena, 
these Laws must exist as Acts of that Intelligence — 
as Laws caused by the thoughts of the Supreme Mind 
—as Ideas in the Mind of God. And then the ques- 
tion would be, How wo are to conceive these thought.**, 
these Ideas, to be at tlie same time Divine and human : 
— to be at the same time Ideas in the Dirine Mind, 
and necessary truths in the human mind; and this is 
the question which I would now inquire into. 

9 , {Is this Flatonmn ?) — To the terms in which the 
inquiiy is now propounded it may be objected that I 
am taking for granted the Platonic doctrine, that the 
world is constituted according to the Ideas of the 
Divine Mind. Jjjj may be said that this doctrine is 
connected with gross extravagancies of speculation 
and fiction, and has long been obsolete among sound 
philosophei’s. 

To which I reply, that if such doctrines have been 
pushed into extravagancies, with them I have notliing 
to do, nor have I any disposition or wish *to revive 
them. But I do not conceive the doctrine, to the ex- 
tent to which I have stated it, to be at all ob&yolete ; — 
that the Cause and Foundation of the Universe is a 
Divine Mind: and from that doctrine it necessarily 
follows, that the laws of the Universe are in the Ideas 
of the Divine Mind. 

: 1 would then, as I have said, examine t^ conse- 
quences of this doctrine, in reference to the question 
of wliich I have spoken. And in ordei* to dp this, it 
may help us, if we consider separately the bearing of 



PHtLOSOFHT OF DI»DOTEET. 

this doctrine upon separate portions of oar knowledge 
of the universe ; — separately its bearing upon the laws 
which form the subject-no^iter of different sciences:— 
if we take paii}icular human Ideas, and consider what 
the Divine Ideas must be with reg^ to oach of them. 

1 0. {Tidm of Space ,) — Let us take, in the fii'&t place, 
the Idea of Space. Concoming this Idea we possess 
necessary truths ; namely, ‘the Axioms of Geometry ; 
and, as necessarily resulting from them, the whole body 
of Geometry. And our former inquiry, as narrowed * 
within the limits of this Idea, will be, How is it that 
the truths of Geometry — b, priori triitlis — are univer- 
sally verified in the observed plienomeiia of the uni- 
vei*Bol And the theist’s answer which we have given 
will now assume this form: — This is so because the 
Supreme Mind has constituted and constitutes the uni> 
verse according to the Idea of Space. T^ie univei*80 
conforms to the Idea of S]mce, and the Idea of Space 
exists in the human mind : — ^is necessarily evoked and 
awakened in the human mind existing in the universe. 
And since the Idea of Space, which is a constituent of 
the universe, is also a constituent of the buuian mind, 
the consequences of this Idea in the universe and in 
the human mind necessarily coincide; that is, the 
spaded Laws of the universe neces^ijily coincide with 
the spacicU Science which man elaborates out of his 
mind. 

1 1. To this it may be objected, that we suppose the 
Idea of Space in the Divine Miucl (according to which 
Idea, among others, the universe is constituted,) to be 
identical^with the Idea of Space in the human mind ; 
and this, it may be urged, is too limited and material a 
notion of the Divine IVIind to be accepted by a reve- 
rent pliilosophy. 

I reply, that I suppose the Divine Idea of Space 
and the human Idea of Space to coincide, only so far 
as the human Idea goes; and that the Divine Idea 
may easily have so much more luminousneas and com- 
prehensiveness as Divine Ideas may be supposed to 
have compai'ed with human. Further, that this Idea 
of Spaoe^ first of the Ideas on which human 



ITS THEQLOOIOAL BKABIIIQ. 

f 

is founded^ is the most Inn^lnous sjotd comprdbensive o£ 
such Ideas; and there ate innumerable other Ideas, 
the foundations of sciences more or less complete, which 
are cxti'emelj obscure and limited in the human n^ind, 
but which must be conceived to be perfectly clear and 
unlimitedly compreheusivo in the Divine Mind. And 
thus, the distance between the huinan aud the Divine 
Mind, even as to the viewA which constitute the most* 
coni]>lete of the human sciences, is as great in our 
view us in any other. 

12. That the Idea of Space in the human mind, 
though sufficiently clear and comprehenbive to be the 
source of necessary truths, is for too obsciu*c and limited 
to be regarded as identical with the Divine Idea, will be 
plain to us, if we call to mind the perjdexities w liich 
the human mind foils into when it speculates 4*oncem- 
ing space infinite. An Intelligence in which all these 
perplexities should vanish by the light of the Idea 
itseli* would be infinitely elevated in clearness and 
comprehensiveness of intellectual vision above human 
intelligence, even though its Idea of Hpace should coin- 
cide with the human Idea as far as the human Idea 
goes. 

I do not shrink from saying, therefore, that the 
Idea of Space w^ich is a constituent of the human 
mind existing in the universe is, as far as it goes, 
identical v ith the Idea of Space which is a constituent 
of the universe. And this I give as the answer to 
question. How it is that the necessary truths of 
Geometry universally coincide with the relations of 
the phenomena of the universe 1 And this Moctrine, 
it is to be remembered, carries us to the further doc- 
triue, that the Idea of Space in the human mind is, so 
for as it goes, coincident with the Idea of Space in 
the Divine Mind. 

13, {Idea of 2V/W4.)— What I have said of the Idea 
of Space, may be repeated, for the moat part, with regard 
to the Idea of Time; except that the Idea of Time, as 
such, does not give rise to a large collection of neces- 
sary truths, such as the propositions of Qeometxy. 
Some philosophers regard Humber as a modification 



362 PHILOSOPUT OF DISCOVERY. 

or derivative of the Idea of Time. If we accept this 
view, we have, in the Science of Arithmetic, a body of 
necessary truths which flow from the Idea of GKme. 
But this doctrine, whichever way held, does not bear 
much ou the question with which we. are now con- 
cerned. That which we do hold is, that the Idea of 
Time in the human mind is, so far as it goes, coin- 
cident with the Idea of Time in the Divine Mind : 
and tl)at this is the reason why the events of the uni- 
verse, as contemplated by us, conform to necessary 
laws of succession : while at the same time we must 
suppose that all the perplexities in the Idea of Time 
which eniban-ass the human mind — the perplexities, 
for instance, which arise from contemplating a past 
and a future eternity, are, in the Divine Mind, extin- 
guished in the Light of the Idea itself. 

Space and Time have, and have generally been re- 
garded as having, peculiar prerogative's in our specu- 
lations concerning the constitution of the universe. 
We see and perceive all things as subject to the laws 
of Space and Time; or rather (for the term Law does 
not here satisfy us), as being and happening in space 
and in time : and probably most persons will liave no 
repugnance to the doctrine that the Divine iMiiul, as 
well as the human, so regards thei^j, and has so con- 
stituted them and us that they mast be so regarded. 
Space and Time are human Ideas which include all 
objects and events, and are the foundation of all human 
Science. And we can conceive that Space and Time 
are also Divine Ideas which the Divine Mind causes 
to inclucto all objects and events, and makes to be the 
foundation of all existence. So far as these Ideas go, 
our doctrine is not difficult or new, 

1 4. {Ideas of Force and Matter ,) — But what are we 
to say of the Ideas which come next in the survey of the 
sciences, Force and Matter? These are human Ideas 
— the foundations of several sciences — of the mecha- 
nical sciences in particular. But are they the founda- 
tions of necessary truths? Have we necessary truths 
respecting Force and Matter? We have endeavoured 
to prove that we have :-^tbat certain fundamental pro* 



ITS THEOLOOICAL BEAIIINO. 363 

positions in the Science of Mechanics, althongli, his- . 
torically speaking, they wre discovered by observa- 
tion and experience, are yet, philosophically speaking, 
necessary propositions. And being such, the facts of 
the universe must needs conform to these propositions ; 
and the reason why they do so, we hold, in this as in 
the former ciise, to be, that these Ide^is, Foioe and 
Matter, arc Ideas in the DiVirie Mind : — Ideas accord- * 
ing to which the universe is, by the Divine Cause, 
constituted and established. 

15. That Force and .Matter are Ideas existing in 
the Divine Mind, and coincident with the Idea of Force 
and Matter in the human mind, as far as these go, 
is a doctrine which is im}>ortant in our view of the 
universe in relation to its Cause and Foundation. 

These are very comprehensive and fundamental 
Ideas, and there are cci'tain universal relations among 
external things which rest upon these Ideas. The two, 
Force aud Matter, are, in a certain way, the necessary 
antithesis and opposite condition each of tlie other. 
Fom? (that is Mechanical Force, Pressure or Impulse) 
cannot act witliout matter to act upon. Matter (tliat 
is Body) cannot exist without Force by wliich it is kept 
in its place, by which its parts are held together, and 
by whieli it exclwles every other body from the place 
which it occupies. We cannot conceive Force with- 
out Mattel', or Matter Avithout Force ; the two ere, as 
Action and Reaction, necessarily co-ordinate and co- 
existent. In every part of the universe they must be 
so. In every part of the universe, if there be material 
objects, there must be Force; if there be Fofee, there 
must be material objects. 

Our appreheusion of this universal necessity arises 
from our having the Ideas of Force and Matter which 
are human IdeajB. The actuality of tliis universal anti- 
thesis arises from the Ideas of Force and Matter being 
Ideas in the Divine Mind ; — Ideas realized as a paiii of 
the fiindamental constitution of the universe. 

'That Force and Matter are thus among the Ideas in 
the Divine Mind, and that, with them, the Ideas of 
Force and Matter in the human mind, regarded in their 



364 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

most general form, agree so far ae they go, is another 
step iu the doctrine which I am tiying to unfold. 
That the Ideas of Force and Matter in the Divine 
Mind are such as to banish by their own light, innu-' 
merable contradictions and poi'|)lexities which darken 
tliese Ideas in the human mind, is to be supposed : and 
thus the Divine Mind is infinitely luminous and com- 
prehensive compared with *che human mind. 

16. (flreation of Matter .) — It may perhaps be urged, ^ 
as an objection to this doctrine, that it asserts Matter to 
be a necessary constituent of the univen 3 e, and thus 
involves the asseHion of the eternity of Matter. But 
in reality the doctrine asserts Matter to be eternal, 
only in the way in which time and space are eternal 
Whether we hold that there was a creation before 
which time and space did not exist, — with the poet 
who says 

Ere Time and Space were Time and Space were no^, — 

is not essential to our present inquiry. Certainly we 
cannot conceive such a state, and therefore cannot 
reason about it. We have no occasion here to speak 
of Creation, noi have spoken of it. What I have said 
is, that Space and Time, Force and Matter are univer- 
sal elements, principles, constitueijJIgi, of the universe 
as it is — and nccossaiy Ideas of the human mind ex- 
isting in that universe. If there ever was a Creation 
before which Matter did not exist, it was a Creation 
before which Force did not exist. And in the universe 
as it is, the two are necessarily co-existent in the hiumaxi 
thought because they are co-existent in the Divine 
Thought which makes the world. 

We apply then to Force and Matter the doctrine— 
the Platonic doctrine, if any one please so "to call i^,-^ 
that the world is constituted according ta the Ideas of 
the Divine Mind, and that the human mind appre* 
hends the inward and most fundamental relations of 
the universe by sharing in some measure of ihose same 
Ideas. 

1?. {Plat&nic Idem ^ — But do we go on with Plate 
to extend this doctrine of Ideas to all the objects /end/' 



ITS THEOLOGICAL BE ABIE G. 365 

all the aspects of objects which constitute the material 
universe? Do we say with Plato that there is not 
only an Idea of a Triangle by conformity to which a 
figure is a triangle, but an Idea of Gold, by conformity 
to which a thing is gold, and Idea of a Table, by con- 
formity to wliich a thing is a table ? 

Wc say none of these things. We say nothing 
which at all approaches to them. We do not say that 
there is an Idea of ,a Triangle, the arclietypo of all 
‘triangles; we only say that man has an Idea of Space, 
which is an Idea of a fundamental reality ; and that 
therefore from this Idea flow real and universal truths — 
about triangles and other figures. Still less do we say 
that we have an archetypal Idea of Gold, or of a Met^ 
in general, or of any of the kinds of objects which 
exist in the world. Here we part company with Plato 
altogether. 

But have we any Ideas at all with regard to objects 
which we thus speak of as scj>arable into Kinds? We 
can have knowledge, — oven exact and general know- 
ledge, that is, science — with regard to such things — 
with regal’d to plants and metals — gold and iron. Do we 
possess in our minds, with regard to those objects, any 
Ideas, any univei-sal principles, such as we possess with 
regard to geomet(^Sal figures or mechanical actions? 
And if so, are those human Ideas verified in the uni- 
verse, as the Ideas hitherto considered are? and do 
they thus afford us further examples of Ideas in* the 
human mind which are also Ideas in the Divine Mmd, 
manifested in the constitution of the universe? 

1 8 . {Idm of Kinds ,) — ^W e answer Yes to thftse ques- 
tions, on this ground: — the objects that exist in the 
world, plants and metals, gold and iron, for example, 
in oHer thatfc they maybe objects with regard to which 
we can have any knowledge, must be objects of distinct 
and definite thought. Plant must differ from metal^ 
gold from iron, in order that we may know anything 
at b11 about any of these objects. The differences by 
which such objects differ need not necessarily be 
Pissed by deJmiHtmSf as the difference of a triangle 
and a square are eiq[>ressed j but there must manifestiy 



36^ EIIILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERT. 

be fixed and definite differenced, in order that we may 
have any knowledge about them. These Kinds of 
things must be so fai' distinct and definite, as to be 
objects of distinct and definite thought. The Kinds of 
natural objects must differ, and we must think of things 
as of different Kinds, in order that we may know any- 
thing about natural objects. Living in a world in 
which we exercise our Intellect upon the natural ob- 
jects which surround us, we must regard them as 
distinct from each other in Kind. Wc must have an* 
Idea of Kinds of natural objects. 

. 19. The Idea of a Kind involves this principle: 
That where the Kiiul differs the Properties may differ, 
but so fin* as the Kind is the same the Properties con- 
templated in framing the notion of each Kind are the 
same. Gold cannot have the distinctive properties of 
Iron without being Iron. 

In the case of human knowledge, each Kind is 
marked by a word — a name; and the doctrine that 
the notion of the Kind must be so apidied that this 
.^ame Kind of object shall have the same properties, 
has been otherwise expressed by saying that Names 
must bo so applied that general propositions may be 
possible. Wc must so apply the name of Gold that we 
may be able to say, gold has a s^cific gravity of a 
certain amount and is ductile in a certain degree. 

20. But this condition of the names of Kinds, — 
that' they must bo such that general propositions about 
these Kinds of objects shall be possible ; — is it a iiecfes- 
sary result of the Idea of Kind ] And if so, can the 
Idea of Kind, thus implying the use of language, and 
a condition dej>ending on use of language, hi an 
Idea in the Pivine as well as in the human mind? 
Can it be, in this respect, like the Ideas which we 
have already emsidered, Space and Time, Force and 
Matter? * « 

We cannot suppose that the Ideas which exist in 
the Divine Mind imply, in the Supreme Intelligence, 
the need of language, like human language. "Eht 
there is no incongruity in supposing that they imply 
that which we take.aa the coruiUion of such hngtmge 



ITS THEOLOGICAL BEAHING. 367 

aa wc speak of, namely, distinct thought. Tliere is ' 
nothing incongi’uous in supposing that the Supreme 
Intelligence regards the objects ivhich exist in the 
miivei^se as distinct in Kind: and that the Idea of 
Kind in the human mind agi*ees with the Idea of 
Kind in the Divine Mind, as far as it goes. And as 
we have seen, the Idea of Properties is correlative and. 
coexistent with the Idea bf Kind, so that the one 
changing, the other changes also. There is notliing 
incongruous in supposing tliat the Divine Mind mani- 
fests in the universe of which it is the Cause and 
Foundation, these two, its coordinate Itleiis : and that 
the human mind sees that these two Ideas are co-ordi- 
nate and coexistent, in virtue of its paru(jii)ating in 
these Ideas of the Divine Mind. The universe is full 
of thijigs which man perceives do and must differ cor- 
respondingly in kind and in properties; and this is so, 
because the Ide^us of various Kinds and various Pro- 
perties are part of tho scheme of the universe in the 
Divine Mind. 

2 1 . That the Ideas of Kinds and Propei ties as co- 
ordinate and interdependent, though common, to a cer- 
tain extent, to the liuman and tlic Divine Mind, are 
immeasurably more luminous, penetrating and compre- 
hensive in the l^Fine than in the hiituiin mind, is 
abundantly evident. In fact, though man assents to 
such axioms aa these, — that the Properties of Tilings 
depend upon their Kinds, and that the Kinds of 
Things are determined by theii* Properties, — ^yet the 
nature of connexion <.»f Kinds and Properties is a mat- 
ter in which man’s mind is all hut wholly flark, and 
on* which tho Divine Mind must be perfectly clear. 
For in how few cases — .if indeed in any one — can we 
know wliab is the essence of any Kind ; — what is the 
real natvUre of the connexion between the character of 
the Kind and jts Properties ! Yet on this point we must 
suppose that ' the Divine Intellect, which' is the foim- 
dation of the world, is perfectly clean Eveiy Kind of 
thing, every genus and species of object, appears to Him 
in its essential character, and its propeiiiies foUbw as 
necessary consequences* He sees the essences of things 



368 PaiLOSOPHT OP DISOOVBItT. 

through all time and through all space; while wO; 
slowly and painfully, by observation and Cxpeiiment, 
which we cannot idealize or can idealize only in the 
most fragmentary manner, make out a few of the pro- 
perties of each Kind of thing. Our Science here is 
but a drop in the ocean of that truth, which is known 
to the Divine Mind but kept back from us ; but still, 
that we can know and do know anything, arises fi'om 
our taking hold of that principle, human as well as 
Divine, that there are ditferences of Kinds of things, 
and corre^^ponding differences of their properties. 

22. {Idea of Substance ) — T shall not attempt to 
enumerate all the Ideas whicli, being thus a jnrt of the 
founihition of Science in the humau mind and of Ex- 
istence in the univei*so, are shown to be at the same 
time ideas in the Divine and in the human mind. But 
there is one other of wliich the necessary and universal 
application is so uncontested, that it may well servo 
furtlior to exemplify our doctrine. In all reasonings 
concerning tlie composition and resolution of the ele- 
ments of bodies, it is assumed that tlio quantity of 
matter cannot be increased or diminished by anything 
which we can do to them. Wo have an Idea of Sub- 
stance, as something which may have its qualities 
altered b^ our operations upon it, Iju^ cannot liave its 
quantity changed. And this Idea of Hubstanoe is uni- 
'versally verified in the facts of observation and experi- 
ment. Indeed it cannot fail to bo so; for it regulates 
and determines the way in which we interpret the facts 
of observation and experiment. It authorized the phi- 
losopher •who was asked the weight of a Column of 
smoke to reply, Subtract the weight 6t the ashes 
from that of the fuel, and yOuliavo the weight of the 
smoke:” for ifi viriue of that^i^ea we assume that, in 
combustion, in any other operatioti^ all the sub- 
stance which b subjected to the operation must exist 
in the result in some form or othei*. Now why may 
we reasonably make this assumption, and thus,, as it 
were, prescribe laws to the universe] Our reply is, 
Because Substance is one of the Id,eas according to 
which the universe is oonfttituted. The material things 



1T3 THSOLO0IC41« BEABim 369 

yAdisk make up the uniyor^e are substance aocordmg 
to this Idea. They are substance according to thiii 
Idea in the Divine Mind, an 4 they are substance ac- 
cording to this Idea in the human mind, because the 
human mind has this Idea, to a certain extent, in com- 
mon 'with the Divine Mind In this, as in the other 
cases, the Idea must be immeasurably more clear and 
oompreheiisive in the Divine Mind than in the human# 
The human Idea of substance is full of difficulty and 
perplexity: as for instance; how a substance can as- 
sume successively a solid, fluid and airy form; how two 
substances con be combined so as entirely to ][)cnetrate 
one another and have new qualities: and the like. 
All those perplexities and difficulties we must suppose 
to vanish in the Divine Idea of Substance. But still 
tliero remains in the human, as in the Divine Idea, 
the source and root of the universal truth, that though 
substances may be combined or separated or changed 
in form in the processes of nature or of art, no portion 
of substance can come into being or cease io be. 

23. (Idea of Fined Came ,) — ^Thcre is yet one other 
Idea which I shall mention, though it is one about which 
difficulties have been raised, since the consideration of 
such difficulties may bo instructive : the Idea of a pu^r- 
posc, or as it is often termed, a Final Carney in organized 
bodies. It hasibeen held, and rightly*, that the as- 
sumption of a Final Cause of each part of animals and 
pl$mts is as inevitable as the assumption of an efficient 
cause of every event. The maxim, that in organized 
b^ies nothing is in vain, is as necessaiily true as the 
maxim that nothing happens hy chaiu:e, I •have else- 
where* shown fully that this Idea is not deduced from 
any special facta^ but is assumed as a law governing all 
&cts in organic naturd, directing the researches and in- 
terpreting the observations of physiologists. I have also 
remarked that it is not at variance with that oth^ law, 
that plants and that animals are constructed upon gene- 
^ral pl^ans, of which plans, it may be, we do not see the 


BB 


* ifov. Org, Belli Apli. cv. 



370 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVEEY. 

necessity, though we see how wide is their generality. 
This Idea of a purpose,— of a Final Cause, — then, thus 
supplied by our minds, is found to be applicable 
throughout the organic world. It is in virtue of this 
Idea that wo conceive animals and plants os subject to 
disecLse; for disease takes place when the parts do not 
fully answer their purpose ; when they do not do what 
th6y ought to do. How k it then that we thus find 
an Idea which is supplied by our own minds, but which 
is exemplified in every part of the organic world? Here * 
perhaps the answer will be readily allowed. It is be- 
cause thk Idea is an Idea of the Divine Mind. There 
is a Final Cause in the constitution of these parts of 
the univeise, and therefore wo can interpret them by 
means of the Idea of Final Cause. Wc can see a pur> 
pose, because there is a purpose. Is it too presump- 
tuous to suppose that we can thus enter into the Ends 
and Pui’poses of the Divine Mind? We willingly 
grant and declare that it would be presumptuous to 
suppose that we can enter into them to any but a very 
small degree. They doubtless go immeasurably beyond 
our mode of imderstanding or conceiving them. But to 
a certain extent we can go. We can go so far as to see 
that they are Ends and Ftirposes. It is not a vain pre- 
sumption in us to suppose that we^know that the eye 
was made for seeing and the ear for*liearing. In this 
the most pious of men see nothing impious: the most 
cautious philosophers see nothing rash. And that we 
can see thus far into the designs of the Divine Mind, 
arises, we hold, from this : — ^that we have an Idea of 
Design and of Purpose which, so far as it is merely 
lJuUf k true; and so &r, is Design and Purpose ip the 
same sense in the one case and in the other. 

I am very fiir from having exhausted the list of 
Fundamented Ideas which the human mind possesses 
and which have been made the foundations of Sdenoes. 
Of all such Ideas, I might go on to remark, that they 
are of universal validity and application in the region 
of external Facts. In all the cases I might go on to 
^uire. How is it that man’s Ideas, developed in his 
internal world; ere found to coincide universally ,witl]^ 



JTS THEOLOaiCAL BEABINa. 37 J 

ft 

the laws of the external world? B7 what necessity, 
on what ground docs this happen ? And in all cases 
1 should have had to reply, that this happens, and must 
happen, because these Ideas of the human mind are 
also Ideas of the Divine Mind according to which the 
universe is constituted. Man has these thoughts, and 
sees them verified in the universe, becaiise Qod had 
these thoughts and exempfifies th^^m in the universe. 

2 4. (// vman im inmmrahli/ to ^But 

of all these Ideas, I should also have to remark, that 
the way in which man possesses them is immeasurably 
obscure and limited in comparison witli the way in 
which God must be stipposed to possess them. These 
human Ideas, though clear and real as far as they go, 
in every case run into obscuidty and perplexity, from 
which the Ideas of the Divine IVlind must be supposed 
to be free. In every ease, man, by following the train 
of thought involve<l in each Idea, runs into confusion 
and seeming contradictions. It may be that by tliink- 
ing more and more, and by more and more studying 
the imiverse, he may remove some of this confusion 
and solve some of these contradictious. But when he 
has done in this way all that he can, an immeasurable 
region of confusion and contradiction will still remain; 
nor can he ever lipof e to advance very far, in dispelling 
the darkness which hangs over the greater part of the 
universe. His knowle<lge, his science, his Ideas, ex- 
tend only so far as he can keep his footing in the 
shallow watem which lie on the shore of the vast 
ocean of unfathomable truth. , 

25. But further, we have not, even so, exhausted 
our estimate of the immeftsimible distance between 
the human mind and the Divine Mind : — ^veiy far from 
it ; we have only spoken of the smallest portion of the 
region of truth, — ^that about which we have Sciencea 
and Scientific Ideas. In that region alone do we claim 
for man the possession of Ideas the dearness of which 
has in it something divine. But how narrow is the 
province of Scienoe compared with the wholp domain 
of human thought I We may enumerate the sdenoea 
of which we have been speaking, and which involve 

Bfia 



372 


PHILOSOPHY OP BISCOVBKY. 


such Ideas as I have mentioned. How many are theyl 
Geometry, Arithmetic, Chemistry, Classification, Phy- 
siology. To these we might have added a few others ; 
as the sciences which deal with Light, Heat, Polari- 
ties; Geology and the other Palietiological Sciences; 
and there our enumeration at present must stop. For 
we can hardly as yet claim to have Sciences, in the 
rigorous sense in which We use the term, about the 
Vital Powers of man, his Mental Powers, his historical , 
attributes, as Language, Society, Arts, Law, and the 
like. On these subjects few philosophers will pretend 
to exhibit to us Ideas of universal validity, prev.iiling 
through all the range of observation. Yet all these 
things proceed according to Ideas in the Divine Mind 
by which the universe, and by which man, is consti- 
tuted. In such provinces of knowledge, at least, wo 
have no difficulty in seeing or allowing how blind 
man is with regard to their fundamental and consti- 
tuent principles; how weik his reason; how limited 
his view. If on some of the plainest portions of pos- 
sible knowledge, man have Ideas winch may be regarded 
as coincident to a certain extent with those by which 
the universe m really constituted ; still on by for the 
largest portion of the things which most concern him, 
he has no knowledge but that wMoL he derives from 
experience, and which he cannot put in so general a 
form as to have any pretensions to rest it upon a 
foundation of coiuiate Ideas. 

26. {Science advances towards the Divine Ideas -) — 
But there is yet one remark tending somewhat in the 
opiKisite direction, which I must make, as a part of 
the view which T wish t» present. Science, in the 
rigorous sense of the term, involves, we have said, 
Ideas which to a certain extent agree with the Ideas 
of the Divine Mind. But science in that sense ia 
gressive; new sciences are formed and old sciences 
extended. Hence it follows that the Ideas which man 
has, and which agree with the Ideas of the Divine 
Mind, may receive additions to their number from 
time to time. This may seem a hold assertion; yet 
this is what, with due restrietion, we ooneeive to be 



ITS THEOLOGICAli BEABiKG. 


373 


tnie. Such Ideas as we have spoken of receive addi« 
tions, in respect of their manifestation and develop- 
ment. The Ideas, the germ of them at least, were in 
the human mind before; but by the progress of scien- 
tific thought they are unfolded into clearness and dis- 
tinctness.^ That this takes place with regard to scien- 
tific Ideas, the history of science abundantly shows. 
The Ideas of Space and Time indeed, were clear and' 
distinct from the first, and accordingly the Sciences of 
Geometry and Arithmetic have exist^ from the ear- 
liest times of man’s intellectual history. But the Ideas 
upon which tlie Science of Mechanics depends, having 
been obscure in the ancient world, are become clear in 
modern times. The Ideas of Composition and Reso- 
lution have only in recent centuries become so clear 
as to be the basis of a definite science. The Idea of 
Substance indeed was always assumed, though vaguely 
applied by the ancients; and tlie Idea of a Design or 
End in vital structures is at least as old as Socrates. 
But the Idea of Polarities wiis never put forth in a 
distinct form till quite recently ; and the Idea of Suc- 
cessive Causation, as applied in Geology and in the 
other Falsetiological Sciences, was never scientifically 
applied till mc^ern times: and without attempting 
to prove the poipt by enumeration, it will hardly be 
doubted that many Scientific Ideas are clear and dis- 
tinct among modern men of science which wore not so 
in the ancient days. 

Now all such scientific Ideas ore, as I have been 
urging, points on which the human mind is a reflex of 
the Divine Mind. And therefore in the progress of 
science, we obtain, not indeed new points where the 
human mind reflects the Divine, but new points where 
this reflection is clear and luminous. We do not assert 
that the progress of science can bring into existence 
new elements, of truth in the human mind, but it may 
bring them into view. It cannot add to the characters 
of Divine origin in the human mind, but it may add 
to or tmfold the proofs of such an origin. And this is 
what we conceive it does. And though we not con- 
ceive that the Ideas which science thus brings into 



374 PHILOSOPHY Of DISCOVBEY. 


view are the most important of man^s thoughts in 
other respects, yet they may, and we conceive do, sup- 
ply a proof of the Divine nature of the human mind, 
wliich proof is of peculiar cogency. What other proo& 
may be collected from other trains of human thought^ 
we shall hereafter consider. ^ 

27. (^Recapitvlation.) — ^This, then, is the argument to 
which we have been led by the survey of the sciences in 
which we have been engaged : — That the human mind 
can and does put forth, out of its natural stores, duly 
unfolded, certain Ideas as the bases of scientific truths : 
These Ideas are universally and constantly verified in 
the universe: And the reason of this i^, that they 
agree with the Ideas of the Divine Mind according to 
which the univeme is constituted and sustained : The 
human mind has thus in it an element of resemblance 
to the Divine Mind : To a certain extent it looks 
upon the universe as the Divine Mind does ; and there- 
fore it is that it can see a jxirtion of the truth : And 
not only can the human mind thus see a portion of the 
truth, as the Divine Mind sees it: but this portion, 
though at present immeasurably small, and certain 
to be always immeasurably small compared with the 
whole extent of trui/h which with greater intellectual 
]iOwers, he might discern, nevGrthelQss may increase 
from ago to age. 

This is then, 1 conceive, one of tlic results of the 
progress of scientific discovery — the Theological Besult 
of the Philosophy of Discovery, as it may, I think, not 
unfitly be called: — ^That by every step in such dis- 
covery by' which external fects assume the aspect of 
necessary consequences of our Ideas, we obtain a fresh 
proof of the Divine nature of the human mind : And 
though these steps, however far we may go in this 
path, can carry us only a very little way in the know- 
ledge of the universe, yet that such knowledge, so far 
as we do obtain it, is Divine in its kind, and shows 
that the human mind has something Divine in its 
nature. > 

The progress by which external facts assume the 
aspect of necessary consequences of our Ideas, we have 



ITS THEOLOGICAL BEARING. 


375 


termed the idealization of facta; and in thia senae we 
have f>aid, that the progress of science consists in the 
Idealization of Facts. But there is another way in 
which the operation of man’s mind may be considered — 
an opposite view of the identification of Ideas with 
Facte; which we must consider, in order to complete our 
view of the bearing of the progress of human thought 
upon the nature of man. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 
Man’s Knowledge of God. 


I. AN’S powers and means of knowledge are so 

a.VJL limited and lin])erfect tliat lie can know lUtl^ 
concerning God. It is well that men in tlieir theo- 
logical speculations should recollect that it is so, and 
should pursue all such speculations iu a modest and 
humble spirit. 

But tlus humility and modesty defeat their own 
ends, when they lead us to think that we can know 
nothing concerning God : for to bo modest and humble 
in dealing with this subject, implies that we know thio^ 
at least, that God is a proper object of modest and 
humble thought. 

2. Some philosophers hayo been led, however, by 
an examination of man’s faculties and of the nature of 
being, to the conclusion that maif <san know Clothing 
concerning God But we may very reasonably doubt 
the truth of this conclusion. We may ask, How can 
we Jenow that we can know nothing! If we can know 
nothing, we cannot even know that. 

It is rnuch more reasonable to begin with things 
tiukt we i^ally do know, and to examine how &r such 
knowledge can carry us, respecting God, as well as 
anything else. This is the course which we have been 
following, and its results are vexy far iix>m being 
trifling or unimportant. 

In tiius beginning what we know, Ve start 
&om two pointa^'dn eadx of which we have, we oon- 
emve, some real and sure knowledge ; — nafnely, mathe- 
matical and physical knowledge of the universe with- 
out us ; and a knowledge of our own moral and per* 
sonal nature wtttiin us. 



MAN*S KNOWLBDaB OP GOD. 377 

3. {From Nature we Uam eomething of God ,) — . 
pursuing the first line of thought, we are led to reason 
thus. The universe is governed by certain Ideaa: for 
instance, everything which exists and happens in the 
universe, exists and happens nr Space and Time, Why 
is this? It is, we conceive, because God has consti- 
tuted and constitutes the universe so that it may be 
so; that is, because the Ideas of Space and of Time are* 
Ideas according to which God has established and up- 
holds the universe. 

But we may proceed further in this way, as we have 
already said. The universe not only exists in space 
and time, but it has in it substances — material sub- 
stances : or taking it collectively, Material Substance, 
Can we know anything concerning this substance? 
Yes: something we can know; for we know that ma- 
terial substance cannot be bi*ought into being or anni- 
hilated by any natural process. We have then an Idea 
of Substance which is a Law of the universe. How is 
this? — We reply, that it is because our Idea of Sub- 
stance is an Idea on which God has established and 
upholds the universe. 

Can we proceed further ^tDl? Can we discern any 
other Ideas according to which the universe is consti-* 
tuted? Yes; as we have already reinai-ked, we can 
discern several, though as we go on from one to an- 
other they become gradually fainter in their light, less 
cogent in their necessity. We can see that Foi-ce as 
well as Material Substance is an Idea on which the 
universe is constituted, and that Force and MfUter are 
a necessary and universal antithesis : we cah see that 
the Things which occupy the universe must be of infi- 
nite Ki'i^f in order thirt an intelligent mind may 
occupy itself about them, and thus that the Idea id 
Kind is a constitutive Idea of the universe. We can 
aee thait some kinds of thii^ have life, and our Idea 
of life is, that every part of a thing is a means 
to an End; recognize or Final 

Cause, as an ld|sa wluch prevails throughout the uni- 
verse, and we reoqgnji® this Idea as an Id^ according 
to which God oonstittttes and upholds the universe, 



378 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVBET.' 

Since we know so mucli concerning the universe, 
and since eveiy Law of the universe which is a ne- 
cessary form of thought about the universe must 
exist in the Divine Mind, in order that it may iind 
a place in <mr minds, how can we say that we can 
know nothing concerning the Divine Mind? 

4. ( Tiumgh but Little .') — But on the other hand, we 
easily sec how little oui' knowledge is, compared with 
what we do not know. Even the parts of our know- 
ledge which are the clearest are fdll of perjilexities; 
and of the Laws of the universe, including living 
as well as lifeless things, how small a portion do we 
know at all ! 

Even the })arts of our knowledge which are the clear- 
est, I say, are full of per^dexities. Infinite Space and 
an infinite Past, an infinite Future, — how helplessly 
our reason struggles with these aspects of our Ideas ! 
And with regard to Substance^ how did ingenerable and 
indestructible substance come into being ? And with 
regard to Matter^ how can passive Matter be endued 
with living force 1 And with regard to Kinde^ how 
immeasurably beyond our power of knowing are their 
numbers and their outward differences : still more their 
internal differences and central essence ! And with 
regard to the Design which wc seoi in the organs of 
living things, though we can confidently say we see it, 
how obscurely is it shown, and how much is our view 
of it disturbed by other Laws and Analogies ! And 
the Life of things, the end to which such Design tends, 
how full of impenetiuble mysteries is it 1 or ratiier how 
entirely a^'mass of mys^gw ^to which our powers of 
knowledge strive in vain ^ penetrate ! 

There is therefore no danger that by following this 
train of thought we should elevate our view of man too 
high, or bring down God in our thoughts to the like- 
ness of man. Even if we were to suppose the Idea of 
the Divine Mind to be the same kbid ae the Ideas 
of the human mind, the very few Ideas of this kind, 
which man possesses, eompared with the whole xange 
of the universe, and the scanty length 'to which he ooit 
follow each, m^e his knowledge so sifiall and ixnpeiv 



man’s KNOWLEDdE OE GOB. 379' 

feet^ fhftb lie has abundant reason to be modest and 
humble in hijs contemplations concerning the Intelli- 
gence that knows all and constitutes all. He can, as 
I have already said, wade but a few steps into the 
margin of the boundless and unfathomable ocean of 
tiaith. 

5. But the Ideas of the Divine Mind must necessarily 
be different in kind, as well *as in number nnd extent, 

^from Uie Ideas of the human mind, on this veiy account^ 
that they are complete and perfect. Tlie Mind which 
can conceive all the parts and laws of the universe in 
all their mutual bearings, fundamental reasons, and 
remote consequences, must be different in kind, as 
well as in extent, from the mind which can only trace a 
few of these parts, and see these laws in a few of their 
aspects, and cannot sound the whole depth of any of 
them« The Divine Mind differs from the human, in 
the way in which wc must needs suppose what is Di- 
vine to differ from what is human. 

6. It has somefamos been said that the Divine Mind 
differs from the human as the Infini^ from the finite. 
And this has been given as a reason why we cannot 
know anything concerning God; for wo cannot, it is 
said, know anything conceming the Infinite. Our 
conception of the Infinite being merely negative, (the 
negation of a limif!^) makes all knowledge about it im- 
possible. But this is not truly said. Our conception 
of the Infinite is not merely negative. As I have 
elsewhere Remarked, our conception of the Infinite is 
positive in this way that in order to form this con«* 
ception, we b^n to follo^r %^ven Idea in*a given 
direction; and then, having begun, we suppose 
that the progress of thought goes on in that direction 
without limit To arrive at our Idea of infinite space, 
for example, we must determine what kind of space 
we mean, — ^line, area or solid ; and from what origin 
we begin : and infinite space Jj^as different attributes 
as wo take different beginnings in this way. 

And so with regard^to the kinds of ii^ity (for 
there are many) irhich^belong to the Divine Mind. 
Wo have a few Ideas whidbi represent the I^ws of the 



38 o philosophy op discovery. 

imiverae : — as Space, Time, Substance, Force, Matter, 
Kind, End ; of such Ideas the Divine Mind may have 
an infinite number. These Ideas in the human mind 
are limited in depth and clearness : in the Divine Mind 
they must be infinitely clearer Uian the clearest human 
Intuition ; infinitely more profound than the profound^ 
est human thought. And in this way, and, as we shall 
see, in other ways also, the Divine Mind infinitely 
transcends the human mind when most fully instructed ^ 
and unfolded. 

In this way and in other ways also, I say. For we 
have hitherto spoken of the human mind only as con- 
templating the external world, — as discerning, to a cer- 
tain small extent, the laws of the universe. We have 
spoken of the world of things without : we must now 
speak of the world within us; — of the woild of our 
thoughts, our being, our moral .and personal being. 

7. {From ourselves we learn, something concerning 
God ) — yf e must .speak of this : for this is, as I have 
said, another starting point and another line in which 
we may proceed ^om what we know, and see how far 
our knowledge carries us, and how far it teaches us 
anything concerning God. 

Looking at ourselves, we perceive that we have to 
act, as well as to contemplate: ive are practical as 
well as speculative beings. And tracing the nature 
and conditions of our actions, in the depths of our 
thought we find that there is in the aspect of actions 
a supreme and inevitable distinction of right and 
wrong. We cannot help judging of our actions as 
right add wrong. We acknowledge that thei*e must 
be such a judgment appropriate to them. We have 
these Ideas of and wrong ^ attribates of actions ; 

and thus we are pwral beiugs. 

8. And again : the actions are owr actions. Wo 
act in this way or that. And tos are not mere things^ 
which move and change as they are acted on, but whhfii 
do not themselves act, eh maa acts* I am not a Thing 
but a Person; and tlm mon with whom I act, who act 
with me-^act in various ways towards me, w^ or ill 
•-*-are also persons. Man is a pmonal being. 



UAN^S KKOWLBDOE OW GOD. 38 1 

Tbe Ideas of right and wrong — ^the Tnoral Ideas of ^ 
man-i-are then a part of the scheme of the universe to 
which man belongs. Could they he this, if they were 
not also a part of the nature of that Divine Mind 
which constitutes the universe ? — It would seem not : 
the Moral Law of the universe must be a Law of the 
Divine Klind, in order that it may be a Law felt and 
discerned by man. * 

9. {Objection (mewered!) — But, it may be objected, 
the Moral Law of the univei'se is a Law in a different 
sense from the Laws of the universe of which we spoke 
before — ^the mathematical and physical laws of the 
universe. Those were laws according to which things 
ore, and events occur: but Moiul Laws are Laws ac- 
cording to which men ougM to act, and according to 
which actions <mghJt to be. There is a difference, so 
that we cannot reason from the human to the Divine 
Mind in the same manner in this case as in the other. 

Time : we cannot reason in tJie same Tuanner. But 
we can reason still more confidently. For the Law 
directing what ouglU to he is the Supi*eme Law, and 
the mind wliich constitutes the Supreme Law is tho 
Supreme Mind, that is, the Divine Mind. 

10, That the Moral Law is not verified among men 
in tact, is not a ground for doubting that it is a Law 
of the Divine Mind ; but it is a ground for inquiring 
what consequences the Divine Mind has annexed to 
the violation of the Law; and in what manner the 
supremacy of the Law will be established in the total 
course of the history of the universe, including, it may 
be, the history of other worlds than that in which we 
now live. 

Considering how dimly and imperfectly we see what 
consequences the Divine Governor has annexed to the 
Violation of the Moral Law, He who sees all these 
consequences and has provided for the establishment 
of His Law in the whole history of the human race, 
must be supposed to be infinitely elevated above man 
pi wisdom; — more even in rf^feue of this aspect of His 

from 


nature than in virtue of that which is derived 



382 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVERY* 

1 1. Man is a person ; and his personality is his highr- 
est atttibufce, or at least, that which makes all his highest 
attributes possible. And the highest attribute which 
belongs to the finite minds which exist in the univei'se 
must exist also in the Infinite Mind which constitutes 
the universe as it is. The Divine Mind must reside 
in a Dlmm Person, And as man, by his personality, 
acts in obetlience to or In transgression of a moral 
law, so God, by His Pei*sonality, acts in establishing ^ 
the Law and in securing its supremacy in tlic whole 
history of the world. 

12. (Creivfion.) — Acknowledging a Divine Mind 
which is the foundation and suppoi^t of the world as it 
is, constituting and upholding its laws, it may be asked, 
Does this view point to a beginning of the world? 
Was there a time when the Divine Mind called into 
being the world, before non-existent? Was there a 
Creation of the world? 

T do not think that an answer to this question, 
given either way, afieots the argument which I have 
been urging. The Laws of the Universe discoverable 
by the human mind, are the Laws of the Divine 
I^nd, whether or not there was a time when these 
Laws first came into operation, or first produced the 
world which we sec. The argument respecting the 
natime of the Divine Mind is the same, whether or 
not we suppose a Creation. 

But, in point of fact, every part of our knowledge 
of the Universe does seem to point to a beginning. 
Every part of the world has been, so far as we ean 
see, formed by natural causes out of something differ-* 
ent from what it now is. The Earth, with its lands 
and seas, teeming with innumerable forms of living 
things, has been produced from an eai*th formed of 
other lands and seas, ocqupied with quite diffetemt 
forms of life; and if we go fkr enough back, from aU 
earth in which there was no life. The stars which wa 
callj&BScf move and change; the nebals in their shape 
show that they too are moving and changing. The 
Earth was, some at least hold, produced by the con-* 
densation of a nebula. The hii^ry of man» ea well 



han’b knowledge oe god. 383 

as of others of its inhabitants, points to a beginning.- 
Languages, Arts, Governments, Histories, all seem to 
have begun from a starting-point^ however remote. 
Indeed not only a beginning, but* a beginning at no 
remote period, appears to be indicated by most of the 
sciences which cany us backwards in the world’s his- 
tory. 

But wo must allow, on the other hand, that though* 
all sucIl lines of resoarcli point t^^imrds a beginning, 
none i»f them can be followed up to a beginning. All 
the lines converge, but all melt away before they reach 
the point of convergence. As I have elsewhere said*, 
in no science has man been able to arrive at a begin- 
ning which is homogeneous with the kno^v^l course of 
events, though we can often go very fiir back, and 
limit the hyiwthcsea respecting the origin. We have, 
in the impossibility of thus coining to any conclusion 
by natural reason on the subject of creation, another 
evidence of the infinitely limited nature of the human 
mind, when compared with the Creative or Constitu- 
tive Divine Mind. 

13. {E^id of the Worlds ) — But if our natural reason, 
aided by all that science can teach, can tell us nothing 
respecting the origin and beginning of this world, still 
less can i-eason te[l us anything with regard to the 
End of this world. On this subject, the natural 
sciences are even more bairen of instruction than on 
tlie subject of Creation. Yet we may say that as the 
Constitution of the Universe, and its conformity to a 
Collection of eternal and immutable Ideas as its ele^ 
ments, are not inconsistent with the supposition of a 
Beginning of the present course of the world, so nei- 
ther are they inconsistent evith the supposition of an 
End. Indeed it would not be at all impossible that 
physical inq^uiries should present the prospect of an 
ESud, even more clearly than they afibixl the retrospect 
of a Beginning. If, for instance, it should be found 
that j^ke planets move in a resisting medium which 


» iTist IiNi Sft K syliL e. vL Mci 5. 




384 3PHIL0S0PHY OF DISOOVEET. 

constantly retards their velocity, and must finally 
make them fall in upon the central siin, there would 
be an end of ilie earth as to its present state. We can« 
not therefore, on the grounds of Science, deny either a 
Beginning or an End of the present world. 

14. But here another order of considerations comes 
into play, namely, those derived from moral and theo- 
logical views of the world# On these we must, in con- 
clusion, say a few words. 

Tt is very plain that these considerations may lead 
us to believe in a view of the Beginning, Middle, and 
End of the liisU)ry of the world, very different from 
anything which the mere physical and natural sciences 
can disclose to us. And these expressions to which I 
have been led, the Beginning^ the Middle^ and the 
End of the world’s history according to theological 
views, are full of suggestions of the highest interest. 
But the interest which belongs to these suggestions is 
of a solemn and peculiar kind ; and the considerations 
to which such suggestions point are better, I think, 
kept apart fi’om such speculations as those with wdiich 
1 have been concerned in the present volume. 



CHAPTER XXXIL 


Analoqi£S of Physical and Religious Philosophy* 


I. A NY assertion of anal<^y l)etween physical and 

jljL religious philosophy will very proj^erly be 
looked upon with great jealousy as likely to be forced 
and delusive ; and it is only in its most general aspects 
that a sound philosophy on the two subjects can offer 
any points of resemblance. But in some of its general 
conditions the discovery of truth in the one held of 
knowledge and in the other may offer certain analo- 
gies, os well os differences, which it may be instructive 
to notice ; and to some such aspects of our philosophy 
1 shall venture to refer. 

For the physical sciences — the sciences of observa- 
tion and speculation — ^tbe progress of our exact and 
scientific knowledge, as I have repeatedly said, con- 
sists in I'educiug tlie objects and events of the universe 
to a conformity with Ideas which wc have in our own 
minds : — the Ideas, for instance, of Space, Force, Sub- 
stance^ and the like. In this sense, the intellectual 
progi*8Ss of men consists in the Idealization of Facta. 

2 . In moral subjects, on the other hand, where 
man has not merely to observe and speculate, 4)ut also 
to act; — where he does not passively leave the foots 
and events of the world su<di as they a^-e, but tries 
actively to alter them and to improve the existing 
state of thongs, his progi^ess consists in doing this. He 
makes a mozut advance when he succeeds in doing 
what he thus attempts : — ^when he really improves the 
state of things with -which he has to do by removing 
etil and prcducing good : — ^when he makes the state 
6f things, namely, the relations between him and otiier 
persons^ his acts and their acts, confbnn more and 

CO 



386 FHILOBOFIIT OF DISCOVEET. 

more to Ideas which he has in his own mind; — * 
namely, to the Ideas of Justice, Benevolence, and the 
like. His moral progress thus consists in the realisa- 
tion of Ideas. ^ 

And thus we are led to the Aphorism, as we may 
call it, that MarCa Intdlectual Progress consists in the 
IdecblizcUion of Faefs^ and his Moral Progress consists 
in the Pealizaiion of Ideas. 

3. But further, though that progress of science 
which consists in the idealization of facts may be 
carried through several stages, and indeed, hi the liis- 
tory of science, has been canied through many stages, 
yet it is, and always must be, a pvogi*ess exceedingly 
imperfect and incomplete, when compared with the 
completeness to which iis nature iioints. Only a few 
bcicnces have made much progress; none are com- 
plete; mobt have advanced only a step or two. In 
none have we reduced all the Facts to Ideas. In 
all or almost all the unrcvluced Pacts arc fu* more 
numerous and extensive than those which have been 
reduced The general mass of the facts of the uni- 
verse are mere facts, unsubdued to the rule of science. 
The Facts are not Idealized. The intellectual pro- 
gress is miserably scanty and imperfect, and would be 
so, even if it were carried mucli furtlier than it is 
carried. How can we hope that it will ever aiiproach 
to completeness ? 

4. And in like manner, the moral progress of man 
is still more miserably scanty and incomjilete. In 
how small a degree has he in this sense realized his 
Ideas! In how small a degree has he carried into 
real effect, and embodied in the relations of society, in 
his own acts and in those^vof others with whom Jke is 
concerned, the Ideas of Justice and Benevolence and 
the like ! How far from a complete realization of such 
moral Ideas are tlie acts of the best men, and the i::ela- 
tions of the best forms of society ! How for fix)m per- 
fection in these respects is man 1 and how certain it^ 
is that he will always be very far from perfectiojal 
Far below oven such perfection os he can conccivn, he 
vill always be in his acts and feelinga The moral 



PHYSIOAIi AND EEUGIOUS PHILOSOPHY. 387 

progress of man, of each man, and of each society, is, 
as 1 haye said, miserably scanty and incomplete ; and 
\^hen regarded as the realization pf hLs moral Ideas, 
its scantiness and incompleteness become still more 
manifest than before. 

Uence we are led to another Aphonsm; — that 
Tihan^a progress in the recdimtion of Moral Ideas^ a/nd 
his progress in the ScierUifie idealization of FactSy a/rcy 
and cdrmys will he^ exceedingly scanty and incomplete, 

5. But there is another as})ect of Ideas, both phy<* 
sical and moral, in which this scantiness and incom- 
pleteness vanish. In the Divine Mind, all the phy- 
sical Ideas aro entertained with complete fulness and 
luminousness; and it is because they are so enter- 
tained in the Divine Mind, and it is beeause the uni- 
verse is constituted and framed upon them, tliat we 
find them verified in every jiart of tlie universe, when- 
ever we make our observation of facts and deduce 
thdir laws. 

In like manner the Moral Ideas exi.st in the Divine 
Mind in coin]dote fulness and lumiiiousness ; and we 
are natumlly led to believe and expect that they must 
be exemplified in the moral universe, as completely 
and universally as the physical laws arc exemplified in 
the physical univeme. Is this sol or under what con- 
ditions can we conceive this to be? ^ 

6. In answering this question, we must consider 
how fisLr the moral, still more even than the physical 
Ideas of the Divine Mintl, are elevated above our 
human Ideas; but yet not so far as to have qo resem- 
blance to our coTtesponding human Idejis; for if this 
wore so, we could not reason about them at all. 

In speaking of man’s moral Ideas, B^evolence, 
Justice, and the like, we speak of them as lielonging 
to man’s Stndy rather than to his Mindy which we have 
commonly spoken of as the seat of his physical Ideas. 
A distinction is thus often made between the intel- 
•lectual and the moral faculties of man; but on this 
distinction we here lay no stress. We may speak oi 
inan^S Mind and Sovly meaning that part of his being 
in which are all his Ideas, intdlectual and moraL ^ 

CO a 



388 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

And now let ns consider the question which has 
just been asked: — ^how we can conceive the Divine 
Benevolence and Jvisticc to bo completely and univer- 
sally realized in the moral worl(]^ as the Ideas of 
Space, Time, are in the physical world? 

7. Our Ideas of Benevolence, Justice, and of other 

Virtues, may be elevated s^bove their original narrow- 
ness, and puiified from their original coarseness, by moral 
culture; as our Ideas of Force and Matter, of Sub- 
stance and Elements, and the like, may be made clear 
and convincing by philosophical and scicntiiic culture. 
This appears, in some degree, in the hibtoiy of moral 
terms, as the progi*e&s of clearness and efficacy in the 
Idea of the material sciences a])pear8 in the history of 
the terms belonging to such sciences. Thus among 
the Homans, while they confined their kindly affections 
"within their own class, a stranger was universally an 
enemy; was synonymous with hoatia. But 

at a later period, they regarded all mm as having a 
claim on their kiiidnes'j, and he who felt and acted on 
this claim was called humam. This meaning of the 
word humanity »hows the progress (in their Ideas at 
least) of the \irtue which the word humanity desig- 
nates. 

8. And as man can thus rise to a point of view 
where he sees that man is to be loved as man, so the 
humane and loving man inevitably assumes that Ood 
loves all men ; and thus assumes that there is, or may 
be, a love of man in man’s heart, which represents and 
resemble^ in kind, however remote in degree, the love 
of Grod to man. 

But as in man’s love of man there are very widely 
different sfietges, rising from*the narrow love of a savage 
to his &mily or his tribe, to the widest and 
feelings of die most enlightened and loving universal 
philanthropist; — so must we sujipose that there are 
stages immeasurably wider by which God’s love of 
man is more comprehensive azid more tender than any 
love of man for mam The religious philosopher wiU 
fully assent to the expressions of this conviction d^ 
livered by pious men in ell ages. ^*The eternal God jb 



PHYSICAL AND BELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY. 389 

thy refuge, and beneath thee are the everlasting arms/* 
“When my father and my mother forsahe me the Lord 
taketh mg up,** is the expression of Divine Love, con- 
sistent with philosophy as well as with revelation. But 
as the Divine Love is more comprehensive and enduring 
tlian any human love, so is it in an immeasurably greater 
degree, more enlightened. It is not a love that seeks 
merely the pleasure and gratification of its object; tJuit 
even an enlightened hunutu love does not do. It seeks 
the good of its olyjects ; and such a good as is the great- 
est good, to an Intelligence which can embrace all 
cases, causes, and contingencies. To our limited un- 
derstanding, evil s<*Gms often to be inflicted, and the 
good of a part seems inconsistent with the good of an- 
otlicr part. Our atU*mpts to conceive a Supreme and 
complete Good provided for all the creatures which 
exist in tlie univer.se, bafilc and peqdex us, even more 
than our attempts to conceive infinite space, infinite 
time, and an infinite chain of causation. But as the 
most careful attention which wo can give to the Ideas 
of Space, Time, and Tausation convinces us that these 
Ideas ai’e perfectly clear and comjdete in the Divine 
Mind, and that our j)erplexity and confusion on these 
subjects arise only from tho vast distance between the 
Divine Mind and cgir human mind, so is it reasonable 
to suppose the same to be the source of the confusion 
which wo experience when we attempt to determine 
what most conduces to tho good of our fellow-crea- 
tures ; and when, urged by love to them, wo endeavour 
to promote this good. We can do little of what Infi- 
nite Love would do, yet are we not thereby dispensed 
fi'om seeking in some d^co to imitate the working of 
Divine Love. We can see •but little of what Infimte 
JntdHgence secs, and this should bo one source of con- 
fidejftie and comfort, when we stumble upon perplexi- 
ti^ {Produced by the seeming mixture of good and ^vil 
in the world. 

9. But when we ask tho questions which have already 
been stated : Whether this Infinite Divine Love is real- 
ized in the world, and if so, How: I conceive that we 
0^ irresistibly impelled to reply^ the formed question, 



390 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVPRT. 

that it is : and we then turn to the latter. We are led 
to assume that there is in God an Infinite Love of 
man, a creature in a certain degree of a Divii^e nature. 
We must, ae a coosoquence of this, assume that the 
Love of God to man, necessarily is, in the end, and on 
tlie whole, completely and fully realized in the history 
of the world. But what is the complete histoiy of the 
world 1 Is it that which consists in the lives of men such 
as we see them between their birth and their death 1 If 
the minds or souls of men are alive aftei* the death of 
the body, that future life, as well as this present life, 
belongs to the history of the World; — to that provi- 
dential history, of which the totality, as we have said, 
must bo governed by Infinite Divine Love. And in 
addition to all other reasons for believing that the 
minds and souls of men do thus survive their present 
life, is this : — ^that we thus can conceive, what other- 
wise it is difficult or impossible to conceive, the opera- 
tion of Infinite Love in the whole of the history of 
mankind. If there be a Future State in which men’s 
souls are still under the authority and direction of the 
Divine Governor of the world, all that is here wanting 
to complete the scheme of a perfect govemmont of 
Intelligent I>ove may thus be applied : all seeming and 
partial evil may he absorbed and v3xiinguished in an 
ultimate and universal good. 

lo. The Idea of Justice ea belonging to God sug- 
gests to us some of the same kind of reflexions as 
those which we have made respecting the Divine Love. 
We believe God to be just: otherwise, as has been 
said, He* would not be God. And as we thus, from 
the nature of our minds and souls, believe God to be 
just, we must;, in this bel^^ understand Justice ac« 
corffing to the Idea which wo have of Justice; that is, 
in some measure, according to the Idea of Jxistioe, as 
exemplified in human actions and feelings. It would 
be absurd to combine the two propositions, that we 
necessarily believe that Gh>d is just, and that by justy 
we mean something entirely different from the com* 
mon meaning of the word. 

But thou^ the Divine Idea of Justice must imeea* 



PHTSlC4Ii and religious PHILOSOPHT. 39 1 

wily, in some meaeure, coincide witli onr Idea of 
Justice, we must believe in fhis, as in other cases, that 
the Diviiie Idea is immeasurabljr moi^ profound, com- 
prehensive, and clear, than the Ifuman Idea. Even 
the human Idea of Justice is susceptible of many and 
largo progi-essive steps, in the way of clearness, con-- 
sistency, and comprehensiveness. In the mural history 
of man this Idea advances from the hard rigour of in- 
flexible written Law to tlie ecpritable cMtiJ nation of the 
real circumstances of each case; it advances also from 
the nari'ow Law of a single community to a larger Law, 
which includes and^«olves the conflicts of all such 
Laws. Further, the administration of human Law is 
always imperfect, often erroneous, in consequence of 
man’s imperfect knowledge of the facts of each case, 
and still more, from his ignorance of the designs and 
feelings of the actors. If the J udge could see into the 
heart of the person accused, and could himself rise 
higher and higher in judicial wisdom, he might exem- 
plify the Idea of J ustice in a far liigher degree than 
has ever yet been done. 

I [. But all such advance in the improvement of 
human Justice must still be supposed to stop immea- 
surably short of the Divine Justice, which must in- 
clude a perfect kitt)wledge of all men’s actions, and all 
men’s hearts and thoughts ; and a universal application 
of the wisest and most comprehensive Laws. And the 
diflferenco of the Divine and of the human Idea of 
Justice may, like the diflerences of other Divine and 
human Ideas, include the solution of all the perplexi- 
ties in which we find ourselves involved 'when we 
would tiaoe the Idea to all its consequences The Di- 
vine Idea is immeasurably elevated above the human 
Idea; in the Divine Idea all inconsistency, defect, and 
incompleteness vanish, and Justice includes in its ad- 
ministration every man, without any admixture of in- 
justice. This is what we must conceive of the Divine 
administration, since Gk>d is perfectly just. 

12 , But here, as before, we have another eonclir- 
aion suggested to us. We or^ by the oonsideratioiiB 
just now spoken led to belieye tbat^ in the Divine 



39^ jpfiiiiOSOPHy oy disootsbt. 

adminiBtratioii of * the 'worid is an adxxunistzA&cm of 
perfect Justice ][«^tliB.t is, such istlie DiTine Admiuis* 
tration in the end and on the whole, takixig Into ac- 
count the whole of the providential history of the 
world, But the course of the world, taking into ac- 
count only what happens to man in this present life, 
is not, we may venture to say, a complete and entire 
administration of justice. It often happens that in- 
justice is successM and triumphant, even in the end, 
so far os the end is seen here. It happens that wrong 
is done, and is not remedied or punished. It happens 
that blameless and vii*tuouB men are subjected to paiu, 
grief, violence^ and oppression, and are not protected, 
extricated, or aveng^. In tne affairs of this world, 
the prevalence of injustice and wrong-doing is so ap- 
parent, as to be a common subject of com|>laint : and 
though the complaint may be exaggerated, and though 
a calm and comprehensive view may often discern com- 
pegiisatiug and remedial induences which are not visible 
at first sight, slall we cannot tegard the lot of happiness 
or mi^iy which fidls to each man in this world and 
this lire as apportioned according to a schcniP of per- 
fect and universal justice, such as in otir thoughts we 
cannot but require the Bivine administration to be. 

, 13. Here then we are again le(^ to the same con- 
viction by regarding^ the Divine acbmi^i^tration of the 
^ world as^he jroalization of the Divine Justice, to which 
we were before led regarding it as the realization 
of the Divine Love, feince the Idea is not fully or 
completely tealized in man’s life in this present world, 
this presdltit world cannot be the whole of the Divine 
Administration. To complete the realimtion of the 
Idea of Justice, as an element of the Divine Adminis- 
tration, there must be a life of man after his life in 
this present world. If man’s mind and soul, the part 
of him which is susceptible of happiness and miseiy, 
Bu^ve this ^present life, and be still subject to the 
Divine Admimstration, the Idea of Divine Justice 
may still be completely realized, notwithstanding oU 
that hero looks like injustice or defective justice ; 
it belongs to the Idea of Justice to remedy and com* 



PHTSlCAIi AND BEIAOIOSTS I^ItOS6jPST, 393 

1. t 

pensaio; not to prevent wrongs thne by this 

supposition of a Future State of man’s existoacei we 
are enabled to oouoeive that, in the whole of the Di- 
vme Gk>vernment of the universe, ^ seeming injustice 
ajid wrong may be finally corrected and rectified, In an 
ultimate and universal establishment of a re^n of per« 
feet Bighteousneas. 

14. Admitting the view thus presented, we may 
again discern a remarkiLble analogy becwceu what 
have called our physical Ideas (those of Space, Time, 
Cause, Substance, and the like), and our nkoral Ideas, 
(those of Benevolence, Justice, &c.) In both classes we 
must suppose that our human Ideas represent, though 
veiy incompletely and at ftn immeasurable distance^ 
the Pivine Ideas. Even our physical Ideas, when pur* 
sued to their consequences, are involved in a per{)lexity 
and confusion from which the Pivine Ideas are iim 
Our Ideas of Benevolence and Justice are still more 
full of imperfections and inconsistency, when we would 
frame them into a complete scheme, and yet from such 
Imperfections and inconsistency we must suppose that 
the Divine Benevolence and Justice are exempt. Our 
physical Ideas we find in every case exactly exempli- 
fied ^d realized in the universe, and we account for 
this by cousidoiing that tjicy are the Divine Idea^ on 
which the universe is constituted.^ «« Our moral Ideas, 
tho Ideas of Benevolence and Justice in particular, v 
must also be realized hi the universe, as a scheme of 
Divine Oo-'^emment. But they are not ^realized in 
tho world as constituted of man living this present 
life. The Divine Scheme of the world, theibfore, ex- 
tends beyond this present life of man. If we could 
include hi our survey the# future life as well as the 
present life of man, and tlie future course of the Di- 
vine Qovernment,, we should have a scheme of the 
Moral Government of the universe, in which the Ideas 
of Perfect Benevolence and Perfect Justioq are as com* 
pletely and universally exemplified and realized, as the 
Idc^ of Space, Time, Cause, Substance^ and the like, 
ereiiln the physical universe. 

15. There is one other remark bearing upon this 



594 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT* 

analogy, which seems to deseiTe our attention. As I 
have said in the last chapter, the scheme of the world, 
as governed by our physical Ideas, seems to point to 
a Beginning of the world, or at least of the present 
coume of the world : and if we suppose a Beginning, 
our thoughts naturtdly turn to an End. But if our 
physical Ideas point to a Beginning and suggest an 
End, do our Ideas of Divine Benevolence and Justice 
in any way lend themselves to this suggestion) — 
Perhaps we might venture to say that in some degree 
they do, even to the eye of a mere philobopliical reason. 
Perhaps our reason alone might suggest that there 
is a progression in the human race, in various moral 
attributes — in art, in civili2ation, and even in humanity 
and in justice, which implies a beginning. And that 
at any rate there is nothing inconsistent with our Idea 
of the Diving Oovemment in the supposition that the 
history of this world has a Beginning, a Middle and 
an End. 

1 6. If therefore there should be convoyed to us 
by some channel esj^ecially appropriated to the com- 
munication and development of moral and religious 
Idens, the knowiodgo that the world, as a scheme of 
Divine Government, has a Beginning, a Middle^ and 
om End, of a Kind, or at least, ^invested wrth cir- 
cumstances quite different from any which our physi- 
cal Ideas can disclose to us, there would be, in such 
a belief, nothing at all inconsistent with the analogies 
which our phDosopliy— the philosophy of our Ideas 
illustrated by the whole progress of science — has im- 
pressed ifpon us. On the gix)unds of this philosophy, 
we need find no ^difficulty in believing that as the 
visible universe eashibits the operation of the Divino 
Ideas of Space, Time, Cause, Substance, and the like, 
and discloses to us traces of a Beginning of the pre- 
sent mode of operation, so the moi^ universe exhibits 
to us the operation of the Divine Benevolence and 
Justice; and that these Divine attributes wrought in 
a special and peculiar manner in the Beginning ; inters 
posed in a peculiar and special manner in the Middle ; 
and will again act in a peculiar and speobl manner in 



PHYSICAL AND RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY. $9$ 

tUe Ihd of the world. And thus the conditions of the 
physical nniverse, and the Govemment of the Moral 
world, are both, though in different wayi^ a paiii of the 
work which God is cairying on from the Banning of 
things to the End — ojtms quod Deua operator a priiv- 
cipio uaqiie ad Jmem, 

17. We are led by such analogies as I Lave been 
adducing to believe that the whole course of events in 
which the minds and souls of men survive the present 
life, and are hereafter subjected to the Divine governr 
meat in such a way as to complete all that is here de- 
ficient in the world’s histoiy, is a scheme of peifect 
Benevolence and Justice. Now, can wo discern in 
man’s mind or soul itself any indication of a destiny 
like this^l Are there in us any powers and fiiculties 
which seem as if they were destined to immortality t 
If there be, we have in such faculties a strong confirm- 
ation of that belief in the future life of man which has 
already been suggested to us as necessary to render the 
Divine govemment conceivable. 

18. According to our philosophy there arc powers 
and faculties which do thus seem fitted to endure, and 
not fitted to terminate and be extinguished. The Meas 
which we have in our minds — ^the physical Ideas, as 
we have called th^ according to which the universe 
is constituted, — agree, as far as they go, with the Ideas 
of tlie Divine Mind, seen in the constitution of the 
universe. But these Divine Ideas are eternal and im- 
perishable : we therefore naturally conclude tlmt the 
human mind which includes such elemetnts, is*also 
eternal and im2)erishable. Since the mine? can take 
hold of eternal truths, it mubt be itjielf eternal. Since 
it is, to a certain extent, the imagM>f God in its facul- 
ties, it cannot ever cease to be the image of God. 
When it has airived at a stage in which it sees several 
aspects of the universe in the same form in which they 
present themselves to the Divine Mind, we cannot 
suppose that the Author of the human mind will allow 
it and all its intellectual light to be extinguished. 

19. And our conviction that this extinction Cf the 
human mind cannot take place becomes stronger stUli 



396 PHILOSOPHY OF DISCOVEUT. 

when we consider that the mind, however imperfect 
and scanty its discernment of truth may be, is still 
capable of a vast, and even of an unlimited progress in 
the pursuit and ap{>rehension of truth. The mind is 
capable of accepting and appropriating, through the 
action of its own Ideas, every step in scienco which 
has ever been made — every step which shall hereai'ter 
be made. Can wo suppose tliat this vast and bound- 
less capacity exists for a few years only, is unfolded 
only into a few of its simplest consequences, and is 
then consigned to annihilation! Can we suppose that 
the wonderful powers which carry man on, genemtion 
by generation, from the contemplation of one great 
and sti iking truth to another, are buried with each 
generation! May we not rather suppose that that 
mind, which is capable of indefinite progi'Ohsion, is 
allowed to exist in an infinite duration, during which 
such progression may take place ! 

20. I propose this argument as a grotmd of hope 
and satisfactory reflexion to those who love to dwell on 
the natural arguments for the Immortality of the Soul. 
I do not attenipt to follow it into detail. I know too 
well how little such a cause can gain by obstinate and 
complicated argumentation, to attempt to urge the 
argument in that manner ; and probably different per- 
sons, among those who accept tne argument as v^d, 
would give different answers to many questions of de- 
tail, wliich naturally arise out of the aeceptauco of ibis 
argument. I will not here attempt to solve, or even 
to propound these questions. My main purpose in 
offering tSiese views and this argument at al^ is to 
give some satisfaction to ih.ose who would think it a 
sad and blank redqjjb of thisJong survey of the nature 
and progress of science in which we have been so long 
engaged (through this series of works), that it should 
in no way lead to a recognition of the Author of that 
world about which our Science is, and to the high and 
consolatory hopes which lift man beyond this world. 
No survey of the universe can be at all satifi&ctory to 
thoughtful men, which has not a theological bearing; 
nor can any view of man’s powers and means of know* 



PHTSICAL AND EELIGlOtr8 PHILOSOPHY. 397 

ing be congenial to sncb men, whieb doea not recognize 
an iniinite destination for the mind which has an infi« 
nite capacity; an eternal being of the Faculty which 
can take a steady hold of eternal being. 

21. And as we may derive such a conviction from 
our physical Ideas^ so too may we no less from our 
moral Ideas. Otir minds m)prehend Space and Time 
and Force and the like, as Ideas which are not depen- 
dent on the body; and henco we beJiove that our minds 
shall not perish with our bodies. And in the same 
manner our souls conceive pure Benevolence and per- 
fect Justice, which go beyond the conditions of this 
mortal life; and hence we believe that our souls have 
to do with a life beyond this mortal life. 

It is more diflBlcult to spoak of man’s indefinite mo- 
ral progression even than of his indefinite intellectual 
progression. Yet in every path of moral speculation 
we have such a progression suggested to us. We may 
begin, for instance, with the ordinary feelings and 
affections of our daily nature* — Love, Hate, Scorn. 
But when we would elevate the Soul in our imagina- 
tion, we ascend above these ordinary affections, and 
take the repulsive and hostile ones as htted only to 
balance their own influences. And thus the poet| 
speaking of a momily poetical nature, describes it; 

The Poet in a golden clime was bom. 

With golden stars above. 

He felt the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn, 

The love of love. 

But the loftier moralist can rise higher thaif this, and 
con, and will, reject altogether Hate and Scorn fVom 
hia view of man’s bettes naturei,^ His description 
would rather be — 

The good man in a loving clime was bom, 

With loving stars above. 

He felt sorrow for hate, pity for scorn. 

And love of bve* 

He would, in his conception of such a oharaoteri 
ascribe to it all the yii*tues which result from the 



398 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY* 

control and extinction of theito repulsive and hostilo 
affectionu : — the virtaeii of magnanimity, forgiving* 
ness, unselfishness, self-devotion, tondemess, sweetness. 
And these we can* conceive in a higher and higher 
degree, in proportion as our own hearts become tender, 
forgiving, pure and unselfish. And though in every 
human stage of such a moral proficiency, we must 
sup])Ose that there is stUl'somo struggle with the re- 
maining vestiges of our unkind, unjust, angry and 
selhsh affections, we can see no limit to the extent to 
which tliis struggle may be suocessfuJ ; no limit to the 
degree in which these traces of the evil of our nature 
may be worn out by an enduring practice and habit 
of our better nature. And when we contemplate a 
human chancter which has, through a long course of 
years, and through many trials and conflicts, made 
a largo progress in this career of melioration, and is 
still capable, if time be given, of further progress 
towards moral perfection, is it not reasonable to sup- 
pose that He who formed man capable of such 2»ro- 
gi’ess, and who, as we must needs believe, looks with 
approval on such progress where made, will not allow 
the progi’ess to stop when it has gone on to the end of 
man’s short earthly life? Is it not rather reasonable 
to suppose that the pure and elevate^ and albembracing 
affection, extinguishing all vices and including all vir- 
tues, to which the good man thus tends, shall continue 
to prevail in him as a permanent and ever-during con- 
dition, in a life after this ? 

fiut can man raise himself to such a stage of moral 
progress, <>y his own efforts ? Such a progress is an 
approximation towards the perfection of moral Ideas, 
and therefoi‘e an approximation towards the image of 
Ood, in whom that perfection resides : is it not then 
reasonable to suppose that man needs a Divine In- 
fluence to enable him to reach this kind of moral 
completeness? And is it not also reasonable to sup- 
pose that, as he needs such aid, in order that tho Idea 
of his moral progress may be raized, so he will receive 
such aid from Divine Power which realizes the 
Jdea of Divine Love in the world; and to do so, mus^ 



PHYSICAL AND EBLIOIOUS PHILOSOPHY. 399 

realize it in those human souls which are most fitted 
for such a purpose 

But these questions remind me how difficult, and 
indeed, how impossible it is to fcAlow such' tmins of 
reflexion by the light of pliilosophy alone* To ahswer 
such questions, we need, not Beligious Philosophy only, 
but Keligion: and as 1 do not here venture beyond 
the domain of philosophy, I must> however abruptly, 
conclude. 


THE END. 




APPENDIX. 




Appendix A. 


ofVhe platonic theory of ideas. 

(Cam. PhU. Soe. .Nov. 10, 1856.) 


rPHOUGH Plato has, in recent times, had many readers and ad- 
- 1 - mirers among onr English scholars, there has been an air of 
unreality and inconsistency about the commendation which most of 
these professed adherents hare giren to his doctrines. This appears 
to be no capriou'i criticism, for instance, when those who speak of 
him as immeasurably superior in argument to his opponents, do not 
venture to produce his arguments in a definite form as able to bear 
the tug of modern controversy; — when they use his own Greek 
phrases as essential to the exposition of his doctrines, and speak as 
if these phtases could not bo adequately rendered in English;-.- 
and when they a.ssent to those among the systems of philosophy of 
modern times which are the most clearly opposed to the system of 
Plato. It seems not unreasonable to require, on the contrary, that 
if Plato is to supply a philosophy for us, it must be a philosophy 
which can be expressed in our own language ; — that his system, if 
we hold it to be well founded, shall compel us to deny the opposite 
systems, modern as well as ancient ; — and that, so far as we hold 
Plato's doctrines to be satisfactorily establisht>d, we should be able 
to produce the arguments for them, and to refute the arguments ‘ 
against them. These seem reasonable requirements of the^ ad- 
herents of any philosophy, and therefore, of Plato’s. ^ 

I regard it as a fortunate circumstance, that we have recently 
had presented to u^ an exposition of Plato’s philosophy which does 
conform to thoso reasonable conditions; and wo may discuss this 
exposition with the less reserve, siuce its accomplished author, 
though belonging to this. generation, is no longer alive. 1 refer to 
the Lectures on the History of Ancient Philosophy, by the late 
Professor Butler of Dublin. In these Lectures, we find au account 
of the Platonic Philosophy which shows that the writer had con- 
sidered it as, what it is, an attempt to solve large problems, which in 
all ages force themselves upon the notice of thoughtful mett» In 
Lectures YIU. and X., of the Second Series, especially^ we have a 

DD2 



404 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERT. 

statement of the Platonic Theory of Ideas, which may be made a 
convenient starting point for such remarks as 1 wish at present to 
make. I will transcribe this account; omitting, as 1 do so, the 
expressions which Pro/essor Butler uses, in order to present the 
theory, not as a dogmatical assertion, but as a view, at least not 
extravagant. For this purpose, he says, of the successive portions 
of the theory, that one is “not too absurd to be maintained;” that 
another is ‘‘not very extravagant either;*’ that a third is “surely 
allowable;” that a fourth presents “no incredible account” of tl^e 
subject; that a fifth is “ no preposterous notion in substance, and no 
unwarrantable form of phrase.” Divested of these modest for- 
mula, his account is as follows: [Vol. ii. p. 117 .J 

Man's soul is made to contain not merely a consistent scheme 
of its own notions, but a direct apprehension of real and eternal 
laws beyond it. These real and eternal laws are things intelligible, 
and not things sensible. 

“These laws impressed upon creation by its Creator, and ap- 
prehended by man, are something distinct equally from the Creator 
and from man, and the whole mass of them may fairly be termed 
the World of Things Intelligible. 

“Farther, there are qualities in the supreme and ultimate Cause 
of all. which are manifested in His creation, and not merely mani- 
fested, but, in a manner — after being brought out of his super- 
essential nature into the stage of being [which is] below him, but 
next to him^are then by the causative act of creation deposited in 
things, differencing them one from the other, so that the things 
partake of them (/iercxoiurt), communicate with them (xoii/ou/oGari). 

** The intelligence of man, excited to reflection by the impressions 
of these objects thus (though themselves transitory) participant of 
a divine quality, may rise to higher conceptions of the perfections 
tlius^ faintly exhibited; and inasmuch as these perfections are 
unquestionably real existences, and known to bo such in the very 
act of contemplation. — this may be regarded as a direct intellectual 
apperception of them, — a Union of the Reason with the Ideas in 
that sphere of being which is common to both, 

“ Finally, the Reason, in proportion as it learns to contemplate 
the Perfect and Eternal, desires the enjoyment of such contempla- 
tions in a more consummate degree, and cannot be fully satisfied^ 
except in the actual fruition of the Perfect itself. 

“ These suppositious, taken together, constitute the Theory of 
Ideas,*' 

In remarking upon the theory thus presented, 1 shall abstain 
from any disenssion of the theological part of it, as a subject Which 



OF THE PLATONIC THEORY OF IDEAS, 405 

*. 

would probably be considered as unsuited to the meetings of this 
Society, even in its mahi, purely philosophical form. But I conceive 
that it will not be inconvenient, if it be not wearisome, to diseiiss 
the Theory of Ideas as an ottempt to explain the existence of real 
knowledge; which Prof. Butler very rightly considers as the neces- 
sary aim of this and cognate systems of philosophy ^ 

1 conceive, then, that one of the primary objects of Plato's 
Theory of Ideas is, to explain ^he existence of real knowledge, . 
that is, of demonstrated knowledge, such as the propositions of 
geometry offer to us. In this view, the Theory of Ideas is one 
attempt to solve a problem, much discussed in our times, Ayhat is 
the ground of geometrical truth? 1 do not mean that this is the 
whole object of the Theory, or the highest of its claim^s. As I have 
said, 1 omit its theological bearings; and 1 am aware that there aro 
passages in the Platonic Dialogues, in which the Ideas which enter 
into the approhonsioii and demonstration of geometrical truths are 
spoken of as subordinate to Ideas which have a theological aspect. 
But 1 have no douiit that one of the main motives to the construc- 
tion of the Theory of Ideas was, the desire of solving the Problem, 
^Hlow is it possible that man should ajtpreliend necessary and 
eternal truths?" That the truths arc necessary, makes them eter- 
nal, for they do not depend on time; and that they are eternal, 
gvies them at once a theological bearing. 

That Plato, in attempting to explain the nature and possibility of 
real knowledge, had in his mind geometrical truths, as examples of 
such knowledge is, I think, evident from the general purport of his 
discourses on such sulyects. The advance of Greek geometry into 
a conspicuous position, at the time when the Ileraditean sect w^ere 
proving that nothing could be proved and nothing could be known, 
naturally suggested mathematical truth as the refutation of the skep- 
ticism of mere sensation. On the one side it was said, we can know* 
nothing except by our sensations ; and that which we observwwith 
our senses is constantly changing; or at any rate, may change at any 
moment. On the other hand it was said, we do know geometrical 
truths, and as truly as we know them, that they cannot change. 
Plato was quite alive to the lesson, and to the importance of. this 
kind of truths. In the Meno and in the Phkdo he refers to them, 
as illustrating the nature of the human mind: in the Repvdtllo and 
the TinuBus he again speaks of truths which far transoend anything 


' 1 P. xi6u No amount of human knowledge con be adequate whidi does 
not solve the phenomena of these absolute certatuties." 




406 PElIiOaOPHT OF DISCOVERT. 

« 

which the seneea can teach, or even adequately exemplify. The 
aenses, be argues in the Theateius^ cannot give us the knowledge 
wHilch we have; the source of it must therefore be in the mind 
itself; in the Idecu which it possesses. The impressions of sense 
are constantly varying, and incapable of giving any certainty : hut 
the Ideas on which real truth depends are conbtant and invariable, 
and the certainty which arises from these is firm and indestructible. 
Ideas are the permanent, perf'ict objects, with which the mind 
deals when it contemplates necessary and eteinai truths. They 
belong to a region superior to the material world, the world of 
sense. They are the objects which make up the furniture of the 
Intelligible World ; with which the Reason deals, as the Senses 
deal each with its appropriate Sensation. 

But, it will naturally be asked, what is the Relation of Ideas to 
the Objects of Sense? Some connexion, or relation, it is plain, 
there must be. The objects of sense can suggest, and can illustrate 
real truths. Though these truths of geometry cannot be proved, 
cannot even be exactly exemplified, by drawing diagrams, yet 
diagrams are of nse in helping ordinary minds to see the proof; 
and to all minds, may represent and illustrate it. And though our 
conclusions with regard to objects of sense may be insecure and 
imperfect, they have some show of truth, and therefore soma 
resemblance to truth. What does this arise from ? How is it ex- 
plained, if there is nq truth except concerning Ideas? 

To this the Flatonist replied, that the phenomena which present 
themselves to the sense? partake, in a certain manner, of Ideas, and 
thus include so much of the nature of Ideab, that they include also 
an element of Truth. The geometrical diagram of Triangles and 
Squares which is drawn in the sand of the floor of the Gymnasium, 
, partakes of the nature of the true Ideal Triangles and Squares, so 
that it presents an imitation and suggestion of the truths which are 
trad of them. The real triangles and squares are in the mind ; 
they are, iis we have said, objects, not in the Visible, but in the 
Intelligible World. But the Visible Triangles and Squares make 
us call to mind the Intelligibly; and thus the objects of sense 
suggest, and, in a wa^, exemplify the eternal truths. 

This 1 conceive to be the simplest and directest ground of hro 
primary ports of the Theory of Ideas; — The Eternal Ideas consti- 
tuting an Intelligible World ; and the Participation in these Ideal 
. ascribed to the objects of the world of sente. And it is plain that 
BO far, the Theory meets what, 1 conceive, was its primary purpose; 
it answers the questions. How can we have certain knowledge, 
though we cannot get it flrom Sense? and, How can we have 



OF THE PLATONIC THEORY OP IDEAS. 407 

knowledge, at least apparent, though imperfeot, about the world of 
sense ? 

But is this the ground on whioh Plato himsdf rests the truth of 
his Theory of Ideas? As I hare said, 1 Hare no doubt that these 
were the questions which suggested the Theory ; and it is perpetu^ 
idly applied in such a manner as to show that it was held by Plato 
in this sense. But his applications of the Theory refer rery often 
to another part of it ; — to the Idsas, not of Triangles and Squares, 
of space and its affections ; but to the Ideas of Helattons-^as the 
Relations of Like and Unlike, Greater and Less; or to things quite 
different from the things of which geometry treats, for instance, to 
Tables and Chairs, and other matters, with regard to which no 
demonstration is possible, and no general truth (still less necessaiy 
and eternal truth) capable of being asserted. 

1 conceive that the Theory of Ideas, thus asserted and thus sup- 
ported, stands upon very much weaker ground than it does, when 
it is asserted concerning the objects of thought abont which neces- 
sary and demonstrable truths ore attainable. And in order to 
devise arguments againsC this part of the Theory, and to trace 
the contradictions to which it leads, we have no occasion to task 
our own ingenuity. We find it done to our hands, not only lu 
Aristotle, the open opponent of the Theory of Ideas, but in works 
which stand among the Platonic Dialogues themselves. And 1 wish 
especially to point out some of the arguments against the Ideal 
Theory, which are given in one of the most noted of the Platonic 
Dialogues, the Parmenidei, 

The Parmenides contains a narrative of a Dialogue held between 
Parmenides and Zeno, the Eleatic Philosophers, on the one side, 
and Socrates, along with several other persons, on the other. It 
moy be regarded as divided into two main portions ; the first, in 
which the Theory of Ideas is attacked by Parmenides, and defended 
by Socrates ; the second, in whioh Parmenides discusses, at length, 
the Eleatic doctrine that All things are One. It is the former part, 
the dtsoussioo of the Theory of Ideas, to which 1 especially wish to 
direct attention at present: and in the first place, to that extension 
of the Theory of Ideas, to things of which no general truth is 
possible ; such as I have mendoned, tables and chatrs. Plato often 
¦peeks of a Table, by way of example, os a thing of whioh them 
must be an Idea, not taken from any special Table or assemblkgo 
of Tables ; but an Ideal Table, such that all Tables are Tables 
participating in the nature of this Idea. Now the question is, 
whether there is any force, or indeed any sense, in this assumpdou; 
and this quesdon is diseussed in the Pormeaidet^ Socrates is there 



4o8 philosophy op discovert. 

represented as verj confident in the existence of Ideas of the high<« 
est and largest kind, the Just, the Fair, the Good, and the like. 
Parmenides asks him how far he follows his theory. Is there, he 
asks, an Idea of Man, which is distinct from us men? an Idea of 
Fire ? of 'Water ? “ In truth,*’ replies Socrates, I hare often hesi- 
tated, Parmenides, about these, whether wo are to allow such 
Ideas.*’ 'When Plato had proceeded to teach that there is an Idea 
of a Table, of course he could n^t reject such Ideas as Man, and 
Fire, and 'Water. Parmenides, proceeding in the same line, pushes 
him further still. **Do you doubt,” says he, ** whether there are 
Ideas of things apparently worthless and vile? Is there an Idea of 
a Hair? of Mud? of Filth?** Socrates has not the courage to 
accept such an extension of the theory. He says, ** By no means. 
These are not Ideas. These are nothing more than just what we 
sec them. 1 have often been perplexed what to think on this sub- 
ject. But after standing to this a while, I have fled the thought, 
for fear of falling into an unfathomable abyss of absurdities.” On 
this, Parmenides rebukes him for his want of consistoney. '^Ah 
Socrates,” he says, ”you are yet young; dnd philosophy has not yet 
taken possession of you as I think she will one day do — when yon 
will have learned to find nothing despicable iu any of these things. 
But now your youth inclines you to regard the opinions of men.” 
It is indeed plain, that if we are to assume an Idea of a Chair or a 
Table, we can find no boundary line which will exclude Ideas of 
everything for which we have a name, however worthless or offen- 
sive. And this is an argument against the assumption of mch 
Ideas, which will convince most persons ofUhe groundlcsMness of 
the assumption : — the more so, fk% for the assumption of such Ideas, 
it does not appear that Plato offeis any argument whatever; nor 
does this assumption solve any problem, or remove any difficulty’. 
Parmenides, then, had reason to say that consistency required 
Socra(eB, if he assumed any such Ideas, to assume all. A nd 1 con- 
ceive his reply to be to this effect ; and to bo thus a reducHo ad 
absurdum of the Theory of Ideas in this sense. According to the 
opinions of those who see in the Parmenides an exposition of Pla* 
tonic doctrines, 1 believe tliat Parmenides is conceived in this 
passage, to suggest to Sociates what is necessary for the comple- 
tion of the Theory of Ideas. But upon either supposition, 1 wish 


* Prof, Butler, Leet ix. Second theologirid kind) for the assumption 

Series, p. 13 G, appears to think that of such Ideas; but 1 see no trace of 
Plato had suffideut grounds (of a them. 




OF THE PLATONIC THEOUY OF IDEAS. 409 

especiallj to draw the attention of niy renders to the position ot 
anperioritj in the Dialogue in which Parmenides is here placed 
with regard to Socrates. 

Parmenides then proceeds to propound to Socrates difliculties 
with regard to the Ideal Theory, in another of its aspects; — namely, 
when it assumes Ideas of Relations of things; and here also^ 1 wish 
especially to have it considered how far the answers of Socrates to 
these objections are really satisfactory and conclusive. 

*'TelI roe,’* says he (§ 10, Rekker), You conceive that there are 
certain Ideas, and that things partaking of these Ideas, are called 
by the corresponding names Idea of Liheneas, things partaking 
of which arc called Like ; — of Greatness^ whence they are Great : 
of Beauty ^ whence they are Beautiful?*"* Socrates assents, natu- 
rally: this being the simple and universal .statement of the Theory, 
in this case. But then conies one of the real dilhculties uf the 
Theory. Since the special things participate of the General Idea, 
has each got the whole of the Idea, which is, of course, One ; or 
has each a part of the Idea ? *^For,’* says Parmenides, **cnn there 
be any other way of participation thun these two?” So(*rat€S 
replies by a similitude: **The Idea, though One, may be wholly in 
each object, as the Day, one and the same, is wholly in each place.” 
The physical illustration, Parmenides damages by making it more 
physical still. “You are ingenious, Socrates,” he says, (§ 11) “in 
making the same thing be in many places at the same time. If you 
had a number of persons wrapped up in a sail or web, wmiild you 
say that each of them had the whole of it? Is not the case similar?'* 
Socrates cannot deny That it is. But in this case, each person has 
only a part of the whole; and thus your Ideas are partible.** To 
this, Socrates is represented as assenting in the briefest possible 
phrase; and thus, here again, as I conceive, Parmenides retains hi% 
Buperiority over Socrates in the Dialogue. 

There are many other arguments urged against the Ideal 'lAieory 
by Parmenides. The next is 4 consequence of this ^artibility of 
Ideas, thus supposed to be proved, and is ingenious enough. It is this : 

“ If the Idea of Greatness distributed among things that are 
Great, so that each has a part of it, each separate thing will be 
Great in virtue of a part of Greatness which is less than Greatness 
itself. Is not this absurd ?*' Socrates submissively allows that it is. 

An(b the same argument is applied in the case of the Idea of 
Equality. 

“ If each of several things have a part of the Idea of Equality, it 
will be Equal to something, in virtue of something which is leas 
than Equality*** 



410 PHILOSOPHY OP DISCOVERY. 

Afid In the fame way with regard to the Idea of Smallnesa. 

If each thing be amall by having a part of the Idea of Smallneff, 
Smallneee itself will be greater than the small thing, since that is 
a part of itself.*’ * 

These ingenions results of the partibility of Ideas remind ns of 
the ingenuity shown in the Greek geometry, especially the Fifth 
Book of Euclid. They are represented as not resisted by Socrates 
(§ 12): ''In what way, Socrates, fan things participate in Idais, if 
they cannot do so either integrally or partibly ?” ** By my troth,” 
says Socrates, " it does not seem easy to toll.” Parmenides, who 
completely takes the conduct of the Dialogue, then turns to another 
part of the sabject and propounds other arguments. " What do 
yon say to this he asks. 

^ There is an Ideal Greatness, and there are many things, separate 
from it, and Great by virtue of it. But now if you look at Great- 
ness and the Great things together, since they are all Great, they 
must be Great in virtue of some higher Idea of Greatness which 
Includes both. And thus you have a Second Idea of Greatness; and 
in like manner you will have a third, and so on indefinitely.” 

This also, as an argument against the separate existence of Ideas, 
Socrates is represented as unable to answer. He replies inter- 
rogatively : 

" Why, Parmenides, is not each of these Ideas a Thought, which, 
by its nature, cannot exist in anything except in the Mind ? In 
that case your consequences would not follow.” 

This is an answer which changes the cnurse of the reasoning : but 
still, not much to the advantage of the IdetH Theory. Parmenides 
is still ready with very perplexing arguments. (§ 13.) 

"The Ideas, then” he says, "are Thoughts. They mast be 
^Thoughts of something. They are Thoughts of something, then, 
which exists in all the special things; some one thing which the 
Tbod^ht perceives in all the special things; and this one Thought 
thus involveQ in all, is the Idea. But then, if the special things, as 
you say, participate in the Idea, they participate in the Thought; 
and thus, all objects are made up* qf Thonghts, and all things think ; 
or else, there are thoughts in things which do not think,” 

This argument drives Socrates from the position that Ideas arc 
Thoughts, and he moves to another, that they are Paradigms, 
Exemplars of the qualities of things, to which the things them* 
•elves are like, and their being thus like, is their partieipattng in 
the Idea. But here too, he has no better snooeti. Parmeiiidea 
argues thus : 

"If the Object be like the Idea, the Idea must be bke the 



OP THE PLATONIC THEORY OP IDEAS. 4II 

Object. And since the Object and the Idea are like, they mnsl, 
according to your doctrine, participate in the Idea of Likeness. 
And thus you have one Idea participating in another Idea, and so 
on in infijnituni.*' Socrates is obliged to allow that this demolishes 
the notion of objects partaking in their Ideas by likeness : and that 
he must seek some other way. ‘'You see then, 0 Socrates,’* says 
Parmenides, " what difficulties follow, if any one asserts the inde- 
pendeut existence of Ideas!’* , Socrates allows that this is true. 
" And yet,” says Parmenides, '' you do not half perceive the dif- 
ficulties which follow from this doctrine of Ideas." Socrates ex- 
presses a wish to know to what Parmenides refers ; and the aged sage 
replies by explaining that if Ideas exist independently of us, we 
can never know anything about them: and that even the Gods 
could not know anything about man. This argument, though 
somewhat obscure, is evidently stated with perfect earnestness, 
and Socrates is represented as giving his assent to it. " And yet,” 
says Parmenides, (end of § 18) “if any one gives up entirely the 
doctrine of Ideas, how is any reasoning possible?** 

All the way through this discussion, Parmenides appears as vastly 
superior to Socrates; as seeing completely the tendency of every 
line of reasoning, while Socrates is driven blindly from one posiHon 
to another; and as kindly and graciously advising a young man 
respecting the proper aims of his philosophical career; as well as 
clearly pointing out the consequences of bis assumptions. Nothing 
can be more complete than the higher position assigned to Par- 
menides in the Dialogue. 

This has not been Sverlooked by the Editors and Commentators 
of Plato. To take for example one of the latest; in Steinhart’s 
Introduction to Hieronymus Miiller's translation of Parmenidti 
(Leipxig, 1852), p, 2G1, he says : “ It strikes us, at first, as strange^ 
that Plato here seems to come forward as the assailant of his own 
doctrine of Ideas. For the difficulties which he makes Parmenides 
propound against that doctrine are by no means Sophistical or 
superficial, but substantial and to the point. Moreover there is 
among all these objections, vjhlch are partly derived from the 
Megarios, scarce one which does not appear again in the penetrating 
and comprehensive argumentations of Aristotle against the Flatonio 
Doctrine of Ideas.** 

Of oonrse, both this writsr and other commentators on Plato 
offisr something as a solution of this difficulty. But though these 
explanations are subtle and ingenious, they appear to leave do 
satisfactory or permanent impression on the mind. 1 must avow 
that, to me, they appear insu^ient and empty; and I eannot help 



412 


PHILOSOPHT OF DISCOVERY, 


belieTing that the solution is of a more simple and direct kind. It 
may seem bold to maintain an opinion different from that of so 
many eminent scholars; but I think that the solution which 1 offer, 
will derive confirmation faam a consideration of the whole Dialogue; 
and therefore 1 shall venture to propound it in a distinct and 
positive form. It is tliis: 

I conceive that the Parmenides Is not a Platonic Dialogue at all ; 
but Antiplatonic, or more prop^erly? Eleatic ; written, not by 
Plato, in order to explain and prove his Theory of Ideas, but by 
some one, probably an admirer of Parmenides and Zeno, in order 
to show how strong were his master’s arguments agaiiiht the 
riatoiiists and how weak their objections to t!<e Eleatic doctrine. 

1 conceive that this view throws an especial light on every part 
of the Dialogue, as a brief survey of it will show. Pannetiides 
and Zeno come to Athens to the Panathenaic festival : Parmenides 
already an old man, with a silver head, dignified and benevolent in 
his appearance, looking live and sixty years old : Zeno about forty, 
•tall and handsome. They are the guests of Pythodorus, outside 
the Wall, in the Ceramicus; and there they are visited by Socrates 
then young, and others who wish to hear the written discourses of 
Zeno. These discourses are explanations of the philosophy of 
Parmenides, which he had delivered in verse. 

Socrates is represented as showing, from the first, a disposition 
to criticize Zeno’s di.'sertation very closely; and without ?*ny prelude' 
or preparation, he applies the Doctrine of Ideas to refute the Eleatic 
Doctrine that All Things are One. ( § 8.) When he. had heard to 
the end, he bogged to have the first Propositmn of the First Book 
read again. And then, “How is it, O Zeno, that you say, That 
if the Things which exist are Many, and not One, they must be at 
the same time like and unlike? Is this your argument ? Or do I 
Misunderstand you?” “No,” says Zeno, “you understand quite 
^ rightlja” Socrates then turns to Parmenides, and says, somewhat 
rudely, as it stems, “ Zeno is a great friend of yours, Parmenides ; 
he shows his friendship not only in other ways, but plso in what he 
writes. For he says the same things which you say, though ho 
pretends that he does not. You saj/in your poems, that All Things 
are One, and givp striking proofs: he says that existences are not 
many, and he gi#es many and good proofs. You seem to soar above 
us, but you do not really differ,” Zeno takes this sally good- 
humouredly, and tells him that he pursues the scent with the keen- 
ness of a Laconian hound. ** But,” says he (§ 6), “ there really is 
less of ostentation in my writing than you think. My Eesay was. 
jnerely written ae a defence of Parmenides long ago, when I wa 0 



OF THE PLATONIC THEORY OF IDEAS. 413 

young ; and la not a piece of display composed now that I am 
older. And it was stolen from me by some one; so that I had no 
choice about publishing it.** 

Here we have, as I conceive, Socrateil already represented as 
placed in a disadvantageous position, by his abruptness, rude 
allusions, and reiidiness to put bad interpretations on what is done* 
For this, Zeno's gentle pleasantry is a rebuke. Socrates, however, 
forthwith rushes into the argument; arguing, as 1 liave said, for 
his ow'u Theory. 

** Tell me,” ho says, *Mo you not think tliere is an Idea of Like* . 
ness, and an Idea of Unlikeness? And that everything partakes of 
these Ideas? The things wlpch partake of Unlikencss arc unlike. 
If ail things partake of both Ideas, they are both like and unlike ; 
and where is the wonder? (§ 7.) if you could show that Likeness 
itself was Unlikeness, it would be a prodigy ; but if things which 
partake of these opposites, have both the opposite qualities, it 
appears to me, Zeno, to involve no absurdity. 

“ So if Oneness itself were to he shown to be Maniness ’* (I hope 
I may use this word, rather than multiplicity) ** 1 should be sur- 
prised ; but if any one say that I am at the same time one and many, 
where is the wonder? For I partake of maniness : my right side is 
different from my left side, my upper from my under parts. But 1 
also partake of Oneness, for 1 am here One of us seven. So that 
both are true. And so if any one say that stocks and stones, and 
the like, are both one and many,»not saying that Oneness is 
Maniness, nor Maniness Oneness, he says nothing wonderful : he 
says what all will alloi^. (§ 8.) If then, as I said before, any one 
should take separately the Ideas or Essence of Things, as Likeness 
and Unlikeness, Maniness and Oneness, Rest and Motion, and the 
like, and then should show that these can mix and separate again, 

I should be wonderfully surpri'>ed, O Zeno: for I reckon that 
have tolerably well made myself master of these sabjec|p^. Jt 
should be much more surprised if any one could 8how./ne this con- 
tradiction involved in the Ideas themselves ; in the object of the 
Reason, as well os in Visible objects.’* 

It may be remarked that Sderates delivers all this argumenta- 
tion with the repetitions which it involves, and the vehemence of 


> I am aware that this translation 
is different from the common trans* 
latlOn. Tt appears to me to be con- 
sistent with the habit of the Greek 
leniKuage. It slightly leans in favour 


of my view; but I do not conceive 
that the argument would he percep- 
tibly weaker, if common inter- 
pretation were adopted. 




4^4 PHILOSOPHY OF DISOOVEUT, 

its maoner^ without waiting for a reply to any of his interrogations } 
instead of making overy step the result of a concession of his 
opponent, as is the case in the dialogues where he is represented 
as triumphant. Every iSiader of Plato will recollect also that in 
those Dialogues, the triuniph of temper on the part of Socrates ia 
repi esented as still more remarkable than the triumph of argument. 
No Tehemence or rudeness on the part of his adversaries prevents 
his calmly following his reasoning; Aid he parries coarseness by 
compliment. Now in this Dialogue, it is remarkable that this kind 
of triumph is given to the adversaries of Socrates. ** When Socrates 
had thus delivered himself/’ says Pythodorus, the narrator of the 
conversation, we thought that Parmenides and Zeno would both 
be augiy. But it was not so. They bestowed entire attention 
upon him, and often looked at each other, and smiled, as in 
admiration of Socrates. And when he had ended, Parmenides 
said: 'O Socrates, what an admirable person you are, for the 
earnestness with which you reason I Tell me then, Do you then 
believe the doctrine to which you have been referring;-— that there 
are certain Ideas, existing independent of Things; and that there 
are, separate from the Ideas, Things which partake of them? 
And do jou think that there is au Idea of Likeness besides the 
likeness which we have; and n Oneness and a Maniiiesv, and the 
like? And an Idea of tlie (light, and the Good, and the Fair, and 
of other such qualities?’*’ Socrates says that he does hold this; 
Parmenides then asks him, how far he carries this doctrine of 
Ideas, and propounds to him the difficulties which I have already 
stated ; and when Socrates is unable to answer him, lets him off 
in the kind but patronizing way which I have already described. 

To me, comparing this with the intellectual and moral attitude 
of Socrates in the most dramatic of the other Platonic Dialogues, 
ft is inconceivable, that this representation of Socrates shonld be 
Plato’s. It is just what Zeno would have written, if he had 
wished to bestow upon his master Parmenides the calm dignity and 
irresistible argument which Plato assigns to Socrates. And this 
character is kept up to the end of the Dialogue. When Socrates 
(§ 1&) has acknowledged that he is^at loss which way to turn for 
his philosophy, Parmenides undertakes, though with kind words, 
to explain to him by what fundamental error in the course of hia 
speculative habits he has been misled. He says; ‘«you try to 
make a complete Theory of Ideas, before you have gone through 
a proper iatellectual discipline. The impulse which urges yon to 
such speculations is admirable— Is divine. But you must e^LsroisO 
yourself in reasoning which many think trifliDg« while you are yet 



OF THE PLATONIC THEORY OF IDEAS. 415 

young; If you do not, the truth will elude your grasp.’* Socrates 
asks submissively what is the course of such discipline : Parmenides 
replies, "The course pointed out by Zeno^ as you have heard.” 
And then, gives him some instructions in manner he is to teat 
any proposed Theory. Socrates is frightened at the laboriousness 
and obscurity of the process. He says, " You tell me, Parmenides^ 
of an overwhelming course of study ; and 1 do not well comprehend 
it. Give me an example of such an examination of a Theory.’*’ 
"It is too great a labour,” says he, **for one so old as 1 am.** 
Well then, you, Zeno,” says Socrates, " will yon not give us such 
an example ? ** Zeno answers, smiling, that tht^ bad better get it 
from Parmenides himself; and Joins iu the petition of Socrates 
to him, that he will instruct them. All the company unite in the 
request. Parmenides compares himself to an aged racehorse, 
brought to the course after long disuse, and trembling ut the risk ; 
but finally consents. And as an example of a Theory to be 
examined, takes his own Doctrine, that AH Things are One, 
carrying on the Dialogue thenceforth, not with Socrates, but with 
Aristoteles (not the Stagirite, but afterwards one of the Thirty), 
whom he chooses as a younger and more manageable respondent. 

The discussion of this Doctrine is of a very subtle kind, and 
it would be difficult to make it intelligitile to a modern reader. 
Nor is it necessary for my purpose to attempt to do so. It is plain 
that the discussion is intended seriously, as an example of true 
philosophy ; and each step of the process is represented as irresis- 
tible. The Respondent has nothing to say but Yps; of No; How 
90 ? Certainly; Jt doetj^i^tpear; Jt does not appear • The discus* 
sion is carried to a much greater length than all the rest of the 
Dialogue ; and the result of the reasoning is summed up by Par* 
menidea thus; ”If One exist, it is Nothing. Whether One exist 
or do not exist, both It and Other Things both with regard to* 
Themselves and to Each other, AH and Everyway are and arf not, 
appear and appear not.” And tliis also is fully assorted to; and 
so the Dialogue ends. 

1 sliall not pretend to explain the Doctrines there examined 
that One exists, or One does lot exist, nor to trace their con* 
leqnencM. Bat these were Formulm, as familiaer in tha Eleatlo ^ 
school, as Ideas in the Platonic ; and were undoubtedly regarded 
by the Megariq contemporaries of Plato as quite worthy of being 
discussed, after tbe Theory of Ideas had been overjitrown. This, 
aecordtn{|^y, appears to be the purport of the Dialogue ; an4 it is 
ponued, os we see, without any bitterness toward Sooratea or his 
disciples i but With a persuasion that they were poor philosophers, 
conceited talkers, and weak disputants. 



pj^IibsOPHY OP DISCOYBRY. 

The dir^VKhKanees of the Dialogue tend, 1 conceive, 

to ooAfim tUa oplidati, that it ia not Plato’s. The Dialogue 
begins, JRej^ublic begins, with the mention of a Cephalua, 

and tii!!co’^brOt^err, Gia^coa and Adimantns. But this Cephalos 
is not %edtd man of the Pirmus, of whom we have so charming a 
picture in the opening of the Republic He is from Clazomenin, 
and tells us that hia fellow citizetisr are great losers of philosophy ; 
a trait of their character which does not appear elsewhere* Even 
the brothers Glaucon and Adlmantus are not the two brothers 
of Plato who conduct the Dialogue in the later books of the 
Republic: so at least Ast argues, who holds the genuineness of the 
Dialogue. This Glaucon and Adimantus are most wantonly in- 
troduced; for the sole office they have, is to say that they have 
a half-brother Antiphon, by a second marriage of their mother. 
No such half- bi other of Plato, and no such marriage of his mother, 
are noticed in other remains of antiquity. Antiphon is represented 
as having been the friend of Pythodoius, who was the host of 
fannenidcs and Zeno, as we have seen. And Antiphon, having 
often heard from Pythodoms the account of the conversation of 
his guests with Socrates, retained it in his memory, or in his 
tablets, so as to be able to give the full report of It which we have 
in the Dialogue Parmenides** To me, all this looks like a clumsy 
imitation of the Introductions to the Platonic Dialogues. 

I say nothing Of the chronological cbihculties which arise from 
bringing Parmerldea and Socrates together, though they are 
considerable; for they have been explained more or less satisfac- 
torily ; and certainly in the 2'hiatetuSi Socratea is represented as 
saying that he when very young had seen Parmenides who was 
very old^ Athenams, however^, reckons this among Platens 
6ct{onB. Schleiermacher gives up the identification and relation 
of the persons mentioned in the Introduction as an’ uimuinageable 
story, 

I may add that I believe Cicero, whp refers to so many of Platons 
Dialogues, nowhere refer/ to the Parmenidei* Athenams does 
refer to it; and in doing so blames Plato' for his SOarse imputa- 
tions on Zeno and Parihhnides. According to these are 

hostile attempts to osorifid rudeness to l^rates or to Plato. 6tdU- 
baum acknowledges thaC'Aristotle nhwhere rOfdrs tO this DiS* 
logue. : • ^ . f 


t m the FlrH AUnbiadtft Pytho- ^ixoa). f 

dorus is mentlensd as havpig paid * P. ^ 


aoomiiiAteanoforldslnstv^ A 



ArPBNDJX Bl[ 

' f p • 

ON PLA-TO’S SUEY^r OF SCIENOIS, 
(Gam. thU. /Sbc. ’ Apjttii/23, 1856.) 


A SURVEY by Plato of tbo state of the Sciences, as exiating in 
hH tinwe, maybe recorded as hardly less iiitcrestinjE; than Francis 
Bacon’s llcYiew of the condition of the Sciences of kis time, oon* 
tained in the Advancement of Learning ^ Such a surFej we have, In 
the seventh book of Plato’s Republic i and it wi’’! be Instructive to 
examine what the Sciences then were, and what Plato aspired to 
have them become ; aiding ourselves by the light afforded by the 
subsequent hibtory of Science. 

In the first place, it is interestiilg to note, in the two writers, 
Plato and Bacon, the same deep conviction that the large and 
profound philosophy which they i^ecommended, had not, in their 
judgment, been pursued in an adequate and worthy manner, by 
those who had pursued^ it at ^1. The reader of Bacon will 
recollect the passage in tbe^omm Orgapon (Lib. 1 . Aphorism 80 ) 
where he speaks with indignatioir of the way in which philosophy 
had been degraded an9 pervcrtecjl, by being applied as a mere in- 
stniment of utility or of eorlv education; **So that the great 
mother of ths Sciences is thrust^' down with indignity to the offices 
of a handmaid ^-~is made to m mister to the labours of medicine o» 
mathematics; or again, to give the first preparatory tinge ^ the 
imosatare minds of youths” 


I Aeeedlt et Dlud quod nat^ 
phUosopbU In fis Ipbis viris, j 
ineubiienmt, vaeanteiu et i 
hominsm, pisobertim 
bus temporibtts,. vix nacta ( 
forte quis monsCht alicujus 1 
out nobfUs In Tifiala locft 
ei^mplum iMi<|iV3C«ilt; sed j 


transltus cujusdam et pontistenfil ad 
alia iljtque magaa Ista sctenUsnim 
mater ad oiheia onciUn detmsa est; 
qvuB mrdlcinfB aut malftiematiciB ope* 
nbuB ministrat. et mrsus qa«s ado. 
{eaoeniium immatuim ingenla lavat 
et Imbuab velut tlnctoxa quadsm 
ptlmn, ut altam postea felicimi et 


'fi! s 



41 8 b * 

In thn Bajs (jR^. vi. $ U, Bekker’a ed,): 

** Obij^mlkW btt^Sif tod fearl6««]jr I set about my explanation of 
my ass^ftl^ that philoeopben ought to rule the world. For I 
begin by aa^ng^ tbit thC State mast begin to treat the study of 
philosophy in a way opposite to that uow practised. Now, those 
who meddle at all t^h this study are put upon it when they are 
children, between the lessons whiA they receive in the farm-yard 
and in the shop*^ and as soon as t^iey have been introduced to the 
hardest part of the subjsct, are taken off from it, even those who 
get the most of philosophy. By the hardest part, I mean, the 
discussion of prinoiples-^Dialectic^. And m their succeeding years, 
if they are willing to listen to a few lectures of those who make 
philosophy their business, they think they have done great things, 
as if it were something foreign to the business of lifo. And as 
they advance towards old age, with a very few exceptions, philosophy 
in them is extingiiished : extinguished far moie completely than the 
Ueraclitean sun, f^r theirs is not lighted up again, as that is every 
morning ;** alluding to the opinion which was propounded, by way of 
carrying the doctrine of the unfixiiy of sensible objects to an ex- 
treme; that the Sun is extinguished every night and lighted again 
in the morning. In opposldan to this practice, Plato holds that 
philosophy should be the especial employment of men's minds when 
their bodily strength fails. 

What Plato means by Dialectic, which he, in the next Book, 
calls the bighedt part of philosop^iy, and which is, 1 think, what he 
here means by the hardest part of philosophy, 1 may hereafter 
considei*: but at present 1 wish to pass is review the Sciences 
which he speaks of, as leading the Uay to that highest study. These 
Sciences are Arithmetic, Plane Ipeometry, Solid Geometry, As- 
tronomy and Harmonii s. ' 

^ The view in which Plato here i*egard8 the Sciences is, as the 
instruments of that culture of the p|hilosopbic(tl spirit which is to 
make the philosopher tie fit and nata|ral ruler of the perfect State 
—the Platonic Polity. It is held thafi to answer this pnrpose, the 
mind must be iustruoted^in something \more stable than the know- 
ledge supplied by the senses; — a knoivledge of objects which are 
constantly changing, and which therefoVe can be no real permanent 
Knowledge, but only Opinion. The rWl and permanent Know- 
ledge which we thus require is to be \fouiid in certain sciences, 
which deal with trutke nectccary and unJbersal, as we should now 

* a<Ta^ oUoeojuUa^ sal miHiey>Jietting; 

a®vi between hoase<keeping sad * rt wW tedf Adyow*. 



ON PLATO'S SUEVBY OF THE SCJENC»S* 419 


dleseribe them 1 and which therefore In PthKo^s lan^^nage, a 
knowledpre of that which reallj i9\ 

This is the object of the Sciences of which Piafjo epehks. And 
henoe^when he introduces Arithmetic, es th^6nt of the SeiencOs which 
are to be employed in this mental discipline, he adds {vn. § 8) that 
it must be not mere common Arithmetic, but % science which lends 
to speculatWe truths^, seen by Intuition^; not ah Arithmetie which 
is studied for the sake of buying taod selling, as among tradesmeO 
and shopkeepers, but for the sake of pure and real Scieifde 

1 shall not dwell upon the details with which he illnstlutes this 
Tiew, but proceed to the other Sciences which he mentions. 

Geometry is then spokca of, as obrionsly the nert Science in 
order; and it is asserted that it really does answer the required 
condition of drawing the mind from risible, mutable phenomena to 
a permanent reality. Geometers indeed speak of their risible dia- 
grams, as if their problems were certain practical processes; to 
erect a perpendicular; to construct a square: and the like. But 
this language, though necessary, it really absurd. The dgures are 
mere aids to their reasonings. Their knowledge is really a know- 
ledge not of risible objects, but of permanent realities : and thu8> 
Geometry is one of the helps by which the mind may be drawn to 
Truth ; by which the philosophical spirit m^y be formed, which 
looks upwards instead of downwards. 

Astronomy is suggested as the Science next in order, hut Socrates, 
the leader of the dialogue, remarks that there is an intermediate 
Se ence first to be considered. Geometry treats of plane figures $ 
Astronomy treats of sofida in motion, that is, of spheres in motion ; 
for the astronomy of Plato’s time wag mainly the doctrine of 
^ the sphere. But before treating of solids in motion, we mnst 
have a science which treats of soUds simply. After taking space of« 
two dimensions, we must take apace of three dimensions, length, 
breadth and depth, as in cubes and the like^. But such a Science, 
it la remarked, has not yet been discovered. Platl "notes as 


^ The Spences are to draw tho* 
m*nd from that which grows and 
perishes to that which realty is: 
puiBufia dirt roC yvyva^ 

fifrou jirl rb 

A jirl vBv dptC/uuSi' 

• rjl voskrci oit^. 

^ He adds "and for the sake of 
war;*' this pcfgAJ.Mni passed by. 


Plato does not really ascribe much 
weight to thin use of Science, as we 
see in what he says of Geometry sad 
Astronomy. 

» ipCwf «x« efsv fMvd 

rpCnjv lirtk 6 vov 

TOvro irvpl rnv tup mljlwp ml 
ft pthtxfiPk 

1 


£ E 2 



420 


APPENDIX B. 


deficient'* this branch of knowledge; to use the expression employed 
by Bacon on the like occasions in his Review* Plato goes on to 
say, that the cultivators of such a science have not received due en- 
couragement ; and that though scorned and starved by the public, 
and not recommended by any obvious utility, it has still made great 
progress, in virtue of its own attractiveness. 

In fact, researches in Solid Geometry had .been pursued with 
great zeal by Plato and his friends, and with remaikable success. 
The five Regular Solids, the Tetrahedron or Pyramid, Cube, Octa« 
hediOD, Dodecahedron and Icosahedron, had been discovered; and 
the curious theorem, th it of Regular Solids there can be fust so 
many, these and no others, was known. The doctrine of these 
Solids was already applied in a way, fanciful and arbitrary, no 
doubt, but ingenious and lively, to the theory of the Universe. In 
the Timaus, the elements have these forms assigned to them re- 
spectively. Earth has the Cube: Fire has the Pyramid ; Water has 
the Octahedron: Air has the Icosahedron: and the Dodecahedron 
is tlie plan of the Universe itself. This application of the doctrine 
of the Regular Solids shows that the knowledge of those figures 
was already established; and that Plato had a right to speak of 
Solid Geometry as a real acd interesting Science. And that this 
subject was so recondite and profound, — that these five Regular 
Solids had so little application in the geometry which has a bearing 
on man*8 ordinary thoughts and actions, — made it all the more 
natural for Plato to suppose that these solids had a bearing on the 
constitution of the Universe; and we shall find that such a belief 
in later times found a ready acceptance in the minds of mathemati- 
cians who followed in the Platonic line of speculation. 

Plato next proceeds to consider Astronomy; and here we have 
can amusing touch of philosophical drama. Glaucon, the hearer and 
pupil in the Dialogue, is desirous of showing that he has profited 
by w^at his instructor had said about the real uses of Science. He 
s^ys Astronomy is a very good branch of education. It is such a 
yevj useful science for seamen and husbandmen and the like. 
Socrates says| with a smile, as w^ may suppose: **You are very 
amusing with your zeal for utility. 1 suppose you are afirald of 
being condemned by the good people of Athens for diffusing Use- 
less Knowledge.** A little afterwards Glaucon tries to do better, 
but still with no great soeoess* He says, You blamed me for 
praRing Astronomy awkwardly : but now I will fdllow your lead. 
Astronomy is one of the sciences which you require, because it 
makes men's minds look upwards, and study things above. Any one 
can see that,** ** Well,'* says Socrates, **perha|A any one can see h 



ON PLATO'S SURVEY OP THE SCIENCES. 4SI 

except me — I oannot eee It.** Glauoon is surprised, but Socrates 
gdes on: “Your notice of ‘the study of things aboye* is certainly 
a very magnidcent one. You seem to think that if a roan bends hia 
head back and looks at the ceiling he ^looka upwards* with his 
mind as well as his eyes. You may be right and 1 may be wrong: 
but I liave no notion of any science which makes' the mind look 
upwards, except a science which is abput the permanent and the 
inr iBible. It makes no difference^ as to that matter, whether a man 
gapes and looks up or shuts bis mouth ami looks down. If a roan 
merely look up and stare at sensible objects, his mjnd does not look 
upwards, even if he wore to pursue his studies swimming on his back 
in the sea.*’ 

The Astronomy, then, which merely locks at phenomena does 
not satisfy Plato. He wants something more. What is it? as 
Glaucon very naturally asks. 

Plato then describes Astrouoroy as a real science (H 11). ** The 
variegated adornments which appear in the sky, the risible lomina* 
ries, we must judge to be the most beautiful and the most perfect 
things of their kind: but since they are mere visible Bgures, we 
must suppose them to be far inferior to the true objects; namely, 
those spheres which, with their real proportions of quicknese and 
slowness, their real number, their real figures, revolve and carry 
luminaries in their revolutions. These objects are to be apprehend- 
ed by reason and mental conception, not by vision.'* And he then 
goes on to say tliat the vaVied figures which the skies present to the 
eye are to be used as diagram to assist the study of that higher 
truth ; just as if any ofie were to study geometry by means of beau- 
tiful diagrams constructed by Dsdalus or any other consummate 
artist. 

^Here then, Plato points to a kind of astronomical science whici^ 
gqea beyond the mere arrangement of phenomena: an astronomy 
which, it would seem, did not exist at the time when he wrofe. It 
is natural to inquire, whether we cau determine ml»re precisely 
what kind of astronomical science he meant, and whether euch 
fioience has been brought into existence since his time. 

Hp gives us soma further features of the philosopldcal astronomy 
wbick he requires. ** As you do not expect tOf find in the most 
exquisite geometrical diagrams the true evidence of quantities bein|p 
equal, or double, or in any other relation : so the true ostropomet 
w^l not think that the proportion of the day to the mopthi or the 
month to the year, and the like, are real and immutable things. 
iU will seek a deeper truth than ^ese. We must treat Astronomy, 
like Geometry, as a series of problems suggested by vleltde things. 



422 


APPENDIX B. 


We muit apply the intelligent portion of our mind to the sub- 
ject/* 

Here we really come in view of a class of problems which astro- 
nomical speculators at oeftain periods have proposed to thcmsdres. 
What is the real ground of the proportion of the day to the month, 
and of the mohtb to the year, 1 do not know that any writer of 
great name has tried to determine: but to ask the reason of these 
proportions, namely, that of the revolution of the earth on its axis, 
of the moon in its orbit, and of the earth in its orbit, are questions 
just of the same kind as to ask the reason of the proportion of 
the rerolutions of the planets in their orbits, and of the proportion 
of the orbits themselves. Now who has attempted to assign such 
reasons? 

Of coarse we shall answer, Kepler: not so much in the Laws of 
the Planetary motions which bear his name, as in the Law which 
at an earlier period he thought he had discovered, determining the 
proportion of the distances of the several Planets from the Sun. 
An4 curiously enough, this solution of a problem which we may 
conceive Plato to have had in his mind, Kepler gave by means of 
the Five Regular Solids which Plato had brought into notice, and 
had employed in his theory of the Universe given in the TVnkeiff. 

Kepler’s speculations on the subject Just mentioned were given to 
the world in the Mysterium Cosmographicum published in 1596. In 
his Preface, -he says **ln the beginning of the year 1595 1 brooded 
with the whole energy of my mind on the subject of the Copernioan 
system. There were three things in particular of which 1 pertina- 
ciously sought the causes ; why they are not ofiier than they are : the 
number, the size, and the motion of the orbits.*' We see how 
strongly ho had his mind impressed with the same thought which 
plato had so confidently uttered : that there must be some reason 
for those proportions in the scheme of the Universe which appear 
caaual*and vague. He |^as confident at this period that he had 
solved two oi the three questions which haunted him that he 
oonld account for the number and the sise of the planetary orbits. 
His acootiDt was given in this way.-^^^Tbe orbit of the Earth is a 
circle; round the sphere to whieh thie circle belongs deaeribsr a 
dodecahedron ; ttkp sphere including this will give the orbit of 
Mars. Bound Mars Inscribe a tetrahedron; the circle incktdiDg 
this will be the orbit of Jupiter. Describe a cube round Jupiter*'s 
orbit; the circle including this will be the orbit of Saturn* Now 
inscribe in the Earth’s orbit an icosahedron : the cirole iiMHiribsd In 
it iHll be the orbit of Venns. Inscribe an octahedron in the orbU 
ot Venus ; the circle inscribed in it will be Mercury’s orbit. This is 



ox PLATO'S SURVEY OF THE SCIENCES. 423 

the reason of the number of the planets and also of the magni- 
tudetf«of their orbits. 

These proportions were only approximations; and the Role thus 
asserted has been shown to be unfoundodf by the discovery of new 
Planets, This Law of Repler has been repudiated by succeeding 
Astronomers, So far, then, tlie Astronomy which Plato re<|uires 
as a part of true philosophy has not been brought into being. But 
are we thence to conclude that^the demand for such a kind of 
Astronomy was a mere Platouio imagination? — was a mistake 
which more recent and sounder views have corrected? We can 
hardly venture to say that. For the questions which Kepler thus 
asked, and which he answered by the assertion of this erroneous 
Law, are questions of exactly the same kind as those which he asked 
and answered by means of the true Laws which still fasten his 
name upon one of the epochs of astronomical history. If he was 
wrong in assigning reasons for the number and size of the planetary 
orbits, he was right in assigning a reason for the proportion of the 
motions. This he did in the Harnianice Mundi, published in 1619 : 
where he established that the squares of the periodic times of the 
different Planets are as the cubes of their mean distances from the 
central Sun, Of this discovery he speaks with a natural exultation, 
which succeeding astronomers have thought well founded. He 
says: "What 1 prophesied two and twenty years ago as soon as I 
had discovered the five solids among the heavenly bodies; what 1 
firmly believed before I had seen the Harmonics of Ptolemy ; what 
1 promised my friends in the title of this book (On the perfect Harm 
mony of the celestiul ikotions), which I named before L was sure of 
my discovery; what sixteen years ago I regarded as a thing to be 
sought; that for which I Joined Tycho Brahe, for which 1 settled in 
Prague, for which 1 devoted the best part of my life to astronomical 
contemplations ; at length 1 have brought to light, and have recog« 
nised its truth beyond my most sanguin^ expectations.’' (fiarm. 
jHundu Lib. v.) ^ • 

Thus the Platonic notion, of an Astronomy which deals with 
doctrines of a more exact and determinate kind than the obvious 
relations of phenomena, may be found to tend either to error or to 
truth. 8uoh aspirations point equally to the five regular solids 
which Kepler imagined as determining the planetary orbits, and to 
the Laws of Kepler in which Newton detected the effect of nuiver* 
sal gravitation. The realities which Plato looked for, as something 
ineompsrably more real than the visible luminaries, are fbund, when 
wc find geometrical figures, epicycles and eccentrics^ laws of motion 



424 


APPENDIX B, 


and laws of force, which explain the appearances. Hia Realities are 
Theories which account for the Phenomena, Ideas which connect 
the Facts. 

But, is Plato right int^iolding that such Realities as these are 
more real than the Phenomena, and constitute an Astronomy of a 
higlier kind than that of mere Appearances ? To this we shall, of 
course, reply that Theories and Facts have each their reality, but 
that these are realities of different kinds. Kepler’s Laws are as real 
as day and night ; tiie force of gravity tending to the Sun is as real 
as the Sun ; but not more so. True Theories and Facts are equally 
real, for true Theories are Facts, and Facts are familiar Theories. 
Astronomy is, as Plato says, a series of Problems suggested by visi- 
ble Things ; and the Thoughts in our own minds which bring the 
solutions of these Problems, have a reality in the Things which sug- 
gest them. 

But if we try, os Plato does, to separate and oppose to each other 
the Astronomy of Appearances and the Astronomy of Theories, we 
attempt that which is impossible. There arc no Phenomena which 
do not exhibit some Law ; no Law can lie conceived without Pheno- 
mena. The heavens offer a series of Problems ; but however many 
of these Problems we solve, there remain still innumerable of them 
unsolved ; and these unsolved Problems have solutions, and are not 
different in kind from those of which the extant solution is most 
complete, 

Ndr can we justly distinguish, with Plato, Astronomy into tran* 
sient appearances and permanent truths. The theories of Astro- 
nomy are permanent, and are manifested in a leries of changes ; but 
the change is perpetual just because the theory is permanent. The 
perpetual change is the permanent fheory. The perpetual changes 
in the poiitioiis and movements of the planets, for instance, manifest 
the permanent machinery: the macbpiery of cycles and epicycles, as 
Plato *srould have said, as Copernicus would have agreed ; while 
Kepler, with^ profound admiration for both, would have asserted 
that the motions might be represented by ellipses, more exactly, if 
not more truly. The cyeles and epicycles, or the ellipses, are as 
real as space and time, tn which the footions take place. But we 
cannot justly say that space and time and motion are more real than 
the bodies which move in space and time, or than the appearances 
which these bodies present. 

Thus Plato, with his tendency to exalt Ideas above Facts, -*to find 
a Reality which Is more real than Phenomena,— .to take hold of a 
permanent Truth** which is more true than truths of obiervatioQ/— 



ON PLATO'S SURVEY OP THE SCIENCES. 425 

attempts vhat is impossible. He tries to separate the poles of the 
FuQjdaiueQtal Antithesis, which, however antithetical, are insepa- 
rable. 

At the same time, we must r^llect thai this tendency to find a 
Reality which is something beyond appearance, a permanence which 
is involved in the changes, is the genuine spring of scientifio dis- 
covery. Such a tendency has been the cause of all the astronomical 
science which we i)osMess. It ap|:s^red in Plato himself, in Hippar- 
ohns, in Ptolemy, in Copernicus, and most eminently in Kepler; and 
in him perhaps in a manner more accordant with Plato's aspirations 
when he found the five Regular Solids in the ‘‘Universe, than when 
he found there the Conio Sections which determine the form of the 
planetary orbits. The pursuit of this tendency has been the source 
of the mighty and successful labours of succeeding astronomers: and 
the anticipations of Pinto on this head were more true than he him- 
self could have conceived. 

When the above view of the nature of true astronomy has been 
proposed, Glaucon says : 

** That would be a task much more laborious than the astronomy 
now cultivated.” Socrates replies: believe so: and such tasks 

mast be undertaken, if our researches are to be good for any- 
thing.*’ 

After Astronomy, there comes under review another Science, 
which is treated in the same manner. It is presented as one of the 
Sciences which deal with real abstract truth ; and which are there- 
fore suited to that development of the phiJosophio insight into 
the liigliest truth, which is here Plato’s ihain object. This Science 
is Harmonies, the doctrine of the mathematical relations of musical 
sounds. Perhaps it may be m^re difficult to explain to a general 
audience, Plato’s views on this than on the previous subjects : for 
though Harmonics is still acknowledged as a Science including th^ 
mathematical truths to which Plato here refers, these truths are less 
generally known than those of geometry ot astronomy • Pythagoras 
is reported to have been the discoverer of the cardinal proposition in 
this Mathematics of Music: — namely, that the musical notes which 
the ear recognizes as having thht definite and hammnious relation 
which we call an octave, ajifth, a fourth, a third, have also, in.some 
way or other, the numerical relation of 2 to 1, 3 to 2, i to 3, 5 
1 say ’^Bome way or other,” because the statements of ancient writ- ' 
era on this subject are physically inexact, but are right in the essen- 
tial point, that those simple ^numerical ratios are oharacteristio of 
the mosi^marked harmonic relations. The numeeical ratios really 
represent the rate of vibration of the air when thpse harmonics 



APPENDIX B, 


426 

are produced. This perhaps Plato did not know: but he knew 
or assumed that those numerical ratios were cardinal truths ki har* 
monjr : and he conceived that the exactness of the ratios rested on 
grounds deeper and more intellectual than any testimony which the 
ear could give. Tliis is the main point in his mode of applying the 
subject, which will be best understood by translating (with some 
abridgement) what he says. Socrates proceeds: 

(§ 11 near the end.) Motion appears in many aspects. It 
would take a very wise man to enumerate them all : but there are 
two obvious kinds. One which appears in astronomy, (the revolu* 
tions of the heavenly bodies,) and another which is the echo of that". 
As the eyes are made for Astronomy, so are the ears made for the 
motion which produces Harmony'^*: and thus we have two sister 
sciences, as the Pythagoreans teach, and we assent. 

(S 12.) ** To avoid unnecessary labour, let us first learn what 
they can tell us, and see whether anything is to be added to it ; 
retaining our own view on such subjects : namely this : — that those 
whose education we are to superintend — real philosophera-^re 
never to learn any imperfect truths : — anything which does not tend 
to that point (exact and permanent truth) to which all our know- 
ledge ought to tend, as we said concerning astronomy. Now 
those who cultivate music take a very different course from this. 
You may see them taking immense pains in measuring musical notes 
and intervals by the car, as the astronomers measure the heavenly 
motions by the eye. 

‘*Tes, says Glauoon, they apply their ears close to the instrument, 
as if they could catch the note by getting i»ear to it, and talk of 
some kind of recurrences*'. Some say they can distinguish an 
intervid, and that this is the smallest possible interval, by which 
others are to be measured ; while others say that the two notes are 
identical: both parties alike judging by the ear, not by the 
intelleDt. 

^*Toa mean, says Socrates, those fipe musicians who torture their 
notes, and screw their pegs, and pinch their strings, and speak of 
the resulting sophds in grand terns of art. We will leave them^ 
and address oorJnipurieB to our oth'er teachers, the Pythagoreans.’* 

The expressions alamt the smttl interval in Glaucon's ^eecb 
appear to me to refer to a curious question, which we know was 
discussed among the Greek mathematicians. If we take a^keyad 


vpbv kvapyjoviAV ^opav fSra iraiyirwu* 
>* mtHiNiSf/ATa irra. 


• iprCtfTfio^ov cidrod. 


ON Plato’s survey op the sciences. 427 

instramdnt, and ascend from a key note by two oetavet and a third, 
(say from Ai to Cg) we arrive at the tame nominal note, os if we 
ascend four times by & fifth (Ai to JSi, Hi to Bgt to F^, to C3). 
Hence one party might call this the sanfr note. But if the Oc- 
taTe% Fifths, and Third be perfectly true intervals, the notes 
arrived at in the two ways will not be really the same. (In the one 
case, the note is it x i x { ; in th% other § x j x f x which are J 
and If, or in the ratio of 81 to 80). This small interval by which 
the two notes really differ, the Greeks called a C<mma, and it was 
the smallest musical interval which they recognized. Plato disdains 
to see anything important in this controversy; though the con- 
troversy itself 18 really a curious proof of his doctrine, that there 
is a mathematical truth in Harmony, higher than instrumental 
exactness can reach. He goes on to say : 

**The musical teachers are defective in the same way as the 
astronomical. They do indeed seek numbers in the harmonic notes, 
which the ear perceives : but they do not ascend from them to the 
Problem, What are harmonic numbers and what are not, and what 
is the reason of each That, says Glaucon, would be a sub- 

lime inquiry.** 

Have we in Harmonics, as in Astronomy, anything in the succeed- 
ing History of the Science which illustrates the tendency of Plato*8 
thoughts, and the value of such a tendency ? 

It is plain that the tendency was of the same nature as that which 
Induced Kepler to call his work on Astronomy Harmonice Mundi; 
and which led to many of the speculations of that work, in which 
harmonical are mixecF with geometrical doctrines. And if we are 
disposed to judge severely of such speculations, as too fanciful for 
sound philosophy, we may recollect that Newton himself seems to 
have been willing to find an analogy between harmonic number% 
and the differeht coloured spaces in the spectrum. 

But 1 wiU say frankly, that 1 do not believe there reall/exlstf 
any harmonical relation in either of these cases. Nor (an the prob- 
lem proposed by Plato be considered as having been solved sinoe his 
time, any forther than the reourgence of vibrations, when their ratios 
are so simple, may be easily oopoeived as affectfug the ear in a 
peculiar manner. The Imperfection of musical scales, which the 
eomeut indicates, has not been removed ; but we may say that, in 
the ease of this problem, as in the other ultimate Platonic prbbleiDa, 
the duplication of the cube and the quadrature of the drde, tho 


IS rCnt Ac. 




appendix; b, 


428 

impossibility of a solation has been already established. The prob* 
lem of a perfect musical scale is impossible, because no power of 2 
can be equal to a power of 3 ; and if we further take the multiplier 
5, of course it also cannot bring about an exact equality. This impos- 
sibility of a perfect scale being recognized, the practical problem is 
what is the system of temperament which will make the scale best 
suited for nmsical purposes; this problem hak been very fully 
discussed by modern writers. 



Appendix BB^ 

ON PLATO’S NOTION OF DIALECTia 
{Cam. Phil. Soc^ May 7, 1855.) 


^FHE survey of the sciences,' arithmetic, plane j^ometry, solid 
^ geometry, astronomy and harmonic?— which is contained in the 
seventh Book of the Hepiihlic (§ C — 1 2), and which has been dis- 
cussed in the preceding paper, represents them as instruments in 
an education, of which the end is something much higher— ros steps 
in a progression which is to go further. ‘‘Do you not know,’* says 
Socrates (§ 12), “that aU this is merely a prelude to the etrain 
which we have to learn?” And what that strain is, he forthwith 
proceeds to indicate. “That these sciences do not suffice, you 
must be aware : for — those who are masters of such sciences— do 
tliey seem to you to be good in dialectic? (deivol 6ia\€KTiKal 
eli/ar;)” 

“In truths says Glaucoh, they are not, with very few exceptions^ 
so far as 1 have fallen in with them.** 

“And yet, said 1, persons cannot give and receive a reason, 
they cannot attain that knowledge which, as we have said, men 
ought to have.** 

Here it is evident that “to give and to receive a reason,” is a 
phrase employed as coinciding, in a general way at least, with being* 
“good in dialectic;** and accordingly, this is soon after assented in 
another form, the verb being now used instead of t^e adjective. 
“It is dialectic discussion (t6 d$a\eyetrdai,) which executes the 
strain which we have been preparing.** It is farther sa^d that It is 
a progress to clear intellectual light, which corresponds to the pro- 
gress of bodily^ vision in proceeding, flrom the darkened cave de- 
scribed in the be^halug of the Bo^ to the light of This 
progress, it is added, of course you call Dialectic {BtaXeicvtK^u)), 

Plato further says, that other seiences cannot properly be called 
sciences. They begin from certain assuipptions; and give us on^y 
the consequences which follow from reasoning on such atiuioaptiona.^ 
But these assumptions they cannot To^ do' so Is uok' in the 

province of eaoW science* It belongs to a higher scienedt to.tho 



APPENDIX BB, 


430 

•eieiKM of Beal Existences. Yon call the man DSalectioal, who re- 
quires a reason of the essence of* each thing^ 

And as Dialectic gives an account of other real existences, so 
does it of that most impd/tant reality, the true guide of Life and of 
Philosophy, the Beal Good. He who cannot follow this through 
all the windings of tlie battle of Life, knows notj^ng to any pur- 
pose. And thus Dialeetic is the pinnaele, the top stone of the 
edifice of the sciences 

Dialectic is here defined or described by Plato according to the 
iult/eci with which it treats, and the object with which it is to be 
pursued: but in other parts of the Platonic Dialognes, Dialectic 
appears rather to imply a certain method of investigation to de- 
scribe the form rather than the matter of discussion; and it will 
perhaps be worth while to compare these different accounts of 
Dialectic. 

(Phadrue,) One of the cardinal passages on this Point is in the 
Phmdrus, and may be briefly quoted. Phecdrus, in the Dialogue 
which bears his name, appears at first as an admirer of Lysias, a 
celebrated writer of orations, the contemporary of Plato* In order 
to expose Uiis writer's style of composition as frigid and shallow, a 
specimen of it is given, and Socrates not only criticises this, but 
delirers, as rival compOsitious, two discourses on the same subject. 
Of these discourses, gisen as the inspiration of the moment, the 
first is animated and vigorous; the second goes still farther, and 
clothes its meaning in a gorgeous dress of poetical and mythical 
Images. Phsedrus acknowledges that bis favourite is ontshone ; 
and Socratee then proceeds to point out that thb real superiority of his 
own discourse condstsltn its having a dialectical structure, l^eath 
its outward aspect of imagery and enthusiasm. He says: ($ 109 , 
Bekker. It Is to be remembered that the subject of all the die- 
oourses was Love, under certain supposed conditions.) 

Thu rest of the performance may be taken as play; but there 
were, in was thus thrown out by a random impulse, two 
features, of whieb, if any one could reduce the effect to an art, 
it would be a rmy agreeable and usqfhl task* 

** What ai^e they ? Phiedroi asks. 

the ftpit place, Socrates replies, the taking a connected view 
of thfi scattered elements of a snljeot, so as to bring them into one 


* *BsidewAsKrMbi'icttAttt rmt 

y9¥ htdmv haif^vwrtL -ifit oMoff if futAfana^ Mm 



ON PLATO'S NOTION OF DIALECTIC. 43 1 

Idea; and thus to a definition of the subject, so as to make it 
clear what we are speaking of ; as was then done in regard to Xoee. 

A definition was given of it, what it iss whether the definition 
was good or bad, at any rate there was a dcAnition. And hence, in 
what followed, we were able to say what was clear and consbtent 
with itself. 

** And what, Pheedras asks, was the other feature? 

^*The dividing the subject intodiinds or elements, according to 
the nature of the thing itself: — not breaking its natural mem- 
bers, like a bad carver who cannot hit tlie joint. Bo the two dis- 
courses which wo have delivered, took the irrational part of the 
mind, as their common subject ; and as the body has two different 
sides, the right and the left, with the same names for its parts ; so 
the two discourses took the irrational portion of man ; and the one 
took the left-hand portion, and divided this again, and again sub- 
divided it, till, among the sutidi visions, it found a left-handed kind 
of Love, of which nothing but ill was to be said, ^hile the dis- 
course that followed out the right-hand side of phrenzy, {the 
irrational portion of man's nature,) was led to something which 
bore the name of Aove like the other, but which is divine, and was 
praised as the source of the greatest bles'^ing.’* 

**Now 1,'* Socrates goes on to say, **am a great admirer of these 
processes of division and comprehension, by which i endeavour to 
speak and to think correctly. And if X can find any one who is 
able to see clearly what is by nature reducible to one and mani- 
fested in many elements, 1 follow his footsteps as a divine guide. 
Those who can do this,**! call — whether rightly or not, Ood knows 
—but I have hitherto been in the habit of calling them dialecHcal 
men.** 

It is of no consequence to our present purpose whether either of ^ 
the discourses of Socrates in the Phedrus, or the two together, as 
is here assumed, do contain a just division and subdivision of that 
part of the human soul which is distinguishable fromlReason, and* 
do thus exhibit, in its truS relations, the affection of Lore, * It Is 
evident that division and subdivj^sion of this kind is here presented 
as, in Plato's opinioir, a most valuable Inethod; and those who 
could successfully practise this inethod are those whom he admires 
as dialectical men. This is here his DitdecHc, 

{8t^hitUs>) We are naturally led to ask whether this method of 
dividing a subject as the best way of examining |t, be lo any other 
part of the Platonic Dialogues more fUlly explained than it Is In 
the Phasdros; 01 ^ whether any rules are given for this VM of 
Dialectic, > 



432 


APPENDIX BB« 


To this- we may reply, that in the Dialogue eniitled The Sophies, 
a method of dividing a subject, in order to examine it, is explaJned 
and exemplified with extraordinary copiousn&s and ingenuity* 
The object proposed iif that Dialogue is, to define what a Sophist 
is and with that view, the principal speaker, (who is represented 
as an Kleatic stranger,) begins by first exemplifying what is his 
method of framing a definition, and by applying it to define an 
Angler. The course fallowed, thongh it now reads like a burlesque 
of philosophical methods, appears to have been at that time a bona 
fide attempt to be philosophical and methodical. It proceeds thus: 

have to inquire coiirerning Angling. Is it an Art? It is. 
Now whnt hind- of art ? All art is an art of making or an art of 
gettings {Poietie or iCteiic.) It is Ktetio. Now the art of getting, 
is the art of getting by exchange or by capture: {Metahletic or 
Chirotic.) Getting by capture is by contest or by chase : {Agonistic 
or Thereutic.) Getting by chase is a chase of lifeless or of living 
things: (tho first has no name, the sec‘ond is Zooihcric.) The chase 
of living things is the chase of land animals or of water animals : 
{Pezotherie or Enygrotheric.) Chase of water animals is of birds 
or of fish: {Omithothereutic and IJalieutic.) Chase offish is by 
inclosing or by striking them : (Hercotheric or Plectie,) Wo strike 
them by day with pointed instruments, or by night, using torches: 
(hence the division Aikhistreutic and Pyreuiic.) Of Ankistreutic^ one 
kind consists in spearing the fish downwards from above, tho other 
in twitching them up^vards from below : (these two arts are 2Wo- 
dontic and Aspalieutic.) And thus we have, what we sought, the 
notion and the description of angling: namely that it is a i^tetic, 
Chirotic, Thereutic, Zootheric, Enygrotheric, Halieutic, Pleotio, 
Ankistreutic, Aspalieutic Art/’ 

H SeVeral other examples are given of this ingenious mode of defini- 
tion, -but they are all introduced with reference to the definition of 
the Sophist. And it will further illustrate this method to show 
how, according to it, the Sophist is related to the Angler. 

The Sophistical Art is an art of getting, by capture, living things, 
namely men. It is thus a Ktetic, Qhirotic, Thereutic art, and so far 
agrees with that of the Angler. But here the two arts diverge^- 
since that^of the' Sophist is Pexothcric, that of the Angler Enygro- 
theric. To determine the Sophist still more exactly, observe that 
the chase of land^aninmls is either of tame an{ma)8'(ineluding man) 
or of wild animals : (JleMerotheric and Agriotherie, ) Tlie chase of ' 
tame animals is either by violence, (as kidnapping, tyranny, and' war 
in general,) or by persuasion^ (as by the arts of speech;) that Is^ it 
is Siaiolheric or Pithanurgie, The art of persiiasidn is^a private or 



ON PLA^TO'S, NOTION OF DIALECTIC. 433 

a public proceeding: (Idiothereutic or Demosiothereutic.) The art of 
private persuasion is accompanied with the giving of presents, (as 
lovers do,) or with the receiving of pay: (thus it is Doropkoric or 
Misthamiutic.) To receive pay as the rcilblt of persuasion, is the 
course, cither of those who merely earn tiieir bread by snppl}ing 
pleasure, namely flatterprs, whose art is Ifedyniic ; or of those who 
profess for pay to teach virtue. And who are they ? Plainly the 
Sophists. And tlius Sophistic i^ that kind of ICtelic, Chirotic, 
Therrntic, Zootherio, Pezotiioric, Hemerotheric. Pithannrgic, Idio- 
thereutic, .Mi^tharnoutic art, which professes to teach virtue, and 
takes money on that account. 

The same process is pursued a)ong several other lines of inquiry : 
and at the end of each of them the Sophist is detected, involved in 
a number of somewhat obnoxious characteristics. This process of 
division it will be observed, is at every step bifurcate, or as it is 
culled, dichotomous. Applied as U is in these examples, it is rather 
the vehicle of satire than of philosophy. Yet, I have no doubt that 
this bifurcate method was admired by some of the philosophers of 
Plato’s time, as a clever and effective philosophical invention. We 
may the more readily believe this, inasmuch as one of the most acute 
persons of our own time, who has come nearer than any other to 
the ancient heads of sects in the submission with which his followers 
have accepted his doctrines, inis taken up this Diehotonions Method, 
and praised it as the only philosophical mode of dividing a sub> 
ject. I refer to Mr .lercniy Benthani’s (published 

originally in ISld), in which this exhaustive bifurcate method, as he 
calls it, was applied t\> classify sciences and arts, with a view to a 
scheme of education. Ho>v exactly the method, as recommended by 
him, agrees with the method illustrated in tho Sophist, an examina- 
tion of any of his examples will show. Thus to take Mineralogy ah 
an example: according to Benihani, Ontology is Coenoscopic or 
Idioscopic ; the Idioscopic is Somatoscopic or Piicumatoscopiif; the 
Somatoseopic is Pososcopic or Poioscopic: Puioscopi(.\ is Piiysiur- 
goscopic or Aiithropurgoscopic : PhysiUrgoscopic is Uranoscopic or 
Bpigeoscopic : Epigeoscopio is Abioscopic or Embioscopic. And 
thus Mineralogy is the Science I<Aoscopic, Somatoscopic, Poioscopic, 
Fhysiurgoscopic, Epigeoscopic, Abioscopic : inasmuch as it is the 
soience which regards bodies, with reference to their qualities, — 
bodies, namely, tho«vorks of nature, terrestrial, lifeless. 

1 conceive that this bifurcate method is not really philosophical or 
valuable: but that is not our business here. What we have to con- 
sider is whether this is what Plato meant by the term Dialectic. 

The general description of Dialectic in the Sophistes agrees very 



434 


APPENDIX BE. 


closely 'with that quoted from the Pkadrus, that it is the separation 
of n subject accordin^G^ to its natural divisions. 

Thus, see in the Sophist the passage § 83: *‘To divide a subject 
according to the kinds'of things, so as neither to make the same 
kind different nor different kinds identical, is the office of the 
Dialectical Science.’* And this is illiistruted by observing that it 
is the uihcc of tlie science of Grammar tq| determine what letters 
may he combined and what may qot; it is the office of the science of 
^lusic to determine what sounds differing as acute and grave, may 
be combined, and what may not: and in like manner it is the office 
of the science of Dialectic to determine wliat kinds may be com- 
bined in one subject and what may not. And the proof is still fur- 
ther explained. 

In many of the Platonic Dialogues, the Dialectic which Socrates 
is thus represonted as approving, appears to include the form of 
Dialogue, as well as the subdivision of the subject into its various 
branches. Socrates is presented as attaching so much importance to 
this form, tliat in the Protagoras (§ (»5) ho rises to dc])iirt, because 
his opponent will not conform to this practice* And generally in 
Plato, Dialectic is opposed to Rhetoric, as a string of short ques- 
tions and answers to a continuous dissertation. 

Xenophon also seems to imply {Mem. iv. 11) that Socrates 
included in his nation of Dialectic the form of Dialogue as well as 
the di\ i.sion of the subject. 

But that the meiLod of close Dialogue was nut called Diahciic 
by the author of the Sophist, we have good evidence in the work 
itself. Among other notions which are aiulysed hy the bifurcate 
division here exhibited, is that of getting by contest {Agonistic, 
previously given us a division of Kteliti), Now getting by contest 
may be by peaceful trial of superiority, or by fight: {HamilUtic or 
Machetic) The figlit may be of body against body, or of words 
agaiiut words : these may be called JJiastic and Amphisbetic. The 
light of vi'ojUs about right and wrong, may be by long discourses 
opposed to each other, as injudicial cases; or b/siiort questions 
and answers : the former may be called Dicanic, the latter Anti* 
logic. Of these colloquies, about right and wrong, some are 
natural and spontaneous, otliers artificial and studied : the former 
need no special name; the latter are commonly called Eiistic. Of 
^Kristic colloquies, some are a source of expense to those who hold 
them, some of gain : that is, they are Chrematophthoric or Chrema- 
tisiic : the former, the occupation of those who talk for pleasure’s 
and for company's sake, is Adoleschic^ wasteful garrulity; the 
latter, that of those who talk for the sake of gain, is Sophistic. 



ON Plato’s notion of dialectic. 435 

And thus Sopliistic is an art Eristic, which is part of Antilojjic, 
which is part of Arnphi^hetic, which is part of Aj^onistic, which is 
part of Cliiiotic, wiiich is a part of Ktttio. (§ 5i3.) 

We may notice here an indication that lutire rather than exact 
reason directs these .niiilyses; in that Sophistic, which was before 
a part of tiie ihercuilc branch of chirotic and ktetic, is here a part of 
?lie o*hcr bi'iiiieli, 

But the remark wirn h I espceiadly w'ish to make here is, that the 
art of disciissitif5‘ points of right and wrong by short ipies^ions and 
answ^er.*!, being here brought into view, not called Dialectic^ 
W’hirh we might have expected; but AniHofjic. It would seem 
therefore that the Author of the Sophit»t did not understand by 
nialaciic such a jiroccas as Socrates dosciib»‘s in XiMinphon ; {Mem. 
IV. o, 11, 12;) wlicrelic says it was railed DiaJectic^ bcciusc it was 
followed by persons dividing things into their hinds in conversation: 
(koivTi 6ia\cyoi/Ta>i :) or sucb as the Socrates of Plato 
insisted upon in the Protagoras and the (Jorgias. Of the two 
elements which the Dialectical Process <*f Socrates implied, Divi- 
sion of the subject and Dialogue, the author of the Sophistos does 
not cl.iiin tiio name of Dialectic for cither, and seems to reject it 
for the second. 

Put without insisting upon the name, are we to suppose that the 
Dichotomous IMefhoil of the Sophistes Dialogue, (1 may add of the 
Politic.us^ for the method is the same in this Dialogue also,) is the 
metliod of dlvi.sioii of a subject according to its natural members^ of 
W'liieli Plato speaks in the l*h(rdnisf 

If tlie Sophistes be ^lie work of Plato, the answer is difiTicuU 
either way. If tliis method be Plato’s Dialectic, how came he to 
omit to say so theie? how c^me he even to seem to deny it? But 
on the other hand, if this dichotomons division be a ditferent pro- ^ 
Cc'Ss from the division called Dialectic in the Phrcdriis, had Plato 
two methods of division of a subject ? and yet has he never spoken 
of them ns two, or marked their distinction ? \ 

This difficulty would be removed if wo were to adopt the opinion, 
to which others, on other groundg, have been led, that the Sophistes, 
though of Plato’s time, is not Plato’s work. The grounds of this 
opinion are, — tiiat the doctrines of the Sophistes arc not Platonic : 
(the doctrine of Ideas is strongly impugned and weakly defended:) 
Socrates is not the principal speaker, but an Elcatic stranger: and' 
there is, in the Dialogue, none of tlie dramatic character which we 
generally have in Plato. The Dialogue seems to be the work of 
some Eleiitic opponent of Plato, rather than Ins. 

(Rep, B. VII.) Blit we can have no doubt that the Phxdrus 

FP2 



APPKNDIX BB. 


436 

contains Plato’s real view of the nature of Dialectic, ns to its form ; 
let us see how this aj»:ree8 with the view of Dialectic, as to its 
matter and ohjcct» given in the seventh Book of the UepubHc, 

According to Plato, Real Existences ore the objects of the exact 
sciences (as number and figure, of Aritinnetic and CJeoinctry). 
The things which are the objects of sense aie transitory pheiio- 
ineiia, wiiich have no reality, because no ^cnnanrnce. Dialectic 
deals with Realities in a more general manner. This doctrine is 
cvcrywlierc inculcated by Plato, and particularly in this part of the 
Uepuhliti. He does not tell ns how we arc to obtain a view of the 
liigher realities, which* are the objects of Dialectic: only he here 
as-suines that it will result from the ediiratioii which he enjoins, 
lie says (§ 10) that the Dialectic Process (»j duthtXTihtj /icfionov) 
alone leads to true science: it makes no assumptions, but goes to 
First Piinciples, that its doctriiics may be firmly grounded: and 
thus it jmrges the eye of the .soul, which w:is immersed in barbaric 
mild, and turns it upward ; using for this purpose the aid of the 
sciences which have been mentioned. But when (Haucon iinpiircs 
about the details of this Dialectic, Socrates says he will not then 
answer the inquiry. We may venture to .say, that it does not ap- 
pear that he had any answer ready. 

Let US consider for a iiionient what is said about a philosophy 
rendering a reason for the F'irst Principles of each Science, w hich 
the Science itself cannot do. That there is room for such a branch 
of phil'tsopliy in some sciences, we easily see. (jpometry, for 
instanf'C, procoedi from Axioms, Definitions and Postulates ; but by 
the very nature of these term.s, does not p1*ove these Fir.st Prin- 
ciples. These — the Axioms, Definitions and Postulates, — are, I 
conceive, what Plato here calls the jf^potheses upon which (jco- 
iiietry proceeds, and for which it is not tlie business of Geometry to 
render a reason. According to him, it is the business of Dialec- 
tic” to give a just account of these “Hypotheses.” What then is 
Dialectic 

( Aristotle.) It is, 1 think, weil worthy of remark, that Aristotle, 
giving an account in many respect^, dift'erent from that of Plato, of 
the nature of Dialectic, is still led in the same manner to consider 
Dialectic as the branch of philosophy which renders a reason for 
First Principles. In the Topics, we have a distinction drawn be- 
tween reasoning demonstrative, and reasoning dialectical: and the 
distinction is tYk\%i—{Top. i. 1) that demonstration is by syllogi.stns 
from true first principles, or from true deductions from such prin- 
ciples ; and that the Dialectical Syllogism is that which syllogizes 
li‘om probable propositions (ef evdo^wv). And he adds that 



ON PLATO'S NOTION OF DIALECTIC. 437 

probable propositions are those wliieli are accepted by all, or by the 
"reatoat part, or by the wi^e. In the next chapter, he speaks of 
the uses of Dialectic, which, he says, are three, mental discipline, 
dcl)ate«, and philosophical science. And*he adds (Top> i. 2, 0) 
that it is also useful with reference to the First Principles in eacli 
Science: for from the appropriate Piinciples of each science we 
cannot deduce unythiiif^ c<mcerninij First Principles, since tlicso 
piiuciples are the beginnirij; of wasoning. But from the probable 
])iinciplcs in each province of science wt* rniist n <‘oncerning 
First Principle>; and this is either the pecuibir office of Dialectic^ 
or the ».fficc most appropriate to it ; tor it is a process of investigation, 
and must lead to the Pnnci|iles of all methods. 

That a demonstrative scaenee, as sncli, docs not explain the origin 
of its own I’iist Principh's, is niuloubtedly true. Geometry docs 
not undertake to give ii reason for the Axioms, T)cfiuirion9, and 
J'ostulates. This has been attempted, both in ancient and in modern 
times, by tiic Metaphysicians. But the Mct:iidi>sics emjiloyed on 
such subjects has not commonly been called Dialectic. The term 
has certainly been usually einploy«d rather as describing a Method, 
than as determining the siihjcct of iiivestigation. Of the Faculty 
which approhcmls First Prineifdes, both according to Plato and to 
Aristotle, 1 will hereafter say a few words. 

The object of tlic dichotonious firoce.ss pnr»ued in the Sopliiste.s, 
and its result in each case, i» a Definition. Definition also was one 
of the mum features of the impiirics pursued by Socrates, Induclion 
being the other; ami imlecil in many cases Induction was a HoricR 
of steps which f'ndc(7iii Definition. Ami Aristotle also taught a 
peculiar method, the object and result of which was the construc- 
tion of Dofimtiona: — namely his (Udeyones. This method ia one 
of division, hut very difteroni from the divisions of the Sophiatea^ 
His method begins f>y di\iding the wliole subject of possible inipiiry 
into ten lieads or C(Jtc(jories — Suh>tance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, 
Place, 'I’ime, Position, Habit, Action, Pasaion. Tli^e again ore 
subdivided: thus Quality is Habit or Disposition, Pow'er, Affection, 
Form. And we have an exainjj^e of the ap])lieutit>n of this method 
to the construction of a Dehnition in the Ethics; where he deter- 
mines Virtue to he a Habit with certain additional limitations. 

Thus the Induction of Socrates, the Dichotomy of the Elcatics, 
the Categories of Aristotle, may all he eonaidered as methods by 
which we proceed to the construction of Definitions. If, by any 
method, Plato could proceed to the construction of a Definition, or 
rather of an Idea, of the Absolute Realities on which First Princi- 
ples depend, such a method would correspond with the notion of 



APPENDIX BB. 


438 

Dialectio in the Republic. And if it was a method of division like 
the Eleatic or Aristoteliu, it would correspond with the notion of 
Dicilectic in the Phccdrus. 

That Plato’s notion, ifbwever, cannot have been exactly either of 
these is, I think, plain. The colloquial method of stiiniilatin^ and 
testing the pro^^ress of the student in Dialectic is implied, in the 
sequel of this discussion of the effect of scientific study. And the 
metliod of Dialogue, us the instrAiinent of instruction, being thus 
supposed, the continuation of tho account in the Republic^ implies 
that Plato expected persons to be inado dialectical by tlie study of 
the exact sciences in a comprehensive spirit. After insisting on 
Geometry and other sciences, he says {Rep. vii. § 16): ‘*The 
synoptical man is dialectical; and he who is not the ono, is not 
the other.” 

But, we may ask, does a knowledge of sciences lead naturally to 
a knowledge of Ideas, as absolute realities from which Fir^t Prin- 
ciples How ? And supposing this to be true, as the Platonic Phi- 
losophy supposes, is the Idea of the Good, as the source of moral 
truths, to be thus attained to? That it is, is the teaching of 
Plato, here and elsewhere; but have the speculations of subsequent 
philosophers in the same direction given any confirmation of this 
lofty assumption ? 

In reply to this inquiry, I should venture to say, that this 
assumption appeai s to he a reinnaut of the Socratic doctrine from 
which Plato hogaii his speculations, that Virtue is a kind of know'- 
ledge ; and that all attempts to verify the assumption have failed. 
^V’hat Plato added to the Socratic notion Ws,' that the inquiry 
after The Good, tho Supreme Good, was to he aided by the 
analogy or suggestions of those sciences which deal with neces- 
sary and eternal truths; the supreme good being of the nature 
of those necessary and eternal truths. This notion is a striking 
one, da a suggestion, but it has always failed, I think, in the 
attempts to ^/urk it out. Those who in modern times, as Cudworth 
and Samuel Clarke, have supposed an analogy between the neces- 
sary trpths of Geometry and the truths of Morality, though they 
have used the like expressions concerning the one and the other 
class of truths, have failed to convey clear doctrines and steady con- 
victions to their readers; and have now, 1 believe, few or no 
followers. 

The result of our investigation appears to be, that though Plato 
added much to the matter by means of which the mind was to 
be improved and disciplined in its research after Principles and 
Definitions, he did not establish any form of Method according 



ON PLATO'S NOTION OP DIALECTIC. 439 

to which the inquiry must be conducted, and by which it mi^ht 
bo aided. The most definite notion of Dialectic still remained 
the same with the original informal view which Socrates hod 
taken of it, as Xenophon tells us {Mem, 5, 11) when he says: 
“lie said that Dialectic (xd diaXeyeortlat) was so called because 
it is an inquiry pursued by persons w'ho take counsel together, 
Heparating the subjects considered according to their kinds {dia- 
XcyovTa^), lie held accordiiig1y*that men should try to bo well 
prepared for such a process, and should pursue it with diligence : 
by this means, he thought, they would become good men, fitted 
for responsible offices of command, and truly diulcctical’* (dta\eic- 
TtKoiTaTous), And this is, I conceive, the answer to Mr. Grote’s 
interrogatory exclamation (Vol. viii. p. 577): “Surely the Ety- 
mology here given by Xenophon or Socrates of the word (^ta- 
Xeyevdai) cannot he considered as satisfactory.** The two notions, 
of investigatory Dialogue, and Distribution of notions according 
to their kinds, which are thus asserted to be connected in etymology, 
were, among the followers of Socrates, connected in fact; the 
dialectic dialogue was supposed to involve of course the dialectic 
division of the subject. 



Appendix C. 


or THE INTELLECTUAL POWEIIS ACCORD- 
ING TO PLATO. 

(Ctna. Pil'd. Soc. Nov. 10, 1850.) 


JN the Seventh Book of Plato’s we have certain seienees 

described as the instruments of a philosophical ai:d intelloctiial 
education; and we have a certain other intclle<'tual ein]>loymont 
spoken of, namely, Biuleetie, as the means of carrying the mind 
beyond these sciences, and of cnablinj^ ir to see the sources of 
those truths which the sciences assume as their fir-t principles. 
These points have been discussed in the two prccedinj; papers. 
But this scheme of the highest kind of philosophical education 
proceeds upon a certain view of the nature and dejj^recsof knovvledj^e, 
and of the powers by which we know ; wdiich view had been pre- 
sented in a great measure in the Sixth Book; this view 1 shall 
now attempt to illustrate. 

To analyse the knowing powers of man is a task so diflficulfc, that 
wc need not ho surprised if there is much obscurity tii this portion 
of Plato’s writings. But as a reason for ^amining what he has 
said, we must recollect that if there bo in it anything on this sub- 
ject which was true then, it is true still; and also, that if wo know 
^ any truth on that subject now, we shall find something correspond- 
ing to that truth in the best speculations of sagacious ancient 
writef^, like Plato. It may therefore be worth while to discuss 
the Platoiiid^doctrines on this matter, and to inquire how they are 
to be expressed in modern phraseology. 

Plaljp’s doctrine will perhaps be^ most clearly understood, if we 
begin by considering the diagram by which ho illustrates the 
different degrees of knowledge', lie sets out from the distinction 
of visible and intelligible things. There arc vi'>ihlo objects, squares 
and triangles, for instance ; but these are not the squares and tri- 
angles about which the Geometer reasons. The exactness of his 
reasoning does not depend on the exactness of his diagrams. He 


1 Pol-. vL § 



OF THE INTELLECTUAL POWEUS. 44 1 


reasons from certain mental squares and triangles, as he conceives 
and understjinds them. **Thiis there are visible and there are 
intelligible things. There is a visible and an intelligible \«’orld‘: 
and there are two didereiit regions aboiit*which our knowledge is 
concerned. Now take a line divided into two unequal segments to 
represent these two regions : and again, divide each segment in the 
same ratio. The parts of each segment are to rcprestuif, differences 
of clearness and distinctness, at^l in the visilde world these parts 
are things and images. By images I mean shadows, and reHectiuiis 
in w.iter, and in polished bodies; and by Ihings, 1 mean tliat of 
which these images are the resemblances ; as animals, plants, 
things made by man. This diiference corresponds to the diflereiice 
of Knoivlctige and mere Opinion ; and the Opinahle is to the Know- 
able as the Image to the Beality.** 

Tiiis analogy is assented to by Olaucon; and thus there is as- 
sumed a ground for a further construction of the diauratn. 

“Now',*’ he says, “w'e have to divide the segment which repre- 
sents Intelligible Things in the same way in which wo have divided 
that which represents Visible Things. The one part must repre- 
sent the knowledge which the mind gets by dealing as it were with 
images, and by reasoning dow'nwards from Principles; the other 
that which it lias by dealing with the Ideas themselves, and going 
to First Principles. 

“The one part defiends upon assumptions or hypotheses^, the 
other is unhypothetical or absolute truth. 

“One kind of Intelligible Things, then, is Conceptions; for in- 
stance, geometrical iSnceptions of figures, by means of w'hich we 
reason downwards, assuming certain First Principles. 

‘*Nuw the other kind of Intelligible Things is this: — that which 
the Reason includes in virtue of its power of reasoning, when it 


s lie adds, “This orahw, this visi- 
ble wor1«J, I will not say has any 
connexion with onranon, heaven, 
that 1 may not be accused of plray Ag 
upon w'ord<.” 

3 It is plain that Plato, hy Hypo- 
iheseSf in this place, means the usual 
foundations of Arithmetic and Geo- 
metry ; namely. Definitions and Pos- 
tulates. He says that “the arith- 
meticians and geometers take as hypo- 
theses (vTro9e>«roi) odd and even, and 


the three kinds of angles (riglit, acute, 
and obtuse) ; and figures, las a trian- 
gle, a .square,) and tlie like.” I say 
his “hypotheses” are the Definitions 
and Poi»tuIate.‘«, not the Axioms: for 
the Axioms of Aritliinetic and Geo- 
metry belong to the Higher Faculty, 
whirh ascends to First Principles. 
But this FjuHilty operates rather in 
using these axioms than in enunciat- 
ing them. It know's them implicitly 
rather than expresses them explicitly. 



442 


APPENDIX C. 


rej^ards the assumptions of the Sciences as, what they are, assump- 
tions onl}'; and uses them as occasions and starting points, that 
from these it may ascend to the absolute^ (di/wiroOeToi/, unhy- 
pothcticul.) which does not depend upon assumption, but is the 
orif^n of scientific truth. The lieason takes hold of this first prin- 
ciple of truth; and availing itself of all the connections and rela- 
tions of this principle, it proceeds to the conclusion ; using no 
sensible image in doing this, biit*contenipIating the Meas alone; 
and with these Ideas the process begins, goes on, and terminates. ” 

This account of the mutter will proliably seem to require at least 
further explanation ; and that accordingly is acknowledged in the 
Dialogue itself. Glaueon says : 

•* I apprehend your iiicaning in a certain degree, but no^ very 
clearly, for the tnatter is somewhat abstruse. You wish to prove 
that the knowledge which, by the Reason, w'e acquire, of Real 
Existence and Intelligible Things, is of a higher degree of certainty 
than the knowledge which belongs to what are commonly called 
Sciences. Such sciences, you say, have certain assuiiiptiuns for 
their bases; and these assumptions are, by the students of such 
sciences, apprehended, not by Sense (that is, the Bodily Senses), 
but by a Mental Operation, — by Conception. But inasmuch as 
such students ascend no higher than the as.suin]>tions, and do not go 
to the First Principles of Truth, they do not seem t«) you to have 
true knowledge— Intuitive insight — Nous — on the suqjcct of iheir 
reasonings, though the subjects are intelligible, along with their 
principle. And you call this habit and practice of the Geometers 
and others by the name Conception, not [nAition* ; taking Con- 
ception to be something between Opinion on the one side, and 
Intuitive Insight on the other." 

^ “You have explained it well, said I. And now consider the 
four sections (of the line) of w'hich we have spoken, as corresponding 
to four affections in the mind, intuition, the highest;’ Conception, 
the next; th^ third, Belief; and the fourth. Conjecture (from 
likenesses); and arrange them in order, so that they may have more 
or less of certainty, as their objects h/ive more or less of truth *, 

* Biavoiav oAX* ov vqvv, 

i The Diagram, as here described, would be tliis; 


hUtUvjible World. 

Visible World. 

IntuitioD. 

Conception. 

* Things. 

Images. 





OF THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS. 443 

understand, said he. I agree to what jrou say, and 1 arrange 
them as you direct.” 

And so the Sixth Book ends: and the Seventh Book opens 
with tlie celebrated image of the Cave, in ^hich men are confined, 
and see all exlernul objects only by the shadows which they cast 
on the walls of their ])rison. And this imperfect knowledge of 
things is to the true vision of them, which is attained by those 
who ascend to the light of day, as the ordinary knowledge of men is 
to the knowledge attainable by those whose minds are purged and 
illiiiniriuled by a true jdiilosophy. 

Confining ourselves at present to the part of Plato’s speculations 
which we have mentioned, namely, the degrees of knowledge, 
and tl)e division of our knowing faculties, we may understand, 
and may in a great degree accept, Plato’s scheme. We have already 
(in the preceding papers) seen that, by the knowledge of real 
things, he means, in the first place, the knowledge of universal 
and necessary trutiis, such as Geometry and the other exact scieneea 
deal with. These we call sciences of Demonstration; and we 
are in the habit of contrasting the knowledge which constitutes 
such sciences with the knowledge obtained by the Senses, by Ex- 
perience or mere Observation. This distinction of Demonstrative 
and Kiiipirlcul knowledge is a cardinal point in Plato’s scheme 
also; the former alone being allow'ed to deserve the name of 
KnowledgCf and the latter being only Opinion. The Objects with 
which Demonstration deals may be termed Conceptions, uiid the 
objects with which Obscrvatiuii or Sense has to do, however 
much speculation may ftduce them to mere Sensations, are commonly 
described as Things, Of these Things, there may be Shadows or 
Images, os Plato says* and us we may obtain a certain kind of 
knowledge, namely Opinion or Belief, by seeing the Things them- 
selves, we may obtain an inferior kind of Opinion or Belief by seeing 
their linages, which kind of opinion we may for the inoraeflt call 
Conjecture, Whether then we regard the distinctions knowledge 
itself or of the objects of it, we have three terms before us. 

If we consider the kinds of knowledge, they are 
Demonstration : Belief : Conjecture : 

If the objects of this knowledge, they are 
Conceptions : Things : Images. 


Plato supposes the whole, and each of the two parts, to be divided in the 
same ratio, in order that the aiiolopy of the division in each case may be 
represented. 




444 


APPENDIX C. 


But in each of these Scries, the first term is evidently wanting : for 
Demonstration supposes Principles to reason from. Conceptions 
suppose some basis in the mind which gives them their evidence. 
What then is the tirst tcAm in each of tliese two Series? 

The Principles of Demonstration must be seen by Intuition, 
Conceptions deiive their properties from certain powers or 
attributes of the mind wliich we may term Ideas, 

Therefore the two scries are * 

Intuition : Demonstration : Belief : Conjecture. 

Ideas: Conceptions: Things: 

Plato further teaches that the two former terms in each Series 
belong to tlic Intelligible, the two latter to the Vi-sible World: 
and ho siipjioses that the ratio of these two [irimary segments 
of the line is the same as the ratio in wdiich each segment is 
dividcMl^ 

111 using the term Ideas to describe the mental sources from 
which Conceptions derive their validity in deinon*>tration, 1 am 
employing a pliiaseology which 1 have already introduced in the 
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. But indepcnfU*ntly altogether 
of this, 1 do not see what other term could be employed to denote 
the mental objects, attriluites. or powers, whatever they lie, from 
W'hich Conceptions derive their evidence, as Demonstrative Truths 
derive their evidence from Intuitive Truths. 

That the Scheme just presented is Pluto’s doctrine on this subject, 
I do not conceive ti:cro can be any doubt. ’J’liere is a little w'ant 
of precision in his [ilirascology, arising froj*; his mixing together 
the two series. In fact, his final series 

Nol'sis: Pianoia: Pislis: Eikasia ; 
is made by putting in the second place, instead of Demonstration, 
‘which is the process pursued, or Science, which is the knowledge 
obtained, Conception, w'hich is the object with which the mind 
deals. Sucljf deviations from exact symmetry and correlation in 
speaking of the faculties of the mind, ,aro almost unavoidable in 
every langiiugc. And there is yet another source of such inac- 
curacies of language; for we have to speak, not only of the 
process of acquiiing knowledge, and of the objects with which 
the mind deals, but of the Faculties of the mind which are 
thus employed. Thus Intuition is the Process; Ideas are the 


The four Ked^nients might be os 4 : 2 : s : z ; or as g : 6 : 6 : 4 ; or generally, 
as a : ar : ar : ar^. 



OF THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS. .445 


Object, in the first term of our series. The Faculty also we 
may call Intuifitm: but the Greek offers a distinction. Noesis 
is the Process of Intuition; but the Faculty is Nous, If we 
wish to preserve this distinction in En^lfth, what must we call 
the Faculty? 1 conceive we must call it the Intuitive Reason^ a 
term well known to our older pliilosopliical writers^. Again: 
taking the second term of the series, Demonstration is the process, 
Science, the result; and Conceptions are the objects with wTiich . 
the mind deals. But what is the Faculty ihus ein^dnyod? What 
is the Faculty emjdoycd in Demonstration? The hanie philosophical 
writers of whom I spoke would have answered at once, the Dis- 
cursive Reason; and I do not know that, even now, we can suggest 
any better term. The Faciiltv employed in aeipiiring the two lower 
kinds of knowledge, the Faculty which deals with Things and 
their Images is, of course, Sense, or Smsation, 

The assertion of a Faculty of the mind hy which it appre- 
hends Truth, which Faculty is higher than the Discursive Reason, 
as the Truth apprehended by it is higher than more Demonstrative 
Truth, agrees (as it will at once occur to several of my renders! 
with the doctrine taught and in^i«led upon by the late Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge. And so far as he was the means of inculcating 
this doctrine, which, as we see, is the doctrine of Plato, and 1 
might add, of ArNtotle, and of many other philosophers, let him 
have due honour. But in his desire to impress the doctrine upon 
men’s minds, he combined it with several other tenets, whirh will 
not bear examination. He held that the two Faculties by which 
these two kinds of tAith are apprehended, and w'hich, as I have 
said, our pliilosopliical writers call ike Intuitive Reason and the 
Discursive Reason, may be called, and ought to be called, respectively. 
The Reason and The Understanding ; and that the second of thes^ 
is of the nature of the Instinct of animals, so as to be something 
intermediate between Hetison and Instinct. These opinion^ I may 
venture to say, are altogether erroneous. The Intuiti^ Reason and 
the Discursive Reason are not, by any English writers, called the 
Reason and the Understnndii^; and accordingly, Coleridge has 
had to alter all the passages, namely, those taken from Leighton» 
Harrington, and Bacon, from which his exposition proceeds. The 
Umlerstanding is so far from being especially the Discursive or 


Hence the mind Reason receives 
Intuitive or Discursive. 


Miltov. 



APPENDIX C. 


446. 

Reasoning Faculty, that it in univernal and by our best 

writers, opposed to the Discursive or Ucasonin^ Faculty. Thus this 
is expressly declared by Sir John Davis in his poem On the Immor^ 
tality of the Soul, He inys, of the soul, 

Wlii‘11 she rales things, and moves from ground to ground, 

' The nriiue of Heason iliatio) .Kbo acquires from this: 

But when by rojison she truth hath found, 

And stjuuleth fl\t, she l/odt rstamling is. 

Instead of the Reason beinjf fixed, and the Understandinfr discur- 
sive, as Mr. Coleridpfe says, the Reason is distinctively discursive; 
that is, it obtains conclusions by running from ono point to another. 
This is what is meant by Diseursus ; or, trikinci: the full term, Dw- 
cursns Itatiums, Discourse of Reason. Understand in*? is fixed, that 
is, it dwells u|)0!i one view of a subject, and not upon the steps by 
winch that view is obtained. The verb to reason, implies the snb- 
stantive, the Reason, though it is nut coevten>ivc with it: for as 1 
have said, there is the Intuitive Reason as well as the Discursive 
Reason. But it is by the Faculty of Reason that we are capable of 
reasoning; thouf;li undoubtedly the practice or the pretence of rea- 
soninpf may he carried so fur us to seem at variance with reason in 
the more familiar sense of the term ; as is the case also iii French. 
Moliero’s Crisale says (in the Femmes Savantes)^ 

lla '.onner est Vomploi «lc toute ma maisoi., 

Ft lo raisoiiuemeut en baniiit la Raison. 

If Mr. Coleridf^e’s assertion were true, that the Understanding is 
the discursive and the Reason the fixed faenfty, w'e should bo justi- 
fied in sayinc: that The Under standituj is the faculty hy which lee 
reason, and the Reason is the faculty hy which toe understand. But 
this is not so. 

Nor is the Understanding* of the nature of Instinct, nor does it 
approach nearer than the Reason to the nature of Instinct, but tbe 
contrary. 'F/ie Instincts of animals bc.ar a very obscure resem- 
blance to any of man’s speculative Faculties; but so far as there is 
any siioh resemblance, Instinct is 1^ obscure image of Reason, not 
of Understanding. Animals are said to act as if they reasoned, 
rather than as if they understood. The verb understand is especially 
applied to man as distinguished from animals. Mr. Coleridge tfclls 
a tale from Huber, of certain bees which, to prevent a piece of 
honey from fulling, balanced it by tlieir weight, w hile they built a 
pillar to su[)port i^. They did this by Instinct, not understanding 
what they did ; men, doing the same, would have understood what 
they were doing. Our Translation of the Scriptures, in making 



OF T[IE INTELLECTUAL POWERS. 447 


it the spcdal lUstinction of man and animals, that he has Under- 
standing and they have not, speaks quite consistently with good 
philosophy and good English. 

Air. Coleridge's object in his specnlatims is nearly the same as 
Plato's; namely, to declare that there is a truth of a higher kind 
than can be obtained by mere reasoning; and also to claim, as por- 
tion.s of this higlier truth, certain fundamental doctrines of Morality. 
Among these, Mr. Coleridge places the Authority of Con.seience, 
and Plato, the Supremo Goo<l. Mr. Coleridge also holds, as Plato 
held, thjt the Reason of man, in its highest una most comprehensive 
form, is a ])ortioii of a Supreme and Universal Reason; and lends to 
Truth, not in virtue of its special attributes in each person, but by 
its own nature. 

Many of the opinions which are combined with these doctrines, 
both in Plato and in Coleridge, are such as we should, I think, find 
it impossible to accept, upon a careful philosophical examination of 
them ; but on these T shall not here dwell. 

I will only further observe, that if any one were to doubt whether 
the term NoiJs is rightly rendered Intuitive Reason^ we may* find 
proof of the propriety of a rendering in the remarkable discus- 
sion concerning the Intellectual Virtues, which we have in the 
Sixtli Hook of the Niconiachcan Ethics. It can hardly be question- 
ed that Aristotle had in lil.s mind, in w'riting that passage, the 
doctrines of Plato, •as expounded in the passage just examined, and 
similar passages, Ari'«totlc there says that tliero are five Intellee- 
tuui Viitucs, or Faculties by which the Mind aims at Truth in 
asserting or den yingj>— namely, Art^ Science, Prudence, Wisdom, 
Nous. In this enumeration, passing over Art, Prudence, and Wis- 
dom, as virtues wdiich are mainly concerned from practical life, w-e 
have, in the region of .speculative Truth, a distinction propounded 
between Science and Nous : and this distinction is further explained* 
(c. G) by the remarks that Science reasons with Principles; aad that 
these Principles cannot be given hy Science, because Sfjence reasons 
from them ; nor by Art, nor Prudence, for these are conversant with 
matters contingent, not with matters demonstrable ; nor can the 
First Principles of the Reasoniligs of Science be given by W’isdom, 
for Wisdom herself has often to reason from Principles. Therefore 
tli^ First Principles of Demonstrative Reasoning must be given by 
a peculiar Faculty, Nous, As w'e have said. Intuitive Reason is the 
most appropriate English term for this Faculty. 

The view thus given of that higher kind of Knowledge which 
Plato and Aristotle place above ordinary Science, as being the 
Knowledge of and Faculty of learning First Principles^ will enable 



APPENDIX C. 


448 

U8 to explain some expressions which might otherwise be misunder- 
stood. Socrates, in the concluding part of this Sixth Book of the 
liepublic, says, that this kind of knowledge is that of which the 
Reason (Xdyos) takes hfcld, in virtue of Us power of reasoning^.'* 
Here we are plainly not to understand that we arrive at First Prin- 
ciples by reasoning: for the very opposite is true, and is here taught ; 
— namely, that First Principles are not what we reason to, but what 
we reason ftorn. The meaning o^ this passage plainly is, that First 
Principles are those of which tlie Reason takes hold in virtue of its 
power of reasoning ; — they are the conditions which must exist in 
order to make any reasoning possible : — they are the propositions 
which the Reason must involve implicitly, in order tliat w'e may 
reason explicitly; — they are the intuitive roots of the dialectical 
power. 

In accordance with the views now explained, Plato's Diagram 
may be thus further expanded. The term lHea is not used in this 
part of the liepublic ; but, as is well known, occurs in its peculiar 
Platonic sense in the Tenth Book. 



Intelligible World, voiirov* 

Visible World, bparov. 

Object . . 

Ideas 

•£tal 

(Conceptions 

fitetf'ota 

Things 

K.T.X. 

Images 

clicovtf 

Proce.'iit . 

Intuition 

yoTitris 

Deuioustratiun 

en-icrrif/ti} 

Belief 

wcVtis 

Conjecture 

clicao'ia 

r'aculty. 1 

Intuitive Reason 

vovs 

Discursive Reason 
Aoyo? 

>Sensation 

aiaOrja-if 




tH tov SiokeytaBoii ivvofJLti, 



A.PPENDIX D. 


CRITICISM OF ARISTOTLE’S ACCOUNT OF 

INDUCTION. 

« 

(Cam, Ph'd. Soc. Feb. 11, 18/50.) 


rpHE Cambridge Philosophical Society has willicgly admitted 
among its proceedings not only contributions to science, but also 
to the philosophy of science; and it is to be presumed that this 
vriUingness will not be less if the speculations concerning the philo- 
sophy of science which are offered to the Society involve a reference 
to ancient authors. Induction, the process by which general truths 
are collected from particular examples, is one m^in point in such 
philosophy: and the comparison of the views of Induction enter- 
tained by ancient and modern writers has already attracted much 
notice. 1 do not intend now to go into this subject at any length ; 
but there is a cardinal passage on the subject in Aristotle's Analytics, 
{Analyl, Prior, ii, 25) which 1 wish to explain and discuss. I will 
first translate it, maki^ such emendations as are requisite to render 
it intelligible and consistent, of which I shall afterwards give an 
account. 

I will number the sentences of this chapter of Aristotle in order ^ 
that I may afterwards bo able to refer to them readily. 

$ 1. **' We must now proceed to observe that we have to esftimine 
not only syllogisms according to the aforesaid yf^/zrc^y^syllogisms 
logical and demonstrative, — ^but also rhetorical syllogisms,— and, 
speaking generally, any kind of proof by which belief is influenced, 
following any method. 

§ 2. ** All belief arises either from Syllogism or from Induction : 
[we must now therefore treat of Induction.] 

§ 3. ** Induction, and the Inductive Syllogism, is when by means of 
one extreme term we infer the other extreme term to be true of the 
middle term. 

§ 4. " Thus if A, C, bo the extremes, and B the mean, we have 
to show, by means of C, that A is true of B, 



450 


APPENDIX D. 


§ 5. ** Thus let A be long-lived; that lohich has no gall- 
bladder; and C, particular long-lived animals, us elephant, horse, 
mule. 

§ 0. ** Then everjr C*i8 A, for all the animals above named are 
long-lived. 

§ 7. ** Also every C is B, for all those animals arc destitute of 
gall-bladder.. 

§ 8. then 7J and C arc convertible, and the mean (77) docs 
not extend further than extreme (C), it necessarily follows that 
every Ji is A. 

§9. ‘*h'or it was shown before, that, if any two things be 
true of tho same, and if either of them be convertible with the ex- 
treme, tho other of the things predicated is true of the convertible 
(extreme). 

§ 19. ** But wc must conceive tliat C consists of n collection of 
all tho particular cases ; for Induction is applied to all the cases. 

§ 11. “ But such a syllogism is an iuierciice of a first truth and 
immediate proposition. 

§ 12. “l^'or when there is a mean term, there is a demonstrative 
iiyllogisni through the mean ; but when there is not a mean, there is 
proof by Inductign. 

§ 13. “ And in a certain way, Induction is contrary to Syllogism ; 
for Syllogism proves, by the middle term, that the extreme is true of 
the third thing : but Induction proves, by means of the third thing, 
that the extreme is true of the mean. 

§ 14. ** And Syllogisn; concluding by means of a middle term is 
prior by nature and more usual to us ; but fiio proof by Induction, 
is more luminous.” • 

1 think that the chapter, thus interpreted, is quite coherent and 
intelligible; although at first there seems to be some confusion, 
from the author sometimes saying that Induction is a kind of Syllo- 
gism,* and at other times that it is not. Tlio amount of the doctrine 
is this. 7 

When wc collect a general proposition by Induction from par* 
ticular cases, as for instance, thi^t all animals destitute of gall- 
bladder (acAolous), are long-lived, (if this proposition were true, of 
which hereafter,) wc may express the process in the form of a Syllo- 
gism, if we will agree to make a collection of particular cases our 
middle term, and assume that the proposition in which tho second 
extreme term occurs is convertible. Thus the known propositions 
are 

Elephant, horse, male, &c., are long-lived. 

Elephant, horse, mule, &c., are aeholous. 



CRITICISM OP ARISTOTLE'S IIsDUCTION. 45 1 

But if we suppose that the latter proposition is convertible, we 
shall have these propositions : 

Elephant, horse, mule, &c., are lo^-livcd. 

All acholouB animals are elephant, horse, mule, &c., 
from whence we infer, quite rigorously as to form, 

All acholoiiB animals are long-lived. 

This mode of putting the Induetive inference shows both the 
strong and the weak point of the Illustration of Induction by means 
of Syllogism. The strung point is this, that we make the inference 
perfect as to form, by including an indefinite collection of particular 
cases, elephant, horse, mule, &c., in a single term, C\ The Syllo- 
gism then is 

All C are long-lived. 

All acholous animals are C, 

Therefore all acholous animals are long-lived. 

The weak point of this illustration is, that, at least in some 
instances, when the number of actual cases is necessarily indefinite, 
the representation of them as a single thing involves an unauthorised ^ 
htep. In order to give the reasoning which really passes in the 
mind, we must say 

Elephant, horse, &c., are long-lived. 

All acholous animals arc <is elephant, horse, &Cr, 

Therefore all acholous animals arc long-lived. 

This ** must be introduced iu order that the “all C** of the 
first propo.sition may be justified by the of the second. 

This step is, I say, necessarily unauthorized, where the number of 
particular cases is indefinite in the instance before us, the species 
of acholous animals. Wo do not know how many such species there 
are, yet we wish* to be able to assert that all acholous animals are 
long-lived. In the proof of such a proposition, put in a syllogistic • 
form, there must necessarily be a logical defect; and the abo^-e dis- 
cussion shows that this defect is the substitution of thej^pruposition, 

“ All acholous animals are as elephant, &c.,’* for the converse of 
the experimentally proved proposition, ** elephant, &c., arc acholous.** 

In instances in which the number of particular cases is limited, 
the necessary existence of a logical flaw in the syllogistic translation 
of the process is not so evident. But in truth, such a flaw exists in 
all cases of Induction proper ; (for Induction by mere enumeration 
can hardly be called Induction). 1 will, however, consider for a 
moment the instance of a celebrated proposition which has often 
been taken as an example of Induction, and in which the number of 
particular cases is, or at least is at present supposed to be, limited. 
Kepler's laws, for instance the law that the planets describe ellipse^ 


QQ9 



452 


APPENDIX D, 


may be regarded as examples of Induction. The law was inferred, 
we will suppose, from an examination of the orbits of Mars, Earth, 
Venus. And the syllogjstic illustration which Aristotle gives, will, 
with the necessary addition to it, stand thus, 

Mars, Earth, Venus descnbc eUipscs. 

Mars, Earth, Venus are planets. 

Assuming the convertibility of this last proposition, and its unixter- 
sality, (which is the necessary addition in order to make Aristotle’s 
syllogism valid) we say 

All the planets are as Mars, Earth, Venus. 

Whence it follows that all the planets describe ellipses. 

If, instead of this assumed universality, the astronomer had made 
a real enumeration, and had established the fact of each particular, 
he would be able to say 

Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury, describe 
ellipses. 

Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury arc all the 
planets. 

And he would obviously be entitled to convert the second proposi- 
tion, and then to conclude that 

All the planets describe ellipses. 

But then, if this were given as an illustration of Induction by 
means of syllogism, we should have to remark, in the first place, that 
the conclusion thac all the planets describe ellipses,” adds nothing • 
to the major proposition, that S., J., M., E., V., m., do so.” It is 
merely the same proposition expressed in ^ther words, so long as 
8., J., M., E., Y., m., are supposed to* be all the planets. And in 
the next place we have to make a remark which is more important ; 
that the minor, in such an example, must generally be either a very 
precarious truth, or, as appears in this case, a transitory error. ’ For 
that the planets known at any time are all the planets, must always 
be a doubtful assertion, liable to be overthrown to-night by an astro- 
nomical observation. And the assertion, as received in Kepler’s 
time, has been overthrown. For Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, 
Venus, Mercury, are not all the planets. I9ot only have several new 
ones been discovered at intervals, as Uranus, Ceres, Juno, Fallas, 
Vesta, but we have new ones discovered every day ; and any conclu- 
sion depending upon this premiss that A, B, C, D, O, //, to 
Z are all the planets, is likely to be falsified in a few years by tho 
discovery of A\ B\ &c. If, therefore, this were the syllogistic 
analysis of Induction, Kepler's discovery rested upon a false propo- 
sition ; and even if the analysis were now made conformable to our 
present knowledge, that induction, analysed^ as above, would still 



CRITICISM OF ARISTOTLE'S INDUCTION. 453 

involve a proposition which to-morrow may show to be false. But 
yet no one, 1 suppose, doubts that Kepler's discovery was really a 
discovery — the establishment of a scieiitiBc truth on solid grounds; 
or, that it is a scientihc truth for us, notwithstanding that w*e are 
constantly discovering new planets. Therefore the syllogistic ana- 
13 ’sis of it now discussed (namely, that which introduces simple enu- 
neratiun as a step) is not the right analysis, and does not represent 
the grounds of the Inductive Truth, that all the planets describe 
ellipses. 

It may be said that all the planets discovered since Kepler's time 
conform to his law, and thus confirm his discovery. This we grant : 
hut they only confirm the discovery, they do not make it; they are 
not its groundwork. It was a discovery before these new cases 
were known; it was an inductive truth without them. Still, an 
objector might urge, if any one of these new planets had contradict- 
ed the law, it would have overturned the discovery. But this is too 
boldly said. A discovery w'hich is so precise, so complex (in the 
phenomena which it explains), so supported by innumerable observa- 
tions extending through space and time, is not so cosily overturned . 
If we find that Uranus, or that Eneke's comet, deviates from Kep- 
ler’s and Newton’s laws, we do not infer that these laws must be 
false; we say that there must be some disturbing caut^e in these 
cases. Wo seek, and we find these disturbing causes: in the case of 
Uranus, a new planet; in the case of Encke’s comet, a resisting 
medium. Even in this case therefore, though the number of parti- 
culars is limited, the Induction was not made by a simple enumera- 
tion of all the particulars. It was made from a few cases, and when 
the law was discerned to be true in these, it was extended to all; the 
conversion and assumed universality of the proposition that these 
are planets," giving us the proposition which we need for the syllo- 
gistic exhibition of Induction, "all the planets are as these." ^ 

I venture to say further, that it is plain, that Aristotle did not 
regard Induction as the result of simple enumeration. j}.'bis is plain, 
in the first place, from his example. Any proposition with regard 
to a special class of animals, cannot bo proved by simple enumera- 
tion : for the number of particfllar cases, that is, of animal species 
in the class, is indefinite at any period of zoological discovery, and 
must be regarded os infinite. In the next place, Aristotle says (§ 10 
of the above extract), "We must conceive that Ccousists of a col- 
lection of all the particular cases ; for induction is applied to all tlie 
eases." We must conceive (i/ocTv) that C in the major, consists of all 
the cases, in order that the couclusion may be true of all the cases ; 
but we cannot observe all the cases. But the evident proof that 
Aristotle does not contemplate in this chapter an Induction by siin- 



454 


APPENDIX D. 


pie enumerAtioD, is the contrast in which he places Induction and 
Syllogism. For Induction by simple enumeration stands in no con- 
trust to Syllogism. The Syllogism of such Induction is quite logi- 
cal and conclusire. Butdnduction from a comparatively small num- 
ber of particular cases to a general law, does stand in opposition 
to Syllogism. It gives us a truth, — a truth which, as Aristotle 
says (§ 14), is more luminous than a truth proved syllogisticolly, 
though Syllogism maybe more natural and usual. It gives ns (g 11) 
immediate propositions, obtained directly from observation, and not 
by a chain of reasoning : ** first truths,** the principles from which 
syllogistic reasonings may be deduced. The Syllogism proves by 
means of a middle term (§ 13) that the extreme is true of a third 
thing : thus, {acholous being the middle term) : 

Achfilous animals are long-lived : 

All elephants are acholous animals : 

Therefore all elephants are Itfng-lived. 

But Induction proves by means of a third thing (namely, particular 
cases) that the extreme is true of the mean; thus {acholous, still 
being the middle term) 

Elephants are long-lived : 

Elephants are acholous animals : 

Therefore acholous animals are long-lived. 

It may be objected, such reasoning as this is quite inconclusive : 
and the answer is, thart this is precisely what we, and as 1 believe, 
Aristotle, are here pointing out. Induction is inconclusive as rea- 
sonimj^ It is not reasoning: it is another way of getting at truth. 
As we have seen, no reasoning can prove snoS^ an inductive truth as 
this, that all planets describe ellipses. It is known from observation, 
but it is not demonstrated. Nevertheless, no one doubts its uni- 
versal truth, (except, as aforesaid, when disturbing causes intervene). 

* And tlicnco, Induction is, as Aristotle says, opposed to syllogistic 
rcasonf ng, and yet is a means of discovering truth ; not only so, but 
a means of /liscovering primary truths, immediately derived from 
observation. 

I hare elsewhero taught that all Induction involves a Conception 
of the mind applieil to facts. It mky be asked whether this applies 
in such a case as that given by Aristotle. And I reply, that 
Aristotle*8 instance is a very instructive example of what I mean. 
The Conception which is applied to the facts in order to make the 
Induction possible is the want of the gall-bladder; — and Aristotle 
supplies us with a special term for this conception; ackotous\ But, 


I This term occurs In other parts of Aristotle. Boe the additional NoIsl 




CRITICISM OF ARISTOTLE'S. IISDUCTION. 455 

It may be said, that the animals observed, the elephant, horse, mule, 
&c., are acholous, is a mere fact of observation, not a Conception. 

1 reply that it is a Selected Fact, a fact selected and compared in 
several cases, which is what we mean by a 4^onception, That there 
is needed for such selection and comparison a certain activity of the 
mind, is evident ; but this also may become more clear by dwelling 
<1 little further on the subject. Suppose that Aristotle, having a 
desire to know what class of animals are long-lived, had dissected 
for that purpose many animals;^ elephants, horses, cows, sheep, 
goats, deer and the like. Ilow many rcsem I lances, how many dif- 
ferences, must he have observed in their anatomy ! He was very 
likely long in fixing upon any one resemblance which w'as common 
to ail the long-lived. Probably he tried several other characters, 
before he tried the presence and absence of the gall-bladder: — per- 
haps, trying such characters, ho found them succeed for a few cases, 
and then fail in others, so that he had to reject them as useless for 
his purpose. All the while, the absence of the gall-bladder in the 
long-lived animals was a fact : but it was of no use to him, because 
he had not selected it and drawn it forth from the mass of other 
facts. He was looking for a mean term to connect his first extreme, 
long liredf with his second, the special cases. lie sought this mid- 
dle term in the entrails of the many animals which he used as 
extremes : it was there, but he could not find it. The fact existed, 
blit it was of no use for the purpose of Induction, because it did 
not become a special Conception in his mind. He considered the 
animals in various points of view, it may be, as ruminant, as 
horned, as hoofed, awh the contrary; but not as acholous and the 
contrary. When he looked at animals in that point of view, — 
when he took up that character as tho ground of distinction, he 
forthwith imagined that he found a separation of long-lived and 
short-lived animals. When that Fact became a Conception, he ob-* 
tained an inductive truth, or, at any rate, an inductive proposition. 

He obtained an inductive proposition by applying tlv^ Conception 
acholous to liis observation of animals. This Conception divided 
them into two classes; and these classes were, he fancied, long-lived 
and short-lived respectively. Tliat it was the Conception, and not 
the Fact which enabled him to obtain his inductive proposition, is 
further plain from this, that tho supposed Fact is not a fact. 
Acholous animals are not longer-lived than others. The presence 
or absence of the gall-bladder is no character of longevity. It is 
true, that in one familiar class of animals, the herbivorous kind, 
there is a sort of first seeming of the truth of Aristotle’s asserted 
rule : for the horse and mule which have not the gall-bladder aro 



APPENDIX D, 


456 

longer-lived than the cow, sheep, and goat, which have it. Bnt if 
we pursue the investigation further, the rule soon fails* The deer* 
tribc that want the gall-bladder are not longer-lived than the other 
ruminating animals whiiSti have it. And as a conspicuous evidence 
of the falsity of the rule, man and the elephant are perhaps, for 
their size, the longest-lived animals, and of these, man has, and the 
elephant has not, the organ in question. The inductive proposition, 
then, is false; but what we have^ mainly to consider is, where the 
fallacy enters, according to Aristotle’s analysis of Induction into 
Syllogism. For the two premisses are still true ; that elephants, &c,, 
are long-lived ; and that elephants, &;c., are acliolous. And it is 
plain that the tallacy comes in with that conversion and generaliza- 
tion of the latter proposition, which wo have noted as necessary to 
Aristotle’s illustration of Induction. When we say "All achulous 
animals are as elephants, that is, as those in their biological 
conditions, wo say what is not true. Aristotle's condition (§ 8) is 
not complied with, that the middle term shall not extend beyond 
the extreme. P'or the character acholotts does extend beyond the 
elephant and the animals biologically resembling it ; it extends to 
deer, &c., which are not like elephants and horses, in the point in 
question. And thus, we see that the assumed conversion and 
generalization of the minor proposition, is the seat of the fallacy of 
false Inductions, as it is the scat of the peculiar logical character of 
true Inductions. 

As true Inductive Propositions cannot be logically demonstrated 
by syllogistic rules, so they cannot be discovered by any rule. There 
is no foimula for the discovery of inductive tluth. It is caught by 
a peculiar sagacity, or power of divination, for which no precepts 
can be given. But from what has been said, we see that this saga- 
city shows itself in the discovery of propositions which are both 
* frue, and convertible in the sense above explained. Both these steps 
may bc^ difficult. The former is often very laborious: and when the 
labour has Lioen expended, and a true proposition obtained, it may 
turn out useless, because the proposition is not convertible. It was 
a matter of great labour to Kepler to prove (from calculation of 
observations) that Mars moves elliptically. Before he proved this, 
he had tried to prove many similar propositions : — that Mars moved 
according to the "bisection of the eccentricity,” — according to the 
"vicarious hypothesis,” — according to the "physical hypothesis,” — 
and the like ; but none of these was found to be exactly true. The 
proposition that Mars moves elliptically was proved to bo true. 
But still, there was the question. Is it convertible? Do aU the 
planets move as Mars moves? This was proved, (suppose,) to be 



CRITICISM OF ARISTOTLE'S INDUCTION. 457 

true, for the Earth and VenuB. But still the question remains, Do 
all the planets move as Mars, Earth, Venus, do? The inductive 
generulizinf^ impulse boldly answers, Yes, to this question; though 
the rules of Syllogism do not authorize the answer, and though there 
remain untried cases. The inductive Philosopher tries the cases as 
fast as they occur, in order to confirm his previous conviction ; but 
if he hud to wait for belief and conviction till he had tried every 
case, he never could have belief or conviction of such a proposition 
at all. lie is prepared to modify or add to his inductive truth 
according as new cases and new observations instruct him ; but he 
does not fear that new coses or now observations will overturn an 
inductive proposition established by exact comparison of many com- 
plex and various phenomena. 

Aristotle's example oifers somewhat similar reficctions. lie had 
to establish a proposition ceuceriiing long-lived animals, which 
should be true, and should be susceptible of generalized conversion. 
To prove that the elephant, horse and mule are destitute of gall* 
bladder required, at least, the labour of anatomizing those animals 
in the seat of that organ. But this labour was not enough ; for he 
would find those animals to agree in many other things besides in 
being uohulous. 11c must have selected' that character somewliat at 
a venture. And the guess was wrong, as a little more labour ivould 
have shon'ii him; if for instance he had dissected doer: for they are 
acholous, and yet short-lived, A trial of this kind would have shonn 
him that the extreme term, acholous, did extend beyond the mean, 
namely, aniniuls such as elephant, horse, mule; and therefore, that 
the conversion was nqt allowable, and that the Induction was unten- 
able. In truth, there is no relation between bile and longevity*, 
and ibis example given by Aristotle of generalization from induction 
is an unfortunate one. 


2 Mr. Owen, to whom I am in- intestine: there is relation he- 
debted for the physiological part of tween natural longevity and bile, 
this criticism, teUs me, “ All mam- Neither has the presence or absence 
malia have bile, the caniivora m of the goll-lJadder any connexion 
greater proportion than the herbi- witli age. Man and the elephant are 
vora: thegoll-bUddeT is a oompara- perhaps for their size tlie longest 
tively unimportant accessory to the lived animals, and the latest at com> 
biliaiy apparatus; adjusting it to ing to maturity: one has the gaU- 
ccrtaln modifications of stomacli and bladder, and the other not*' 



458 


APPENDIX D. 


In discussing this passage of Aristotle, 1 hare made two a1tera> 
lions in the text, one of^tyhi^h is necessary on account of the fact ; 
the otlier.on account of the sense. In the received text, the parti- 
cular examples of long-lived animals given are man, horse, and mule 
to de r, TO KaOcKatrTov fiaKpofiiov, oTou avOpw'jroi^ kuI 'L'lriro^, 
Kai tjpioi/ov). And it is afterwards said that all these are acholom: 
(dWd Kai T& B, TtJ fxfi eypv 'irai/rl bTrdp\cL tw P.) But 

man has a gall-bladder : and the fact was well known in Aristotle’s 
time, for instance, to Hippocrates; so that it is not likely that 
Aristotle would have made the mistake which the text contains. 
But at any rate, it is a mistake ; if not of the transcriber, of Aristotle ; 
and it is impossible to reason about the passage, without correcting 
the mistake. The substitution of eXec/jar for dt/Optoiros makes the 
reasoning ooberent; but of course, any other achulous long-lived 
animal would do so equally Avell. 

The other emendation which 1 have made is in § 0. In the re- 
ceived text § G and 7 stand thus : 

‘ C. Then every C is A, for evejj/ adiolous animal is long-lived 
(rip dn r o\w vwdpxci t4 a, *jrdv yap tS d^oXov fjLaKpojiiop)* 

7. Also every C is for all C is destitute of bile. 

Whence it may uc inferred, says Aristotle, under certain condi- 
tions, that every Ji is A (tw A ti|» B v-jrdpxeiu) that is, that every 
acholoHS animal is long-lived. But this conclusion is, according to 
the common reading, identical with the majof’premiss ; so that the 
passage is manifestly corrupt. 1 correct it by substituting for 
dx,o\aVf P; and thus reading nrdv yap to P fiaKpoftiov “ for every 
C is long-lived:” just as hi the parallel sentence, 7, we have aX\a 
Vot TO B, Td pij expv Travrl virdp)(ci T(p P. In this way 

the reai^oning becomes quite clear. The corrupt substitution of 
dy^oXov for 1> may have been made in various ways ; which [ need 
not suggest. As my business is with the sense of the passage, and 
as it makes no sense without the change, and very good sense with 
it, 1 cannot hesitate to make the emendation. And these emenda- 
tions being made, Aristotle’s view of the nature and force of In- 
duction becomes, I think, perfectly clear and very instructive. 



CRITICISM OP Aristotle’s induction. 459 


ADDITIONAL NOTE, 

I take the liberty of adding to this Memoir the following remarks, 
for which 1 am indebted to Mr Edleston, Fellow of Trinity College. 

Several of the earlier editions of Aristotle have y instead of 
axp\ov in the passage referred to in the above paper: ox. gr. 

(1) The edition printed at Basle, 1559 (after Erasmus) : " t6 y.” 

(2) Basil (Erasmus) 1550. 

(0) Burana's Latin version,* Venet. 1552, has " omne enim C 
longasvum.” 

(4) Sylhurg, Francf. 1587 "to y ” is printed in brackets thus : 
•‘[to y] TO dxo \ ov .** 

(5) So also in Casaubon’s edition, 1500. 

(C) Casaub. 1605 “ to y,” (though the Latin version has •• vacans 
bile;’^) not “ [t5 y] to dxoXov,** as the edition of 1590. 

(7) In the edition printed Aurel. Allobr. 1607, “ [to y] t« 
dxoXov/* as in (4) and (5). 

(8) Du Vnl’a editions, Paris, 1C19, 1G20, 1054 "t<5 y” though in 
Pacius's translation in the adjacent column wc find •' vacans bile.’' 

(9) In the critical notes to Waitz’s edition of the Organon (Lips. 

1844) it is stated that “post T* implying apparently, 

that in the MS. marf^ed 71, the letter y, which had been originally 
written after dx^ov^ bad been erased. 

The following passages throw light upon the question whether 
ai/ 0 /)(tf 7 rov ought or ought not to be retained in the passage dis* 
cussed in the Memoir. ^ 

(A) Aristot. Dc Animalihus Histor. ii. 15, 9 (Bt’kk.), twv fiev 
Jwotoicmv Kal Terpavodofi/ e\a<l>09 ouk cx^i 

iTi 5^ Yttwov, d/oec/v, ovoi, tfiMKij Kal twu i/wv evLoi •"Bxci 6 l- 

Kal 6 Td tj-jrap dxoXou ficvy ic . t . \. 

(B) Conf. lb. 1 . 17, 10, 11. (In the beginning of Chap. 16, be 
says that the external jiopia of man are yptopipa, “Ta ivrd^ 
Toiivavriov, "Ay vonanra yap ktrri fidXiara to Tuii; duBpioirtou, 
tSare ^ei •TTpds rd riov dXXwv fiopta Jwair aWyoi^Tav o’lco'TreTv,”...) 

(C) Id De Part* Animal, iv, 2, 2. to nhv yap ovk Ix^* 
XoXifv, dlov ViTTros Kal dpews Kal di/ov Kal eXo^os Kal irpuj,..,. 



APPENDIX D, 


460 

’Ey 3^ T 0 T 9 yevccri 'rotv aurotc ra fiiu exjetu <paiv€Taif ra 3* ovk 
olau eif Tw TcSi# fiutav. Tovtidv 3* icai 6 dvdpmiro^* 
ei/ioi juiu ydp KpaivovTai ijVaTos, cviot 3 * 

061 c expuTct. Aid Kai j^iveTai dfitpicrpiiTtiarL^ vepi o\ou tou ye- 
i/ows* ol ydp euTu\6yT€9 ovoTepataouy cxautTi irepl vdvTwu uttci- 
XapfSavovciy cos cisrai/Tcov ixatrrtoy.^.,,^ 

(D) Ib. § 11. Aid Kai xapitcrrara Xcyoutri tujv dpxoiuty ol 

tpacKoyTev airtov tiuai tov vXfito ^tjy xpovov to p.tj x®“ 

XifV, ^/Vti/fai/Tcc ivi Ta ptayvxa. Kai t«s eXdff>oui' TavTa ydp 
dxoXd T€ Kai iroXvu xpoyov. *Eti 3k Kui Ta pi] bmpnpeva 
vir* kKeiutov on ovk e'xct 3eX(ph Kai Kdpt]XoVf Kai 

TaOra Tuyxduei paKpofita ovra, ESXoyov ydp, k.t.X, 

(E) The elephant and man are mentioned together as long- 
lived animals {DeLong, at Brcv* Vti(P, iv. 2, and De Omerat, Ani- 
mal, IV. lo, 2.) 


The following is the import of these passages: 

{A ) “ Of viviparous quadrupeds, the deer, roe, horse, mule, ass, 
seal, and some of the swine have not the gall-bladder. ... 

The elephant also has the liver without gall-bladder, &.c.’^ 

{£) ** The external parts of man are well known : the internal 
parts arc far from being so. The parts of man are in a great mea- 
sure unknown ; so that we must judge concerning them by refer- 
ence to tbe analogy of other animals. * 

(C) *'Somc animals are altogether destitute of gall-bladder, as 

the horse, the mule, the ass, the deer, the roc... But in some kinds 
rt appears that some have it, and some have it not, as the mice kind. 
And aiqpng these is man; for some men appear to have a gall- 
bladder on th^ liver, and some not to have one. And thus there is 
a doubt as to the species in general; for those who have happened 
to examine examples of either kind, hold that all the cases are of 
that kind.’* * 

(D) ** Those of the a,ncients speak most plausibly, who say that 
the absence of the gall-blodder is the cause of long life ; looking 
at animals with uncloven hoof, and deer : for these are destitute of 
gall-bladder, and live a long time. And further, those animals in 
which the ancients had not the opportunity of ascertaining that 
they have not the gall-bladder, os the dolphin, and the camel, are 
also long-lived animals.” 



CRITICISM OP Aristotle’s induction. 461 

It appears, from those passages, that Aristotle was aware that 
some persons had asserted man to have a gall-bladder, but that he 
also conceived this not to be universally true. He may have in- 
clined tc the opinion, th<at the opposite case was the more usual, 
and may have written dvOpunrovt in the passage which 1 have been 
didlussing. Another mistake of his is the reckoning deer among 
long-lived animals. 

It appears probable, from the context of the passages ( C) and 
(D), that the conjecture of a connexion between absence of the 
gall-bladder and length of life was suggested by some such notion 
as this : — that the gall, from its bittcraes.s, is the cause of irritation, 
mental and bodily, and that irritation is adverse to longevity. The 
opinion is ascribed to **tbc ancients,” not claimed by Aristotle as 
his own. 



Appendix E. 


ON THE FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHI':SIS ®P 
PHILOSOPHY. 

{Gam. rhU. Soc. Feb. 5, 1844) 


1. A LL persons who have attended in any de^reo to the views 
generally current of the nature of reasoning are familiar 
with the distinction of necessary truths and Iriiths of CtVperience; 
and few such persons, or at least few students of mathematics, 
require to have this distinction explained or enforced. All geome- 
tricians are satisfied that the geometriciil truths with which they 
are conversant are necessarily true; they not only are true, but 
they must bo true. The neaning of the terms being understood, 
and tho proof being gone through, the truth of the proposition 
inu.st be assented to. That parallelograms upon the same base and 
between the same parallels arc equal ; — that angles in the same 
segment are equal j —these are propositions which we learn to be 
true by demonstrations deduced from definitions and axioms ; and 
which, when we have thus learnt them, w^e s4e could not bejothcr- 
wisQ. On the other hand, there are other truths which we learn 
from experience; as for instance, that the stars revolve round the 
pole in one day; and that the moon goes through her phases from 
full to full again in thirty days. These truths we see to be true; 
but wd know them only by experience. Men never could have 
discovered tb'^fm without looking at the stars and the moon ; and 
having so learnt them, still no one will pretend to say that they are 
necesearily true. For aught we can see, things might have been 
otherwise ; and if we had been placed in another part of the solar 
system, then, accordin||to the opinions of astronomers, experience 
would have presented them otherwise. 

2. I take the astronomical truths of experience to contrast with 
the geometrical necessary truths, as being both of a familiar defi- 
nite sort; we may easily find other examples of both kinds of tnith. 
The truths which regard numbers are necessary truths. It is a 
necessary truth, that 27 and 38 are equal to G5; that half the sum 



FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY. 463 

of two numbers added to half their difference is equal to the 
greater number. On the other hand, that sugar will dissolve in 
water; that plants cannot live without light; and in short, the 
whole body of our knowledge in chemist^', physiology, and the 
other inductive sciences^ consists of truths of experience. If there 
be any science which offer to us truths of an ambiguous kind, with 
regard to which we may for a moment doubt whether they are 
necessary or experiential, we will^defer the consideration of tliem 
till w'e have marked the distinction of the two kinds m^re clearly. 

8. One mode in which we may express the difference of necessary 
truths and truths of experience, is, that necessary truths are those 
of which we cannot distinctly conceive the contrary, "NV e can very 
readily conceive the contrary of experiential truths. Wo can 
conceive the stars moving about tlie polo or across the sky in any 
kind of curves with any velocities; we can conccjvc the moon 
always appearing during the whole month as a luminous disk, as 
she might do if her light were inherent and not borrow'ed. But 
we cannot conceive one of the parallelograms on the same base* 
and between the same parallels larger than the other; for wo 
tiiid that, if we attempt to do this, when \vc separate the paral- 
lelograms into parts, wo have to conceive one triangle larger than 
another, both having all their parts equal ; which we cannot 
conceive at all, if avo conceive the triangles distinctly. Wc make 
this imp 9 ssibility more clear by conceiving the triangles to be 
placed so that two sides of the one coincide with two sides of 
the other; and it is then seen, that in order to conceive tho tri- 
angles unequal, we ufust conceive the two bases which have the 
same extremities both ways, to be different lines, though both 
straight lines. This it is impossible to conceive : we assent to the 
impossibility as an axiom, when it is expressed by saying, that two 
straight lines cannot inclose u space ; aud thus we cannot distinctly 
conceive the contrary of the proposition just mentioned re&|)ccting 
parallelograms. ^ 

4. But it is necessary, in applying this distinction, to bear in 
mind the terms of it that we cannot distinctly conceive the con- 
trary of a necessary truth. Por in a certain loose, indistinct way, 
persons conceive the contrary of necessary geometrical truths, when 
they erroneously conceive false propositions to be true. Thus, 
Hobbes erroneously held that he had discovered a means of geo- 
metrically doubling the cube, os it is called, that is, finding two 
mean proportionals between two given lines ; a problem which can- 
not be solved by plane geometry. Hobbes not only proposed a 
construction for this purpose, but obstinately maintained that il 



APPENDIX E. 


464 

was right, when it had been proved to bo wrong. But then, the 
discussion showed how indistinct tho geometrical conceptions of 
Hobbes were ; for when his critics had proved that one of the lines 
in his diagram would tiot meet tho otheF in the point which his 
reasoning supposed^ but in another point near to it ; he maintained^ 
in reply, that one of these points was large enough to include 
tho other, so that they might be considered as the same point. 
Such a mode of conceiving tho opposite of a geometrical tnith, 
forms no exception to tho asserCion, that this opposite cannot be 
distinctly conceived. 

5. In liko manner, tho indistinct conceptions of children and of 
rnde savages do not invalidate the distinction of necessary and ex* 
periential truths. Children and savages mako mistakes even with 
regard to numbers; and might easily happen to assert that 27 
and 38 are equal to 63 or 64. But siirh mistakes cannot make 
such arithmetical truths cease to be necessary truths. When any 
person conceives these numbers and their addition distinctly, by re- 
volving them into parts, or in any other way, he sees that their sum 
is necessarily 65. If, on the ground of the possibility of children 
and savages conceiving something different, it be held that this is 
not a necessary truth, it must be held on the same ground, that 
it is not a necessary truth that 7 and 4 are equal to 11 ; for children 
and savages might be found so unfamiliar with numbers as not to 
reject the assertion that 7 and 4 are 10, or even that 4 and 3 are 6, 
or 8. But I suppose that no persons would on such grounds hold 
that these arithmetical truths are truths known only by expe- 
rience. 

6 Necessary truths are established, as has already been said, 
by demonstration, proceeding from definitions and axioms, accord- 
ing to exact and rigorous inferences of reason, Truths of experi- 
* ence ore collected from what we see, also according to inferences 
of reason, but proceeding in a less exact and rigorous mode of 
proof. The«?former depend upon the relations of the ideas which 
we have in our minds : the latter depend upon the appearances or 
phenomena, which present themselves to our senses. Necessary 
tmths are formed from our thougfits, the elements of tho world 
within us ; experiential truths are collected from things, the ele- 
ments of the world without us. The truths of experience, as they 
appear to us in the external world, wo call Facts ; and when we 
are able to find among onr ideas a train which will conform them- 
selves to the apparent faots, we call this a Theory. 

7. This distinction and opposition, thus expressed in various 
forms; as Necessary «nd Experiential Truth, Ideas and Senses, 



FUNDAMENTAL, ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY. 465 

Thoughts and Things, Theory and Fact, may be termed the 
Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy ; for almost all the discus- 
sions of philosophers have been employed in asserting or denying, 
explaining or obscuring this antithesis, Jt may be expressed in 
many other vtrays; but is not difficult, under all these different 
forms, to recognize the same opposition: and the same remarks 
apply to it under its various forms, with corresponding modifica- 
tions. Thus, as vre have already seen, the antithesis agrees with 
that of Iteasoning and Observation : again, it is identical with the 
opposition of Keilcciion and Sensation; again, sensation deals 
with Objects; facts involve Objects, and generally all things with- 
out US are Objects: — Objects of sensation, of observation. On the 
other hand, we ourselves who thus observe objects, and in whom 
sensation is, may be called the Subjects of sensation and observa- 
lion. And this distinction of Subject and Object is one of the most 
general ways of expressing the fundamental antithesis, although 
not yet perhaps quite familiar in Knglish. I shall not scruple 
however to speak of the Subjective and Objective clement of this 
antithesis, where the expressions are convenient. 

8. All these forms of antithesis, and the familiar references to 
them which men make in all discussions, show the fundamental 
and necessary character of the antithesis. AVe can have no know- 
led^fo without ^ho union, no philosophy without tho separation, of 
the two elements. We can have no knowledge, except* we have 
both impressions on our senses from the world without, and 
thoughts from our minds within : — except w'e attend to things, and 
to our ideas; — except^pre are passive to receive imprc.ssions, and 
active to compare, combine, and mould them. But on the other 
hand, philosophy seeks to distinguish the imprcs.sions of our senses 
from tho thoughts of our minds ; — to point out the difference of 
ideas and things ; — to separate the active from the passive faculties 
of our being. The two elements, sensations and ideas, are, both 
requisite to the existence of our knowledge, as both,, matter and 
form are requisite to tho existence of a body. But philosophy 
considers tho matter and the form separately. The properties of 
the form are the subject of geouijetry, the properties of the matter 
are the subject of chemistry or mechanics. 

9. But though philosophy considers these elements of know- 
ledge separately, they cannot really be separated, any more than 
can matter and form. Wo cannot exhibit matter without form, or 
form without matter ; and just as little can we exhibit sensations 
without ideas, or ideas without sensations; — the passive or the 
active faculties of tho mind detached from eac{| other. 


HF 



APPENDIX B. 


466 

In ercry act of my knowledgo, there must be concerned the 
things whereof I know, and thoughts of me who know: I must 
botli passwely receive or have received imprcssiona, and 1 must 
actively combine them ^nd reason on them. No apprehension of 
things is purely ideal : no experience of external things is purely 
sensational. If they be conceived as things, the mind roust have 
been awakened to the conviction of things by sensation: if they be 
conceived as things, the expressions of the senses must have been 
bound together by conceptions. ^If we think of any thing, we must 
recognize the existence both of thoughts and of things. The 
fundamental antithesis of philosophy is an antithesis of inseparable 
ekments. 

10. Not only cannot these elements be separately exhibited, but 
they cannot bo separately conceived and described. The descrip- 
tion of them must always imply their relation ; and the names by 
which they are denoted will consequently always bear a relative 
significance. And thus the terms which denote the fundamental an- 
iithesis of philosophy cannot he applied absolutely and exclusively 
in any case, AVe may illustrate this by a consideration of some of 
the common modes of expressing the antithesis of which we speak. 
The terms Theory and Fact are often emphatically used as opposed 
to each other: and they arc rightly so used. But yet it is im- 
possible to say absolutely in any case, This is a Fact and not a 
Theory; this is a Theory and not a Fact, meaning by Theory, true 
Tlieory. Is it a fact or a theory that the stars appear to revolve 
round the pole ? Is it a fact or a theory that the earth is a globo 
revolving round its axis ? Is it a fact or p theory that the earth 
revolves round the sun? Is it a fact or a theory that the sun 
attracts the earth? Is it a fact or a theory that a loadstone attracts 
a needle ? In all these cases, some persons would answer one Way 
and some persons another. A person who has never watched the 
stars, ^nd has only seen them from time to time, considers their 
circnlar motipn round the pole os a theory, just as ho considers the 
motion of the sun in the ecliptic as a theory, or the apparent 
motion of the inferior planets round the sun in the zodiac. A 
person who has compared the measures of different parts of the 
earth, and who knows that these measures cannot be conceived dis- 
tinctly without supposing the earth a globe, considers its globular 
form a fact, just as much as the square form of his chamber. A 
person to whom the grounds of believing the earth to revolve round 
its axis and round the snn, are as familiar ar the grounds for be- 
lieving the movements of the mail-coaches in this country, con- 
ceives the former e^nts to be facts, just as steadily os the flatter. 



rUNDAMENTAl^ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY. 467 

And a person who, believing the fact of the earth’s annual motion, 
refers it distinctly to its mechanical course, conceives the sun’s 
attraction os a fact, jnst as he conceives os a fact the action of the 
wind which turns the sails of a mill. We%ee then, that in these 
cases we cannot apply absolutely and exclusively either of the terms, 
Fact or Theory. Theory and Fact are the elements which cor- 
respond to our Ideas and our Senses. The Facts are facts so far as 
the Ideas have been combined with the sensations and absorbed 
in them: the Theories are Theorrcs so far a*? the Ideas are kept 
distinct from the sensations, and so far as ii is considered as still 
a question whether tliey can be made to agree with them, A true 
Theory is a fact, a Fact is a familiar theory. 

In like manner, if we take the terms Reasoning and Observa- 
tion; at first sight thev appear to be very distinct. Our observa- 
tion of the world witiiout us, our reasonings in our own minds, 
appear to he clearly separated and opposed. But yet we shall find 
that we cannot apply these terms absolutely and exclusively. 1 see 
a book lying a few feet from me: is this a matter of observeation? 
At first, perhaps, we might be inclined to say that it clearly is so. 
But yet, all of us, who have paid any attention to the process of 
vision, and to the mode in which we are enabled to judge of the 
distance of objects, and to judgo them to be distant objects at all, 
know that this judgment involves inferences drawn from various 
sensations from the impressions on our two eyes; — from our 
muscular sensations; and the like. These inferences are of the 
nature of reasoning, ns much os when we judge of the distance 
of an object on the oih'c side of a river by looking at it from differ- 
ent points, and stepping the distance between them. Or again : we 
observe the setting sun illmninatc a gilded weathercock ; but this is 
us much a matter of reasoning as when wo observe the phases 
of the moon, and infer that she is illuminated by the sun. All ob- 
servation involves inferences, and inference is reasoning. • 

11. Even the simplest terms by which the antithesis^ expressed 
cannot be applied : ideas and sensations, thoughts and things, sub- 
ject and object, cannot in^ny case be applied absolutely and ex- 
clusively. Our sensations reqiffre ideas to bind them together, 
namely, ideas of space, time, number, and the like* If not 90 
bound together, sensations do not give us any apprehension of 
things or objects. All things, all objects, must exist in space and 
in time — ^must be one or many. Now space, time, number, are not 
sensations or things. They are something different from, and op- 
posed to sensations and things. We have termed them ideas. It 
may be said they are relations of things, or^^of sensations. Bat 

H h2 



APPENDIX E. 


468 

granting this form of expression, still a relation is not a thing 
or a sensation; and therefore we must still have another and 
opposite element, along with our sensations. And yet, though 
wo have thus these twS elements in every act of perception, wo 
cannot designate any portion of the act as absolutely and exclu- 
sively belonging to one of the elements. Perception involves sen- 
sation, along with ideas of time, space, and the like ; or, if any 
one prefers the expression, invol^ves sensations along with the ap- 
prehension of relations. Perception is sensation, along with such 
ideas as make sensation into an apprehension of things or objects. 

12, And as perception of objects implies ideas, as observation 
implies reasoning ; so, on the other hand, ideas cannot exist where 
sensation has not been : reasoning cannot go on when there has not 
been previous observation. This is erider)^ from the necessary 
order of development of the human faculties. Sensation necessa- 
rily exists from the first moments of our existence, and is constantly 
at work. Observation begins before we can suppose the exist- 
ence of any reasoning which is not involved in observation. Hence, 
ut whatever period we consider our ideas, we must consider them 
as having been already engaged in connecting our sensations, and 
as inoditied by this eniploynient. By being so employed, our ideas 
are unfolded and defined, and such development and definition 
cannot be separated from the ideas themselves. Wo cannot con- 
ceive. space without boundaries or forms ; now forms involve sen- 
sations. We caun(>t conceive time without events which mark 
the course of time; but events involve sensations. We cannot 
conceive number without conceiving tiling^ which are nnnibcrod; 
and ihings imply sensations. And the forms, things, events, which 
are thus implied in our ideas, having been the objects of sensa- 
tion constantly in every part of our life, have modiiied, unfolded 
and fixed our ideas, to an extent which wo cannot ostiinato, but 
which Sve must suppose to be essential to the processes which at 
present go {n in our minds. Wo cannot say that objects create 
ideas; for to perceive objects we must already have ideas. But wo 
may say, that objects and the constiynt petception of objects have so 
far modified our ideas, that we cannot, even in thought, separate 
our ideas from the perception of objects. 

We cannot say of any ideas, as of the idea of space, or time, or 
number, that they are absolutely and exclusively ideas. We cannot 
conceive what space, or time, or number would be in our minds, 
if we hod never perceived any thing or things in space or time. 
We cannot conceive ourselves in such a condition as never to have 
perceived any thing or things in space or time. But, on the other 



FUNDAMEXTAf, ANTITHESIS OP PHILOSOPHY, 469 

hand, just as little can we conceive ourselves becoming acquainted ' 
with space and time or numbers as objects of sensation. We can- 
not reason without having the operations of our minds affected by 
previous sensations ; but we cannot conceive reasoning to be merely 
a series of sensations. In order to be used in reasoning, sensa. 
tion must become observation ; and, as we have seen, observation 
already involves reasoning. In order to be connected by our ideas, 
sensations must be things or objects, and things or objects already 
include ideas. And thus, as we have said, none of the terms by 
w'hich the fundamental antithesis is expressed can be absolutely 
and exclusively applied. 

13. X now proceed to make' one or two remarks suggested by 
the views which have thus been presented. And first I remark, 
that since, as we have just seen, none of the terms which express 
the fundamental antithesis can be applied absolutely and exclu- 
sively, the absolute application of the antithesis in any particular 
case can never be a conclusive or immoveable principle. This 
remark is the more necessary to be borne in mind, as the terms of 
this antithesis are often used In a vehement and peremptory man- 
ner. Thus we arc often told that such a thing is a Fact and not a 
Tlieory, with all the emphasis which, in speaking or writing, tone 
or italics or capitals can give. We see from what has been said, 
that when this is urged, before we can estimate the truth, or the 
value of the asscrtioti, w'e must ask to whom is it a fact? what 
habits of thought, what previous information, what ideas does it 
imply, to conceive the fact as a fact? Does not the apprehension 
of tho fact imply asAimptions vvhich may with equal justice be 
called theory, and which are perhaps false theory? in which case, 
the fact is no fact. Did not the ancients assert it as a fact, that tho 
earth stood still, and the stars moved? and can any fact have, 
stronger apparent evidence to justify persons in asserting it empha- 
tically than this had? These remarks ore by'^no means ifrged in 
order to show that no fact can be certainly known ti^be true ; but 
only to show that no fact can be certainly shown to be a fact 
merely by calling it a fa^, however emphatically. There is by no 
moans any ground of general skepticism with regal'd to truth 
involved in the doctrine of the necessary combination of two ele- 
ments in all our knowledge. On the contrary, ideas are requisite 
to the essence, and things to the reality of our knowledge in every 
case. The proportions of geometry and arithmetio are examples of 
knowledge respecting our ideas of space and number, with regard 
to which there is no room for doubt. The doctrines of astronomy 
are examples of truths not less certain respeoting the external world. 



470 


APPENDIX E, 


14. I remark further, that since in every act of knowledge, 
observation or perception, both the elements of the fundamental 
antithesis are involved, and involved in a manner inseparable even 
in our conceptions, it nfhst always be possible to derive one of these 
elements from the other, if we are satisfied to aceept, as proof of 
such derivation, that one always co-exists with and implies the 
other. Thus an opponent may say, that our ideas of space, time, 
and number, are derived from o^j* sensations or perceptions, because 
we never w ere in a condition in which we had the ideas of space 
and time, and had not sensations or perceptions. But then, we 
may repl^ to this, that we no sooner perceive objects than we per- 
ceive them as existing in space and time, and therefore the ideas of 
space and time are not derived from the perceptions. In the same 
manner, an opponent may say, that all knowledge which is involved 
in our reasonings is the result of experience; for instance, our 
knowledge of geometry. For every geometrical principle is pre- 
sented to us by experience as true; beginning with the simplest, 
from which all others are derived by processes of exact reasoning. 
But to this we reply, that experience cannot bo the origin of such 
knowledge; for though expcrienco shows that such principles are 
true, it cannot show that they must be true, which we also know. 
We never have seen, as a matter of observation, two straight lines 
inclosing a space; but we venture to say further, without tfie 
smallest hesitation, that wo never shall see it ; and if any one were 
to tell IIS that, according to his experience, such a form was often 
seen, we should only suppose that he did not know what ho was 
talking of. No number of acts of experieifco can add to the cer- 
tainty of our knowledge in this respect; which shows that oiur 
knowledge is not made up of acts of experience. Wo cannot test 
such knowledge by experience; for if wo were to try to do so, we 
must first know that the lines with which we make the trial are 
straight ; and wo have no test of straightness better than this, that 
two such li4es cannot inclose a space. Since then, experience can 
neither destroy, add to, nor test our axiomatic knowledge, such 
knowledge cannot be derived from^expeAence. Since no one act of 
experience can affect our knowledge, no numbers of acta of expe- 
rience can make it. 

16, To tliis a reply has been offered, that it is a characteristic 
property of geometric forms that the ideas of them exactly resemblo 
the sensations; so that these ideas are as fit subjects of experi- 
mentation as the realities themselves; and that by such experi- 
meiitation we learn the truth of the axioms of geometry. 1 might 
very reasonably ask those»wbo use this language to explain how. a 



FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OP PHILOSOPHY. 47 1 

particular class of ideas can be said to resemble sensations; how, if 
they do, we can hnow it to be so ; how we can prove this resem- 
blance to belong to geometrical ideas and sensations ; and how it 
comes to be an especial characteristic of tl^e. Bat I will put the 
argument in another way. Experiment can only show what is, 
not what must be. If experimentation on ideas shows what must 
be, it is different from what is commonly called experience. 

1 may add, that not only the m^re use of our senses cannot show 
that the axioms of geometry must be true, but that, without the 
light of our ideas, it cannot even show that they are true. If we 
had a segment of a circle a mile long and an inch wide, we should 
have two lines inclosing a space ; but we could not. by seeing or 
touching any part of either of them, discover that it was a bent line. 

IG. That mathematical truths arc not derived from experience 
is perhaps still more evident, if greater evidence be possible, in the 
case of numbers. We assert that 7 and 8 are 35. We find it so, if 
we try with counters, or in any other way. But we do not, on that 
account, say that the knowledge is derived from experience. We 
refer to our conceptions of seven, of eight, and of addition, and as 
soon as we possess these conceptions distinctly, we see that the 
sum must be fifteen. We cannot be said to make a trial, for we 
should not believe the apparent result of the trial if it were different. 
If any one were to say that the multiplication table is a table of 
the results of experience, wc should know that he could not be 
able to go along with us in our researches into tiie foundations of 
human knowledge ; nor, indeed, to pursue with success any specu- 
lations on tlio, subject? 

, 17. Attempts have also been made to explain the origin of 

axiomatic truths by referring them to the association of ideas. But 
this is one of the cases in which the word association has been 
applied so widely and loosely, that no sense can be attached to it. 
Those who have written with any degree of distinctness^ on the 
subject, have truly taught, that the habitual associatiJh of the ideas 
leads us to believe a connexion of the things : but they have never 
told us that this association gave us the power of forming the ideas. 
Association may determine belief, but it cannot determine the poS'^ 
sibility of oar conceptions. The African king did not believe that 
water could become solid, because he had never seen it in that 
state. But that accident did not make it impossible to conceive it 
so, any more than it is impossible for us to conceive frozen quick- 
silver, or melted diamond, or liquefied air; which we may never 
have seen, but have no difficulty in conceiving. If there were a 
tropical philosopher really incapable of conceiving water solidified, 



472 


APPENDIX B, 


he must have been brought into that mental condition by abstruse 
Bpeculations on the necessary relations of solidity and fluidity, not 
by the association of ideas. 

18. To return to the results of the nature of the Fundamental 
Antithesis. As by assuming unirersal and indissoluble connexion 
of ideas Tvith perceptions, of knotvledge with experience, as an 
evidence of derivation, we may assert the former to be derived from 
the latter, so might we, on the sa/ne ground, assert* the latter to be 
derived from the former. We sec all forms in space; and we 
might hence assert all forms to be mere modifications of our idea 
of space. We see all events happen in time; and wo might hence 
assort all events to be merely limitations and boundary- marks of 
our idea of time. We conceive all collections of things as two or 
three, or some other number: it might hence be asserted that we 
have an original idea of number, which is reflected in external 
things. In this case, as in the other, we are met at once by the 
impossibility of this being a complete account of our knowledge. 
Our ideas of space, of time, of number, however distinctly reflected 
to us with limitations and modifications, must be reflected, limited 
and modified by something diflV^rent from themselves. We must 
have visible or tangible forms to limit space, perceived events to 
mark time, distinguialiablo objects to exemplify number. But still, 
in forms, and events, and objects, we have a knowledge which they 
themselves cannot give us. For we know, without attending to 
them, that whatever they are, they >vill conform and must conform 
to the truths of geometry and arithmetic. There is an ideal por- 
tion in all our knowledge of the external world ; and if we were 
resolved to reduce all our knowledge to one yf its two antithetical 
elements, we might say that all our knowledge consists in the rela- 
tion of our ideas* Wherever there is necessary trntb, there mui|t 
be something more than sensation can supply : and the necessary 
truths <f£ geometry and arithmetic show us that our knowledge of 
objects in spabe and time depends upon necessary relations of ideas, 
whatever other element it may involve. 

19* This remark may be carried pauch further than the domain 
of geometry apd arithmetic. Our knowledge of matter may at first 
sight appear to be altogether derived from the senses. Tet we 
cannot derive from thOensea our knowledge of a truth which we 
accept as nniversally certain ; — ^namely, that wo. cannot by any pro- 
cess add to or diminish the quantity of matter in the world* This 
truth neither is nor can be derived from experience ; for the experi- 
ments which we make to verify it pre-suppoae its truth. When 
the philosopher was asked what was the 'weight of smoke, he bade 



FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY. 473 

the Inquirer subtract the weif^ht of the ashes from the weight of 
the fuel. Every one who thinks clearly of the changes which take 
place in matter, assents to the justice of this reply : and this, not 
because any one had found by trial that au%h was the weight of tho 
smoke produced in combustion, but because tho weight lost was 
assumed to have gone into some other form of matter, not to have 
been destroyed. When men began to use the balance in chemical 
analysis, they did not prove by tryd, but took for granted, as self* 
evident, that the weight of the whole must be found in the aggre* 
gate weight of the elements. Thus it is involved in the idea of 
matter that its amount continues unchanged in all changes which 
tiike place in its consistence. This is a necessary truth : and thus 
our knowledge of matter, as collected from chemical experiments, 
is also a modification of our idea of matter as tho material of the 
world incapable of addition or diminution. 

20. A similar remark may be made with regard to tho mecha- 
nical properties of matter. Our knowledge of these is reduced, in 
our reasonings, to principles which we call tho laws of motion. 
These laws of motion, os 1 have endeavoured to show', depend 
upon the idea of Cause, and involve necessary truths, which are 
necessarily implied in tho idea of cause; — namely, that every 
change of motion must have a cause — that tho effect is measured 
by the cause; — that re-action is equal and opposite to action. 
These principles aro not derived from experience. No one, I sup- 
pose, would derive from experience the principle, that every event 
must have a cause. Every attempt to sec the traces of cause in 
the world assumes tfiis principle. 1 do not say that these prin* 
ciples are anterior to experience; for I have already, I hope, shown, 
that neither of the two elements of our knowledge is, or can be, 
anterior to the other. But tho two elements are co-ordinate in the 
development of the human mind; and the ideal element may bo 
said to be the origin of our knowledge with the more |fropriotj 
of the two, inasmuch os our knowledge is tho relsfjion of ideas. 
The other element of knowledge, in which sensation is concerned, 
and which embodies, linAts, aqd defines tho necessary truths which 
express the relations of our ideas, may be propef|y termed ex- 
perience ; and 1 have, in the discussion just quoted, endeavoured 
to show how the principles concerning mechanical causation, 
whioh 1 have jnst stated, are, by observation and experiment, 
limited and defined, so that they become the laws of motion* 


i£ri8t.5o./nd.b.m. 




474 


APPENDIX B, 


And thus we see that such knowledg^e ia derived from ideas, in 
a sense quite as general and rigorous, to say the least, as that 
in which it is derived from experience. . 

21. 1 will take anotller example of this; although it is one less 
familiar, and the consideration of it perhaps a little more difficult 
and obscure. The objects which we find in the world, for in- 
stance, minerals and plants, are of different kinds; and accord* 
ing to their kinds, they are called by various names, by moans of 
which wc know what we mean when we speak of them. The 
discrimination of these kinds of objects, according to their differ- 
ent forms and other properties, is the business of chemistry and 
botany. And this bnsiness of discrimination, and of consequent 
classification, has been carried on from the first periods of the 
development of the human mind, by an industrious and compre- 
hensive series observations and experiments ; the only way in 
which any portion of the task could have been effected. But as the 
foundation of all this labour, and as a necessary assumption during 
every part of its progress, there has been in men's minds the 
principle, that objects are so distinguishable by resemblances and 
differences, that they may be named, and known by their names. 
This principle is involved in the idea of a Name; and without 
it no progress could have been made. The principle may be 
briefly stated thus :~-IutclligibIe Names of kinds are possible. If 
we suppose this not to be so, language can no longer exist, nor 
could the business of human life go on. If instead of having 
certain definite kinds of minerals, gold, iron, copper and the like, 
of which the external forms and characterl are constantly con- 
nected with the same properties and qualities, there were no con- 
nexion between the appearance and the properties of the object - 
if what seemed externally iron might turn ont to resemble lead in 
*it8 hardness; nnd what seemed to be gold daring many trials, 
might at the next trial be found to be like copper; not only all the 
uses of thesoi^iTiinerala would fail, but they would not be distin- 
guishable kinds of things, and the names would be unmeaning. 
And if this entire uncertainty as to kind find properties prevailed 
for all objects, the world would no longer be a world to which lan- 
guage was applicable. To man, thus unable to distinguish objects 
into kinds, and call them by names, all knowledge would be im- 
possible, and all definite apprehension of external objects would 
fade away into an inconceivable confusion. In the very apprehen- 
sion of objects as intelligibly sorted, there is involved a principle 
which springs within us, contemporaneous, in its efficacy, with out 
first intelligent perceptipn of the kinds of ihinga of which the world 



FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY. 475 

consists. We assume, as a necessary basis of our knowledge, that 
tilings are of definite kinds ; and the aim of chemistry, botany, and 
other sciences is, to find marks of these kinds ; and along with 
these, to learn their definitely-distinguishdl properties. Even here, 
therefore, where so large a portion of our knowledge comes from 
experience and observation, we cannot proceed without a neces- 
sary truth derived from our ideas, as our fundamental principle 
of knowledge. 

22. What the marks arc, which distinguish the constant differ- 
ences of kinds of things (definite marks, selected from among many 
unessential appearances), and what their definite properties arc, 
when they are so distinguished, are parts of our knowledge to 
be learnt from observation, by various processes; for instance, 
among others, by chemical analysis. We find the differences of 
bodies, as shown by such analysis, to be of this nature: — that there 
are various elementary bodies, which, combining in different definite 
proportions, form kinds of bodies definitely different. But, in arriv- 
ing at ibis conclusion, we introduce a new idea, that of Elementary 
Composition, which is not extracted from the phenomena, but sup- 
plied by the mind, and introduced in order to make the phenomena 
intelligible. That this notion of elementary composition is not sup- 
plied by the chemical phenomena of combustion, mixture, &c. as 
merely an observed fact, we see from this ; that men had in ancient 
times performed many experiments in which elementary composition 
was concerned, and had not seen the fact. It never was truly seen 
till modern times; and when seen, it gave a new aspect to the whole 
body of known facts.'* This idea of elementary composition, then, is 
supplied by the mind, in order to make the facts of chemical analy- 
sis and synthesis intelligible as analysis and synthesis. And this 
idea being so supplied, there enters into otir knowledge a^png with 
it a corresponding necessary principle; — That the elementary com-* 
position of a body determines its kind and properties. 'Vliis is, 1 
say, a principle assumed, as a consequence of tlic id^a of composi- 
tion, not a result of experience ; for when bodies have been divided 
into their kinds, we taW> for granted that the analysis of a single 
specimen may serve to deterilline the analysis of all bodies of the 
same kind: and without this assumption, chemical knowledge with 
regard to the kinds of bodies would not be possible. It has been 
said that we take only one experiment to determine the composition 
of any particular kind of body, because we have a thousand experi- 
ments to determine that bodies of the same kind have the same 
coinposition. But this is not so. Our belief in the principle that 
bodies of the same kiud have the same composition is not established 



APPENDIX E. 


476 

by experiments, but is assumed as a necessary consequence of the 
ideas of Kind and of Composition. If, in our experiments, wo 
found that bodies sup])osed to be of the same kind had not tlie same 
composition/ wo should hot at all doubt of the principle Just stated, 
but conclude at once that the bodies were not of the same kind; — 
that tho marks by which the kinds are distinguished had been 
wrongly stated. This is what has very frequently happened in the 
course of the investigations of chemists and mineralogists. And 
thus we have it, not as an experiential fact, but as a necessary 
principle of chemical philosophy, that the Elementary Composition 
of a body determines its Kind and Properties. 

23. How bodies differ in their elementary composition, experi- 
ment must teach us, as we have already said, that experiment has 
taught us. But as we have also said, whatever be the nature of 
this difference, kinds must be dehnito, in order that language may 
be possible: and hence, whatever be the terms in which we aro 
taught by experiment to express the elementary composition of 
bodies, the result must be conformable to this principle, That tho 
differences of elementary composition aro definite. The law to 
which we are led by experiment is, that the elements of bodies 
continue in definite proportious according to weight. Experiments 
add other laws; as for instance, that of multiple proportions in 
different kinds of bodies composed of the same elements ; but of 
these we do not he^o speak. 

24. We are thus led to see that in our knowledge of mechanics, 
chemistry, and the like, there ore involved certain necessary princi- 
ples, derived from our ideas, and not from experience. But to this 
it may be objected, that the parts of our knowledge in which these 
principles are involved has, in historical fact, all been acquired by 
cxperiei^ce. The laws of motion, tho doctrine of definite propor- 

<tions, and the like, have all become known by experiment and 
observa^on ; and so far from being seen as necessary truths, have 
been discovei^d by long-continued labours and trials, and through 
innumerable vicissitudes of confusion, error, and imperfect truth. 
This is perfectly true: but does not at al^ disprove what has been 
said. Perception of external objeofs and experience, experiment 
and observation are needed, not only, as we have said, to supply the 
objective element of aU knowledge^to embody, limit, define, and 
modify our ideas; but this intercourse with objeots is also requisite 
to unfold and fix our ideas themselves. As we have already said, 
ideas and facts can never be separated. Our ideas cannot be exer- 
cised and developed in any other form than in their combination 
with facts, and therefore the trials, corrections, controversies, by 



FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY. 477 

which the matter of our knowledge is collected, is also the only way 
in which the form of it can be riglitly fashioned. Experience is 
requisite to the clearness and distinctness of our ideas, not because 
they are derived from experience, but b%cause they can only be 
exercised upon experience. And this consideration suiBciently ex*> 
plains how it is that experiment and observation have been the 
means, and the only means, by which men have been led to a 
knowledge of the laws of nature. In reality, however, the neces- 
sary principles which flow from oftr ideas, and which are the basis 
of such knowledge, have not only been inc<^ttably assumed in the 
course of such investigations, but have been often expressly pro- 
mulgated in words by clear-minded phi]osoi)hers, long before their 
true interpretation was assigned by experiment. This has happened 
with regard to such principles as those above mentioned ; That every 
event must have a cause; That reaction is equal and opposite to 
action; That the quantity of matter in the world cannot be in- 
creased or diminished : and there v'ould be no dilHculty in finding 
similar enunciations of the other principles above mentioned; — 
That the kinds of things have definite differences, and that these 
differences depend upon their elementary composition. In general, 
however, it may bo allowed, that the necessary principles which 
are involved in those laws of nature of w'hich we have a knowledge 
become then only clearly known, when the laws of nature are dis- 
covered which thus involve the necessary ideal element. 

25. But since this is allowed, it may be further asked, how we 
are to distinguish between the necessary principle which is derived 
from our ideas, and tiio law of nature which is learnt by experience. 
And to this wo reply, that the necessary principle may be known by 
the condition v/hich we have already mentioned ns belonging to such 
principles:... that it is impossible distinctly to conceive the contrary, 
AVe cannot conceive an event without a cause, except we abandons 
all distinct idea of cause; we cannot distinctly conceive twq straight 
lines inclosing space; and if we seem to conceive ^is, it is only 
because we conceive indistinctly. We cunifbt conceive 5 and 3 
making 7 or 9 ; if a per^n were to say that he could conceive this, 
we should know that he was*a person of immature or rude or be- 
wildered ideas, whose conceptions had no distinctness. And thus 
wo may take it as the mark of a necessary truth, that we cannot 
conceive the contrary distinctly. 

26. If it be asked what is the test of distinct conception (since 
it is upon the distinctness of conception that the matter depends )» 
we may consider what answer we should give to this question if it 
were asked with regard to the truths of geometry. If we doubted 



APPENDIX E. 


478 

vrhether any ono had these distinct conceptions '«;vhioh enable him to 
see the necessary nature of geometrical truth, 'we should inquire if 
be could understand the axioms as axioms, and could follow, as 
demonstratire, the reasenings which are founded upon them. If 
this were so, we should be ready to pronounce that he had distinct 
ideas of space, in the sense now supposed. And the same answer 
may be giren in any other case. That reasoner has distinct concep- 
tions of mechanical causes who can see the axioms of mechanics as 
axioms, and can follow the demdnstrations derived from them as 
demonstrations. If it be said that the science, as presented to him, 
may be erroneously constructed; that the axioms may not be axioms, 
and therefore the demonstrations may be futile, wc still reply, that 
the same might bo said with regard to geometry : and yet that the 
possibility of this does not lead as to doubt either of the truth or of 
the necessary nature of the propositions contained in Euclid's Ele- 
ments. We may add further, that although, no doubt, the authors 
of elementary boohs may be persons of confused minds, who present 
as axioms what are not axiomatic truths; yet that in general, what 
is presented as an axiom by a thoughtful man, though it may include 
some false interpretation or application of our ideas, will also gene- 
rally include some principle which really is necessarily true, and 
which would still be involved in the axiom, if it wero corrected 
so as to be true instead of false. And thus we still say, that if 
in any department of science a man can conceive 4ibtinctly at all, 
there are principles the contrary of which he cannot distinctly con- 
ceive, and which are therefore necessary truths. 

27. But on this it may be asked, whether tcuth can thus depend 
upon the particular state of mind of the person who contemplates 
it ; and whether that can be a necessary truth which is not so to all 
men. And to this wc again reply, by referring to geomdfcry and 
arithmetic. It is plain that truths may be necessary truths which 
are not |o to all men, when we include men of confused and per- 
plexed intellects ; for to such men it is not a necessary truth that 
two straight lines caffnot inclose a space, or that 14 and 17 are 31. 
It need not be wondered at, therefore, if^to such men it does not 
appear a necessary truth that reaction is equal and opposite to 
action, or that the quantity of matter in the world cannot be 
increased or diminished. And this view of knowledge and truth 
does not make it depend upon the state of mind of the student, any 
more than geometrical knowledge and geometrioal truth, by the 
confession of all, depend upon that state. We know that a man 
cannot have any knowledge of geometry without so much of atten- 
tion to the matter of the science, and so much of care in the 



FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OP PHILOSOPHY. 479 

management of his own thoughts, as is requisite to keep his ideas 
distinct and clear. But we do not, on that account, think of main- 
taining that geometrical truth depends merelj upon the state of 
the student's mind. We conceive that h^ knows it because it is 
true, not that it is true because he knows it. We are not surprised 
that attention and care and repeated thought should be requisite to 
the clear apprehension of truth. For such care and such repetition 
are requisite to the distinctness and clearness of our ideas : and yet 
the relations of these ideas, and their consequences, are not pro- 
duced by the efforts of attention or repetition which we exert. 
They are in themselves something which we may discover, but 
cannot make or change. The idea of space, for instance, which is 
the basis of geometry, cannot give rise to any doubtful propositions. 
What is inconsistent with the idea of space cannot be truly obtained 
from our ideas by any efforts of thought or curiosity; if w'e blunder 
into any conclusion inconsistent with the idea of space, our know- 
ledge, BO far as this goes, is no knowledge: any more than our 
observation of the external world would be knowledge, if, from 
haste or inattention, or imperfection of sense, we were to mistake 
the object which we sec before us. 

28. But further: not only has truth this reality, which makes it 
independent of our mistakes, that it .must be what is really con- 
sistent with our ideas ; but also, a further reality, to which the 
term is more obviously applicable, arising from the principle already 
explained, that ideas and perceptions are inseparable. For since, 
when we contemplate our ideas, they have been frequently em- 
bodied and exemplified in objects, and thus have been fixed and 
modified ; and since this compound aspect is that under which we 
constantly have them before us, and free from which they cannot 
bo exhibited; our attempts to make our ideas clear and distinct 
will constantly lead us to contemplate them as they are manifested ^ 
in those external forms in which they are involved. Thus in study- 
ing geometrical truth, we shall be led to contemplate it as exhi- 
bited in visible and tangible figures; — not as if th'^se could be 
sources of truth, but as enabling us more readily to compare the 
aspects which our ideal, ap]^ied to the world of objects, may 
assume. And thus we have an additional indication of the reality 
of geometrical truth, in the necessary possibility of its being capable 
of being exhibited in a visible or tangible form. And yet even this 
test by no means supersedes the necessity of distinct ideas, in order 
to a knowledge of geometrical truth.* For in the case of the dupli- 
cation of the cube by Hobbes, mentioned above, the diagram which 
he drew made two points appear to coincide, which did not really. 



APPENDIX K. 


480 

and by the nature of onr idea of space, coincide; and thus con- 
firmed him in hfs error. '' 

Thxts the inseparable nature, of the Fundxmmtal Antithesis of 
Ideas and Things gives reality to our hnotoledge, and makes objecm 
live reality a corrective of our subjective imperfections in the pursuit 
of "knowledge. But this objective exhibition of knowledge can by no 
means supersede a complete development of the subjective condition^ 
namely^ distinctness of ideas. And that there is a subjective condU 
tiouj by no means makes knowledge altogether subjective^ and thus 
deprives it of reality; because^ as we have said^ the subjective and 
the objective elements are inseparably bound together in the funda^ 
mental antithesis. 

29. It would be easy to apply these remarks to other oases, for 
instance, to the case of the principle we have just mentioned, that 
the differences of elementary composition of different kinds of bodies 
must be definite. We have stated that this principle is necessarily 
true; — ^that the contrary proposition cannot be distinctly conceived. 
But by whom? Evidently, according to the preceding reasoning, by 
a person who distinctly conceives Kinds, as marked by intelligible 
names, and Composition, as determining the kinds of bodies. Per- 
sons new to chemical and c^assificatory science may not possess 
these ideas distinctly; or rather, cannot possess thorn distinctly; 
and therefore cannot apprehend the impossibility of conceiving the 
opposite of theabovo principle; just as the schoolboy cannot appre- 
hend the impossibility of the numbers in his multiplication table 
being other than they are. But this inaptitude to conceive, in 
either case, does not alter the necessary character of the truth ; 
although, in one case, the truth is obvious to all except schoolboys 
and the like, and the other is probably not clear to any except those 
who have attentively studied the philosophy of elementary com- 

^ positions. At the same. time, this difference of apprehension of the 
truth in different persons does not make the truth doubtful or 
dependint upon personal qualiQcations ; for in proportion as per- 
sons attain f& distinct ideas, they will see the truth ; and cannot, 
with such ideas, see anything as truth which is not truth. When 
the relations of elements in a compouncTbecome as familiar to a 
person as the relations of factors in a multiplication table, he will 
then see what are the necessary axioms of chemistry, as he now sees 
the necessary axioms of arithmetic. 

30. There is also one other remark which I will here make. In 
the progress of science, both the elements of our knowledge are 
constantly expanded and augmented. By the exercise of observa- 
tion and experiment, we have a perpetual accumulation of facts, the 



FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY. 48I 

materials of ]cno\vled|!:e, the objective element. Bj thought and 
discussion, we have a perpetual development of man*s ideas going 
on : theories are framed, the materials of knowledge are shaped into 
form; the subjective element is evolved* and by the necessary 
coincidence of the objective and subjective elements, the matter and 
the form, the theory and the facts, each of these processes furthers 
and corrects the other: each element moulds and unfolds the other. 
Now it follows, from this constant development of the ideal portion 
of our knowledge, that we shall constantly lie brought in view of 
new Necessary Principles, the expression of ihe conditions belong- 
ing to the Ideas which enter into onr expanding knowledge. These 
principles, at first dimly seen and hesitatingly asserted, at last be- 
come clearly and plainly self-evident. Such is the case with the 
principles which are the basis of the laws of motion. Such may 
soon be the case with the principles which arc the basis of the 
philo.sophy of chemistry. Such may hereafter be the case with 
the principles which are to be the basis of the philosophy of the 
connected and related polarities of chemistry, electricity, galvanism, 
magnetism. That knowledge is possible in these cases, we know; 
that our knowledge may be reduced to principles, gradually more 
simple, wo al.so know' ; that we have reached the* last stage of 
simplicity of our principles, few cultivators of the subject will bo 
disposed to maintain; and that the additional steps which lead 
towards very simple and general principles will also lead to prin- 
ciples which recommend themselves by a kind of axiomatic charac- 
ter, those who judge from the analogy of the past history of science 
will hardly doubt. That the principles thus axiomatic in their 
form, do also express some relation of our ideas, of wdiich experi- 
ment and observation have given a true and real interpretation, 
is the doctrine which 1 have here attempted to establish and illus- 
trate in the most clear and undoubted of the existing sciences ; and 
the evidence of this doctrine in those cases seems to be unexcep- 
tionable, and to leave no room to doubt that sncli is ^e universal 
type of the progress of science. Such a doctrine, as w’C have now 
seen, i.s closely connected with the views here presented of the 
nature of the Fundamental Antithesis of Fhilosophy, which 1 have 
endeavoured to illustrate. 



, ArjENMX F. 


EEMAEKS ON A EEVIEW OF THE PHILO- 
SOPHY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 


Trinity Zudg^, AjtritlUh, 1844. 

Mt Dear HEasciiEii, 

T>E1NG about to send you a copy of a paper on a philosophical 

question just printed in the Transactions of our Cambridge 
Society, 1 am tempted to add, as a private communication, a few 
Kemarks on another aspect of the same question. These Rernarkif 
I think 1 may properly address to you, They will refer to an 
Article in the Quarterly lieview for June, 1841, respecting xny 
History and Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences ; and without 
assigning any other reasoii, 1 may say that the interest I know you 
to take in speculations on such subjects makes me confident that 
you will give a reasonable attention to what 1 may have to say od 
the subject of that Article. With the Keviewal itself, I am so far 
from haying any quarrel, that when it appeared 1 received it as 
affording all that 1 hoped from J^ublic Criticism. The degree and 
the kind of admiration bestowed upon my works by a writer so 
familiar with science, so comprehensive in his views, and so equit* 
able in his decisions, as the Reviewer manifestly w'as, 1 accepted 
as giving ray work a stamp of acknowledged value which few other 
hands doiild have bestowed. 

You may ^rhaps recollect, however, that the Reviewer dissented 
altogether from some of the general views which I had maintained, 
and especially from a general view which is also, in the main, 
that presented in the accompanying Memoir, namely, that, besides 
Facts, Ideas are an indispensable source of our knowledge; that 
Ideas are the ground of necessary truth ; that the Idea of Space, in 
particular, is the ground of the necessary truths of geometry. This 
question, and especially as limited to the last form, will be the sub- 
ject of my Remarks in the first place ; and I wish to consider the 
Reviewer's objections with. the respect which their subtlety and 
depth of thought well deserve. 



REMARKS ON A REVIEW, &C. 483 

The Reyiewer makes objections to the account which I haye 
given of the source whence geometrical truth derives its characters 
of being necessary and universal; but he is not one of those meta- 
physicians who deny those characters to tlie truths of geometry, 
lie allows in the most ample manner that the truths of geometry 
art necessary. The question between us tlierefore is from what 
this character is derived. The Reviewer prefers, indeed, to have it 
considered that the question is not concerning the necessity, but, as 
he snys, the universality of these truths; or laiher, the nature and 
grounds of our conviction of their universality. He might have 
said, with equal justice, the nature and grounds of our conviction 
of their necessity. For liis objection to the term necessity in this 
case — ** that all the propositions about realities are necessarily true, 
since every reality must be consistent with itself,*’ (p.20G) — does not 
apply to our conviction of necessity, since we may not be able to 
see what are the properties of real things; and therefore may have 
no conviction of their necessity. It may be a necessary property of 
salt to be soluble, but we sec no such necessity ; and therefore the 
assertion of such a property is not one of ‘the necessary truths with 
which we are here concerned. But to turn back to the necessary 
or universal truths of geometry, and the ground of those attributes : 
The main difference between the Author and the Reviewer is 
brought into view, w'heri the Reviewer discusses the general argu- 
ment w’htch 1 had used, in order to show that truths which we seo 
to be necessary and universal cannot be derived from experience. 
The argument is this, — 

** Experience must afways consist of a limited number of observa- 
tions; and however numerous these may be, they can show nothing 
with regard to the infinite number of cases in which the experiment 
has not been made.. ..Truths can only be known to be general, not 
universal, if they depend upon experience alone. Experience can- 
not bestow that universality w'hich she herself cannot have; nor 
that necessity of -which she has no comprehension.” {Pfiil, i. pp. 
GO, Cl.) 

Here is that which mult be considered as the cardinal argument 
on this subject. It is therefore important to attend to the answer 
which the Reviewer makes to it. lie says,— 

** We conceive that a full answer to this argument is afforded by 
the nature of the inductive propensity, — ^by the irresistible impulse 
of the mind to generalize ad infinitum, when nothing in the nature 
of limitation or opposition offers itself to the imagination ; and by 
our involuntary application of the law of continuity to fill up, by 
the same ideal substance of truth, every interval which uncontra#- 


11 a 



APPENDIX F. 


484 

dieted expel ience may ha?e left blank in our inductive conclusion.” 
(p.207.) 

Now here we have two rival explanations of the same thing, — 
the conviction of the universality of geometrical truths. The one 
explanation is, that this universality is imposed upon such truths 
by their involving a certain element, derived from the niiivcrgal 
mode of activity of the mind when apprehending surh truths, which 
clement 1 have termed an Idea. ,The other explanation is, that this 
universality arises from the inductive propensity — from the irresist- 
ible impulse to generalize ad infinitum — from the involuntary appli- 
cation of the law of continuity— ieoiw the filling up all intervals with 
the same ideal substance of truth. 

With regard to these two explanations, I may observe, that so 
far as they are thus stated they do not necessarily diiler. They 
both agree in expressing this;* that the ground of the universality 
of geometrical truths is a certain law of the mind’s activity, which 
dutei mines its procedure when it is concerned in apprehending the 
external world. One explanation soys, that we impress upon the 
external world the relations of onr ideas, and tluis believe more 
than we see, — the other says, that we have an irresistible impulse 
to introduce into our conviction a relation between what w'e do 
observe and what we do not, namely, to generalize ad infinitum 
from what we do see. One explanation says, that we perceive all 
external objects as included In absolute ideal space, — the other, 
that we fill up tlie intervals of the objects w'hich w’e perceive with 
the same ideal substance of truth. Both sets of expressions may 
perhaps be admissible; and if admitted, may be understood as ex. 
pressing the same opinions, or opinions which have much in com- 
mon, The Author’s expressions have the advantage, which ought 
to belong to them, as the expressions employed in a systematic 
work, of being fixed expressions, technical phrases, intentionally 
seleetetl, uniformly and steadily employed wdienevcr the occasion 
recurs. Tli^ Reviover’s expressions are more lively and figurative, 
and such as well become an occasional composition; hut Imrdly 
such as could be systematically applied to the subject in a regular 
treatise. We could not, as a standard and technical phrase, talk of 
filling np the intervals of observation with the same ideal substance 
of truth; and the inevitable impulse to generalize would hardly 
sufliciently express that we generalize according to a certain idea, 
namely, the idea of space. Perhaps that which is suggested to us 
as the common import of the two sets of expressions may be con- 
veyed by some other phrase, in a manner free from the objections 
nrhich lie against both the Author’s and the Critic’s terms. Perhaps 



REMAEKS ON A REVIEW, &C. 485 

tlie mental idea governing our experience, and the irresistible im- 
pulse to generalize our observation, ma^ both be superseded by our 
speak ing of a law of the mind’s activity^ which is really implied in 
both. There operates, in observing the Acternol world, a law of 
the mind’s activity, by which it connects its observations; and this 
law of the mind’s activity may be spoken of either as the idea of 
j'pace, or as the irresistible impulse to generalize the relations of 
space which it observes. And this expression — the laws of the 
mind's activity — thus opposed to*that merely passive function by 
which the mind receives the impressions of sense, may be applied to 
other ideas as well as to the idea of space, and to the impulse to 
generalize in other truths as well as those of geometry. 

So far, it would seem, that the Author and the Critic may be brought 
into much nearer agreement than at first seemed likely, with regard 
to the grounds of the necessity and universality in our knowledge. 
But even if we adopt this conciliatory suggestion, and speak of the 
ncccsbity and universality of certain truths as arising from the laws 
of the mind’s activity, wc cannot, without producing great con- 
fusion, allow ourselves to say, as the Critic says, that these truths 
are thus derived from experience^ or from observation. It will, 1 
say, be found fatal to all philosophical precision of thought and 
language, to say that the fundamental truths of geometry, the 
axioms, with the conviction of their necessary truth, are derived 
from experience. Let us take any axiomatic truth of geometry, 
and ask ourselves if this is not so. 

It is, for example, an axiom in geometry that if a straight line 
cut one of two parallel straight lines, it must cut the other also. 
Is this truth derived or derivable from observation of actual parallel 
lines, and a line cutting them, exhibited to our senses ? Let those 
who say that we do acquire this truth by observation, imagine 
to themselves the mode in which the observation must be made. 
We have before us two parallel straight Hues, and we secs that a 
straight lino which cuts the one cuts the other also. S We see this 
again in another case, it may be the angles and the distances being 
different, and in a third, and in a fourth ; and so on ; and generaliz- 
ing, we are irresistibly led to believe the assertion to be universally 
true. But can any one really imagine this to be the mode in which 
we arrive at this truth? '‘We see,” says this explanation, “two 
parallel straight lines, cut by a third.” But how do we know that 
the observed lines are parallel? If we apply any test of parallelism, 
we must assume some property of parallels, and thus Involve some 
axiom on the subject, which we have no more right to assume than 
the one now under consideration. We should thus destroy our 



APPENDIX F, 


486 

explanation as an account of the mode of arrixing at independent 
geometrical axioms. But probabiy those who would give such an 
explanation would not do this. They would not suppose that in 
observing this property 6f parallels we try by measurement whether 
the lines are parallel. They would say, I conceive, that we suppose 
lines to be parallel, and that then we see that the straight line 
which cuts the one must cut the other. That when we make this 
supposition, we are persuaded of the truth of the conclusion, is 
certain. But what I have to remark is, that this being so, the con* 
elusion is the result, not of observation, but of the hypothesis. 
The geometrical truth here spoken of, after this admission, no 
longer flows from experience, but from supposition. It is not that 
we ascertain the lines to be parallel, and then find that itiey have 
this property: but we suppose the lines to be parallel^ and therefore 
they have this property. This is not a truth of experience. 

This, it may bo said, is so evident that it cannot have been over* 
looked by a very acute rcasoner, such as you describe your Critic to 
be. What, it may be asked, is the answer which he gives to so 
palpable an objection as this? How does ho understand his asser- 
tion that we learn the truth of geometrical axioms from experience 
(p. 208), BO as to mako it tenable on his own principles? What 
account does he give of the origin of such axioms which makes them 
in any sense to be derived from experience? 

In justice to the Reviewer’s fairness (which is unimpeachable 
throughout his argumentation) it must be stated that he does give 
an account in which he professes to show how this is done. And 
the main step of his explanation consists iif introducing the con- 
ception of directionj and unity of direction. He says (p. 208), “ Tho 
unity of direction, or that we cannot march from a given point by 
more than one path direct to the same object, is a matter of practical 
experience, long before it can by possibility become matter of ab* 
stract thought.” We might ask here, aiS in the former case, how 
this can be oAnatter of experience, except we have some independ- 
ent test of directness? and we might demand to know what this 
test is. Or do we not rather, here ^ in the other case, suppose the 
directness of the path ; and is not the singleness of the direct path 
a consequence, not of its observed form, but of its hypothetical di- 
rectness ; and thus by no means a result of experience ? But we 
may put our remark upon this deduction of ttie geometricid axiom 
in another form. We generalize, it is said, the observations which 
we have made ever since we were born. But this term ** generalize'* 
is far too vague to pass for an explanation, without being itself ex- 
plained. We are impelled to believe that to be true in general 



REMARKS ON A REVIEW, &C. 487 

which we see to be true in particular. But how do we see any 
truth? How do wo pick out any proposition with respect to a 
diagram which we see before us? We see in particular, and state 
in general, some truth respecting straigh twines, or parallel lines, or 
concerning direction. But where do we find the conception of 
straightness, or parallelism, or direction? These conceptions are 
not upon the surface of things. The child does not, from his birth, 
see straightness and parallelism so as to know that he sees them. 
How then does his experience bbar upon a proposition in which 
these conceptions are involved ? It Is said that it is a matter of 
experience long before it is a matter of abstract thought. But how 
can there bo any experience by. which we learn these properties of 
a straight line, till our thoughts are at least so abstract as to con- 
ceive what straightness is? If it bo said that this conception grows 
with our experience, and is gradually unfolded with our unfolding 
materials of knowledge, so as to give import and significance to 
them : I need make no objection to such a statement, except this — 
that this power of unfolding out of the mind conceptions which give 
meaning to our experience, is something in addition to the mere 
employment of our senses upon the external world. It is what I 
have called the ideal part of our knowledge. It implies, not only 
an impulse to generalize from experience, but also an impulse to 
form conceptions by which generalization is possible. It requires, 
not only that nothing should oppose the tendency, but that the 
direction in which the tendency is to operate should be determined 
by the laws of the mind’s activity; by an internal, not by an ex- 
ternal agency. a 

One main ground on which the Reviewer is disposed to quarrel 
with and reject several of the expressions used in tho Philosophy ; — 
such as that space is an idea, a form of our perception, and tho 
like, — is this ; that such expressions appear to deprive the externa# 
world of its reality; to make it, or at least most of its properties, a 
creation of the observing mind, fle quotes the follo’ipng argument 
which is urged in the Philosophy, in order to prove that space is 
not a notion obtained friim experience: “ Experience gives us infor- 
mation concerning things without us, but our apprehending them 
as wiriiout us takes for granted their existence in space. Experience 
ac(iuaints us with the form, position, magnitude, &c. of particular 
objects, but that they have form, position, magnitude, pre-supposes 
that they are in space.’’ From this statement he altogether dissents. 
No, says he, *Hhe reason why we apprehend things as without us is 
that they are without us. We take for granted that they exist in 
space, because they do so exist, and because such their existence is 



APPENDIX F. 


488 

a matter of direct perception, which can neither be explained in 
words nor contravened in Imagination : because, in short, space is a 
realUy, and not a mere matter of convention or imagination.’* 

Now, if bv calling spfree an idea, we suggest anj doubt of its 
reality and of the reality of the external world, we certainly run the 
risk of misleading our readers; for the external world is real if 
anything be real; the bodies which exist in space are things, if 
things are anywhere to be found. That bodies do exist in space, 
and that that is tlio reason why wo a]>prehend them as existing 
in space, 1 readily grant. But 1 conceive that the term Idea ought 
not to suggest any such doul)t of the reality of the knowledge in 
which it is involved. Ideas are always, in our knowledge, conjoined 
with facts. Our real knowledge is knowledge, because it involves 
ideas, real, because it involves facts. Wo apprehend things as ex. 
isting in space because they do so exist : and our idea of space 
enables us so to observe them, and so to conceive them. 

But we want, further, a reason why, apprehending them as they 
are, we also apprehend, that in certain relations they could not be 
otherwise (that two straight linear objects could not inclose a space, 
for instance). This circunistaneo is no way accounted for by saying 
that we apprehend them as they are; and is, 1 presume to say, in- 
explicable, except by supposing that it arises from some property 
of the observing mind an Idea, as 1 have termed it, — an irresis- 
tible Impulse to generalize, as the Reviewer expresses it. Or, us 
1 have suggested, we may adopt a third phrase, a Law of the 
mind’s activity : and in order that no question may remain, whe- 
ther we ascribe reality to the objects and rektions which we oh- 
serve, we may describe it as *‘a Law of the mind’s activity in 
appreheiKling what is.” And thus the real existence of the object, 
and the ideal element which our apprehension of it introduces, 
Vould both be clearly asserted. 

1 am ready to use expressions which recognize the reality of space 
and other external things more emphatically than those expressions 
which I have employed in the Philosophy ^ if expressions can be 
found which, while they do this, enable us lo explain the possibility 
of knowledge, and to analyze the structure of truth. It is, indeed, 
extremely difficult to find, in speaking of this subject, expressions 
which are satisfactory. The reality of the objects which we per- 
ceive is a profound, apparently an insoluble problem ^ We cannot 
but suppose that existence is something different from our know- 


^ Tliese remarks were written in 1841. The accompanying Memoir con- 
talas a farther discussion of this problem. 




REMAIIKS ON A REVIEW, &C. 489 

ledge of existence ; — ^that which exists, does not exist merely in our 
linuwiiij' that it does:— truth is truth whether we know it or not. 
Yet how can we conceive truth, otherwise than as something known ? 
How can wo conceive things as existing, Without conceiving them 
as objects of perception ? Ideas and Things are constantly opposed, 
yet necessarily co-existent. How they are thus opposite and yet 
idGntica\| is the ultimate problem of all philosophy. The successive 
jihases of philosophy have consisted in separating and again uniting 
these two opposite elements; in (dwelling somotimes upon the one 
and sometimes upon the other, as the principal or original or only 
element; and then in discovering that such an account of the stale 
of the cose was insufficient. Knowledge requires ideas. Keality 
requires things. Ideas and things co-exist. Truth and is known. 
But the complete explanation of these points njipears to be beyond 
our reach. At least it is not necessary for the purposes of our 
philosophy. The separation of ideas and sensations in order to 
discover the conditions of knowledge is our main task. How ideas 
and sensations are united so as to form things, docs not so imme- 
diately concern us. 

1 have stated that we may, without giving up any material por- 
tion of the Philosophy of Science to which 1 have been led, 
express the conclusions in other phraseology; and that instead of 
saying that all our knowledge involves certain Fundamental Ideas, 
the sources from which all universal truth is derived, we may 8.ay 
that there are certain Laws of Mental Activity according to which 
alone all the real relations of things are apprehended. If this 
alteration in the phrdbeology will make the doctrines more generally 
intelligible or acceptable, there is no reason why it should not be 
adopted. But 1 may remark, that a main purpose of the Philo- 
Sophy was not merely to prove that there are such Fundamental 
Ideas or Laws of mental activity, but to enumerate those of theiA 
which are involved in the existing sciences ; and to state the funda- 
mental truths to which the funda^iental ideas lead. ^This was the 
ta^k which was attempted; and if this have been executed with any 
tolerable success, it mays perhaps be received as a contribution to 
the philosophy of science, of which the value is not small, in what- 
ever terms it be expressed. And this enumeration of fundamental 
ideas, and of truths derived from them, must have something to 
correspond to it, in any other mode of expressing that view of the 
nature of knowledge which we ore led to adopt. If instead of 
Fundamental Ideas^ we speak of Impulses of generalization, or of 
Zaws of n^ental activity^ we must still distinguish such Impulses, 
or such Laws, according to the distinctions of ideas to which tha 



490 


APPENDIX F. 


survey of scienco led us, We shftll thus have a series of groups of 
Laws, or of classes of generalizing Impulses, corresponding to the 
series of Fundamental Ideas already given. If we employ the 
language of the Reviewer, we shall We one generalizing Impulse 
which suggests relations of Space; another which directs ns to 
properties of Numbers; another which deals with Time; another 
with Cause: another which groups objects according to ykeness; 
another which suggests a purpose as a necessary relation among 
them; to which may be added, eVen while we confine ourselves to 
the physical sciences, several others, as may be seen in the Philo- 
sophy. Now when the fundamental conditions and elements of 
truth are thus arranged into groups, it is not a matter of so much 
consequence to decide whether each group shall be said to be bound 
together by an idea or by an impulse of generalization ; as it is to 
see that, if this happen in virtue of ideas, here are so many distinct 
ideas which enter into the structure of science, and give universality 
to its matter; and again, if this happen in virtue of an irresistible 
impulse of generalization in each case, wo have so many different 
kinds of impulses of generalization. The main purpose in the 
Philosophy was to analyze scientific truth into its conditions and 
elements; and 1 did not content myself with saying that those ele- 
ments are Sensations and Ideas; the Ideas being that element 
which makes universal knowledge conceivable and possible. I went 
further: 1 enumeinted the Ideas which thus enter into science. I 
showed that in the sciences which 1 passed in review, the most 
acute and profound inquirers had taken for granted that certain 
truths in each science are of universal and ntoesaary validity, and 
1 endeavoured to select the idea in which this universality and 
necessity resided, and to separate it from all other ideas involved 
in other sciences. If therefore it be thought better to say that those 
f»rinciples in each science upon which, as upon the axioms in geo- 
metry, tho universality and necessity of scientiHe truth depends, are 
arrived at, noijthy ideas, but by ail irresistible impulse of generali- 
zation, those who employ such phraseology, if they make a classifi- 
cation of such impulses corresponding to m(f classification of ideas, 
will still adopt the greater port of m/ philosophy, altering only the 
phraseology. Or if, as 1 suggested, instead of Fundamental 
Ideas," we use the phrase ‘‘Laws of Mental Activity, ** then our 
primary intellectual Code«->the Constitution of our minds, as it 
may be termed— will consist of a Body of Laws of which the Titles 
correspond with the Fundamental Ideas of the Philosophy, 

My object was, from the writings of the most sagacious and pro- 
found philosophers who have laboured on each science, to extract 



REMARKS ON A REVIEW, &C. 49! 

such a code, such a constitution. If I have in anj degree succeeded 
in this, the result must hajre a reality and a value independently of 
all forms of expression. Still I do not think that any language can 
ever serve for such legislation, in which 4ie two elements of truth 
are not distinguished. Even if we adopt the phraseology which I 
have just employed, we shall have to recollect that Law and Fact 
must be kept distinct, and that the Constitution has its Principles 
as well as its History. 

But I will not longer detain yhu by seeking other modes of ex- 
pressing the Fundamental Antithesis to which the accompanying 
Memoir refers. The Remarks which I here send you were written 
three years ago, on the appearance of the Review which 1 have 
quoted. If I succeed in obtaining for them a few minutes' atten< 
tion from you and a few other friends, 1 shall bo glad that they 
have been preserved. 

I am, my dear Ilerschcl, 

always truly yours, 

W. WIIEWELL. 

P.S. I have abstained from sending you a largo portion of my 
Remarks as originally written. 1 had gone on to show that, in 
tny Philosophy, I had not only enumerated and analyzed a great 
number of different Fundamental Ideas which belong to the different 
existing sciences, but that I had also shown in what manner these 
ideas enter into theif respective sciences; namely, by the statement 
or use of Axioms, which involve the ideas, and which form the basis 
of each science when systematically exhibited. A number of these 
Axioms belonging to most of the physical sciences, are stated in the 
Philosophy. 1 might have added also that 1 have attempted to clac^ 
sify the historical steps by which such Axioms are brought into 
view and applied. But it is net necessary to d\^ell upon these 
points, in order to illustrate the difference and the agreement 
between the Reviewer ^nd me. 

Sir John F. W. Ifersehel, Bart, 



^PPEKDIX Gr. 

OF THE TRANSFORMATION OF HYPO- 
THESES IN THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE. 

i 

{Cam, Phil. Soc. May 19 , 1851 .) 


1. history of scicnco supr^ests the reflection that it is very 

(lifficuU for the same person at the same time to do justice 
to two conflicting^ theories. Take for example the Cartesian hypo- 
thesis of vortices and the Newtonian doctrine of universal gravi- 
tation. The adherents of tlie earlier opinion resisted the evidence 
of the Newtonian theory with a degree of obstinacy and captious- 
neas which now appears to u«i quite marvellous : while on the other 
hand, since the complete triumph of the Newtonians, they have 
been unwilling to allow any merit at all to the doctrine of vortices. 
It cannot but sceiu strange, to a calm observer of such changes, 
that in a matter which depends upon mathematical proofs, the 
whole body of the mathematical world should pass over, as in this 
and similar cases they seem to have done, fbom an opinion con- 
fidently held, to its opposite. No doubt this must be, in part, 
ascribed to the lasting effects of education and early prejudice. 
The old opinion passes away with the old generation : the new 
theory grows to its full vigour when its congenital disciples grow 
to be masters. John Bernoulli continues a Cartesian to the last ; 
Daniel, his soqi is a Newtonian frfim the first. Newton’s doctrines 
are adopted at once in England, for they are the solution of a pro- 
blem at which his contemporaries have bei^ labouring for years. 
They find no adherents in France, whhre Descartes is supposed to 
have already explained the constitution of the world; and Fon- 
tenelle, the secretary of tho Academy of Sciences at Paris, dies a 
Cartesian seventy years after the publication of Newton's Principia, 
This is, no doubt, a part of the explanation of the pertinacity with 
which opinions are held, both before and after a scientific revolu- 
tion : but this is not the whole, nor perhaps the most instructive 
aspect of the subject. There is another feature in the change* 



TRANSFORMATION OP HYPOTHESES, &C. 493 

'which explains, in some degree, how it is possible that, in subjects, 
mainly at least mathematical, and therefore claiming demonstrative 
evidence, mathematicians should hold different and even opposite 
opinions. And the object of the prescnt^)aper is to point out this 
feature in the successions of theories, and to illustrate it by some 
prominent examples drawn from the history of science. 

2. The feature to which I refer is this; that 'vidien a prevalent 

theory is found to be untenable, and consequently, is succeeded by 
a different, or even by an opposite one, the change is not made 
suddenly, or completed at once, at least in the minds of the most 
tenacious adherents of the earlier doctrine ; but is effected by a 
transformation, or series of transformations, of the earlier hypo^ 
thesis, by means of which it is gradually brought nearer and 
nearer to the second; and thus, the defenders of tite ancient doc- 
trine are able to go on as if still asserting their tirst opinions, and 
to continue to press their points of advantage, if they have any, 
against the new theory. They borrow, or imitate, and in some 
way accommodate to their original hypothesis, tlie new explana- 
tions which the new theory gives, of the observed facta; and lliiis 
they maintain a sort of verbal consistency; till the original hypo- 
thesis becomes inextricably confused, or breaks down under the 
weight of tlio auxiliary hypotheses thus fastened upon it, in order 
to make it consistent with the facts. * 

Tliis often-occurring course of events might be illustrated from 
the history of the astronomical theory of epicycles and eccentrics, 
as is well known. But my present purpose is to give one or tw'O 
brief illustrations of% somewhat similar tendency from other parts 
of scientific history; and in tiic first place, from that part which 
has already been referred to, the battle of the Cartesian and New- 
tonian systems. 

3. The part of the Cartesian system of vortices which is mo^^ 
familiarly known to general readers is the explanation of the motiotis 
of the planets by supposing them*carried round tho ajn by a kind of 
whirlpool of fluid matter in which tliey are immersed: and the ex- 
planation of the motioss of the satellites round their primaries by 
similar subordinate whirlpools, turning round the primary, and 
carried, along with it, by tho primary vortex. But it should be 
borne in mind that a part of the Cartesian hypothesis which was 
considered quite as important as the cosmical explanation, was the 
explanation which it was held to afford of terrestrial gravity. Ter- 
restrial gravity was asserted to arise from the motion of the vortex 
of subtle matter which revolved round the earth’s axis and filled 
the surrounding space. It was maintained that by the rotation of 



494 


APPENDIX G. 


such a Tortex, the particles of the subtle matter would exert a 
centrifugal forcej and by virtue of that force, tend to recede from 
the center: and it was held that all bodies which were near the 
earth, and therefore immersed in the vortex, would be pressed to- 
wards the center by the effort of the subtle matter to recede from 
the center ^ 

These two assumed effects of the Cartesian vortices — to carry 
bodies iu their stream, as straws are carried round by a whirlpool, 
and to press bodies to the center by the centrifugal effort of the 
whirling matter — must be considered separately, because they were 
modified separately, as the progress of discussion drove the Carte- 
sians from point to point. The fornmr effect indeed, the dragging 
force of the vortex, as we may call it, would not bear working out 
oil mechanical principles at all ; for as soon as the law of motion 
was acknowledged (which Descartes himself was cue of the loudest 
in proclaiming), that a body in motion keeps all the motion which it 
has, and receives in addition all that is impressed upon it; as soon, 
in short, as philosophers rejected the notion of an inertness in 
matter which constantly retards its movements, — ^it was plain that 
a planet perpetually dragged onwards in its orbit by a fluid moving 
quicker than itself, must be perpetually accelerated ; and therefore 
could not follow those constantly-recurring cycles of quicker and 
8 lowei*motion which the planets exhibit to us. 

The Cartesian mathematicians, then, left untouch 3d the calcu- 
lation of the progressive motion of the planets; and, clinging to 
the assumption that a vortex would produce a tendency of bodies 
to the center, made various successive efforki to construct their 
vortices in such a manner that the centripetal forces produced by 
them should coincide with those which the phenomena required, 
and therefore of course, in the end, with those which the New'toniaii 
theory asserted* 

lA tra||h, the Cartesian vortex was a bad piece of machinery fur 
producing a c^itral force : from the first, objections were made to 
the sufficiency of its mechanism, and most of these objections were 
very unsatisfactorily answered, even granting the additional machi- 
nery which its defenders demanded. SJne formidable objection was 
soon started, and continued to the last to be the torment of the 
Cartesians. If terrestrial gravity, it was urged, arise from the 
centrifugal force of a vortex which revolves about the earth's axis, 
terrestrial gravity ought to act in planes perpendicular to the 


1 Cartes. Prineip. iv. 23 . 




TEASSFORMATION OF HYPOTHESES, &C. 495 

earth's axi^, instead of tending to the earth's center. This oiijec^ 
tiun was taken by James Bernoulli^, and by Huygliens* not long 
after the publication of Descartes's Prindpia. Huyghens (who 
adopted the theory of vortices with modiAcations of his own) sup- 
poses that there are particles of the fluid matter which move about 
the earth in every possible direction, within the spherical space 
which includes terrestrial objects; and that the greater part of 
these motions being in spherical surfaces concentric with the earth, 
produces a tendency towards the*earth*8 center. 

This was a procedure tolerably arbitrary, but it was the best 
which could be done. Saurin, a little later^, gave nearly the same 
solution of this difficulty. The solution, identifying a vortex of 
some kind with a central force, made the hypotliesis of vortices 
applicable wherever central forces existed; but then, in return, it 
deprived the image of a vortex of all that clearness and simplicity 
wliich had been its first great recommendation. 

But still there remained difficulties not less formidable. Accord- 
ing to this explanation of gravity, since the tendency of bodies to 
the earth's center arose from the superior centrifugal force of the 
whirling matter which pushed them inward as water pushes a light 
body upward, bodies ought to tend more strongly to tlie center in 
proportion as they are less dense. The rarest bodies should be the 
heaviest *, contrary to what we find, 

Descartes's original solution of this difficulty has a certain degree 
of ingenuity. According to him, {Princip, \ v. 2^) a terrestrial body 
consists of particles of the third clement, and the more it has of such 
particles, the inoresit excludes the parts of the celestial matter, 
from the revolution of which matter gravity arises; and therefore 
the denser is ihe terrestrial body, and the heavier it will be. 

But though this iiiiglit satisfy him, it could not satisfy the matho- 
maticians who followed him, and tried to reduce his system tft 
calculation on mechanical principles. JFor how could th^ do this, 
if the celestial matter, by the opillration of which thm^phenomcna of 
force and motion w’ere produced, watf so entirely ditferent from 
ordinary matter, which^lono had supplied men with experimental 


3 Jac. Bernoulli, KouvdUs Fonseca Biilflnger, in i7?0 (Acad. Petrop.), 
flttr le Sysl^mc de M, Ptscarics, op. t. conceived that by making a sphere 
i. p, 23Q (1686). revolve at the same time about two 

* De la Cause data Pesanteur{jC^), axes at right angles to each other, 
p. 135. every particle would describe a great 

« Journal dea Savans, 1703. M£m. circle; but this is not so. 

Acad. Par. 170^. 



APPENDIX G. 


496 

illustrations of mechanical principles? In order that the celestial 
, matter, by its whirling, might produce the gravity of heavy bodies, 
it was mechanically necessary that it must be very dense ; and dense 
in the ordinary sense of the term ; for it was by regarding density 
in the ordinary sense of the term that the mechanical necessity had 
been established. 

The Cartesians tried to escape this result (ITuyghens, Pesantcur^ 
p. 161, and John il^crnoulli, Nouvelles Pensees, Art. 31) by saying 
that there were two meanings of density and rarity ; that sonic 
fluids might be rare by having their particles far asunder, others, by 
having their particles very small though in contact. But it is diffi- 
cult to think that they could, as persons well acquainted w'ith 
mechanical principles, satisfy themselves with this distinction; for 
they could hardly fail to see that the mechanical eft’ect of any por- 
tion of fluid depends upon the total mass moved, not on the size of 
its particles. 

Attempts made to exemplify the vortices experimentally only 
showed more clearly the force of this difficulty. Iluyghens bad 
found that certain bodies immersed in a. whirling fluid tended to 
the center of the vortex. But w'hen Saulmou'^ a little later made 
similar experiments, he had Ihe mortification of finding that tho 
heaviest bodies had the greatest tendency to recede from the axis 
of the vortex. ** The result is,’' as the Secretary of the Academy 
(Fontenelle) says, exactly the opposite of what wc could have 
wished, for the [Cartesian] system of gravity : but wc are not to 
despair; sometimes in such researches disappointment leads to ulti* 
male success.” 

But, passing by this difficulty, aud a^isuming that in some way or 
otlier a centripetal force arises from the centrifugal force of the 
vortex, the Cartesian mathematicians were naturally led to calcu- 
Vite the circumstances of the vortex on mechanical principles ; espe- 
cially Huyghens, who had successfully studied tho subject of centri- 
fugal force. .Accordingly, in hi» little treatise on the Cause of 
Gravitation (p. 143), be calculates the velocity of ihe fluid matter of 
the vortex, and finds that, at a point in tl|p equator, it is 17 times 
the velocity of the earth’s rotation. « 

It may naturally be asked, how it comes to pass that a stream of 
fluid, dense enough to produce the gravity of bodies by its centri- 
fugal force, moving with a velocity 17 times that of the earth (and 
therefore moving round tho earth in 85 minutes), does not sweep 


* Acad. Par. 1714, fJist. p. io6l 



TRANSFORMATION OF HYPOTHESES, &C. 497 

oil terrestrial objects before it. But to this Hnjghens had already 
replied (p. 137), that there are particles of the fluid moving in all 
directions f and therefore that they neutralize each other’s action, so 
far as lateral motion is concerned. • 

And thus, as early as this treatise of Huyghens, that is, in three 
years from the publication of Newton’s Principuiy a vortex is made 
to mean nothing more than some machinery or other for producing 
:i central force. And this is so much the case, t))at Huyghens com- 
mends (p. 165), as confirming hist>wn calculation of the velocity of 
his vortex, Newton’s proof that at the Moon’s orbit the centripetal 
force is equal to the centrifugal; and that thus, this force is less 
than the centripetal force at the earth’s surface in the inverse pro- 
portion of the squares of the distances. 

John Bernoulli, in the same manner, but with far less clearness 
and less candour, has treated the hypothesis of vortices as being 
principally a hypothetical cause of central force. ITo had repeated 
occasions given him of propounding his inventions for propping up 
the Cartesian doctrine, by the subjects proposed for prizes by the 
Paris Academy of Sciences ; in which competition Cartesian specu- 
lations were favourably received. Thus the subject of the Prize 
hissays for 1730 was, the explanation of the Elliptical Form of the 
planetary orbits and of the Motion of their Aphelia, and the prize 
was assigned to John Bernoulli, who gave the explanation on Car- 
tesian principles. Be explains the elliptical figure, not os Descartes 
himself bad done, by supposing the vortex wdiich carries the planet 
round the sun to be itself sipieczed into an elliptical form by the 
pressure of contiguoiTi vortices ; but he supposes the planet, while 
it is carried round by the vortex, to have a limited oscillatory 
motion to and from the center, produced by its being originally, 
not at the distance at which it w'ould float in equilibrium in the 
vortex, but above or below that point. On this supposition, the® 
planet would oscillate to and from the center, Bernoulli says, like 
the mercury when deranged in a barometer; and it is,evident that 
such an oscillation, combined with a motion round the center 
might produce an oval cjirve, either with a fixed or with a move- 
able aphelion. All this howeter merely amounts to a possibility 
that the oval may be an ellipse, not to a proof that it will be so ; 
nor does Bernoulli advance further. 

It was necessary that the vortices should be adjusted in such 
a manner as to account for Kepler’s laws ; and this was to be done 
by making the velocity of each stratum of the vortex depend in 
a suitable manner on its radius. The Abbd de Molieres attempted 
this on the supposition of elliptical vortices, but could not reconcile 


KK 



APPENDIX G, 


498 

Kepler's first two laws, of equal elljptlcal areas in equal times, with 
his third law, that the squares of the periodic times are as the cubes 
of the mean distances^. Bernoulli, with his circular vortices, could 
accommodate the velocities at different distances so that they should 
explain Kepler's laws. He pretended to prove that Newton's in- 
vestigations respecting vortices (in the ninth Section of the Second 
Book of the Principia) were mechanically erroneous; and in truth, 
it must bo allowed that, besides several arbitrary assumptions, there 
are some errors of reasoning in tliem. But for the most part, the 
more enlightened Cartesians were content to accept Newton's ac- 
count of the motions and forces of the solar system as part of their 
scheme; and to say only that the hypothesis of vortices explained 
the origin of the Newtonian forces; and that thus theirs was a 
philosophy of a higher kind. Thus it is asserted {Mem. Acad. 1734 ;), 
that M. de Molicres retains the beautiful theory of Newton en- 
tire, only he renders it in a sort less Newtonian, by disentangling 
it from attraction, and transferring it from n vacuum into a plenum. 
This plenum, though not its native region, frees it from the need of 
attraction, which is all the better for it. These points were the 
main charms of the Cartesian doctrine in the eyes of its followers; 
—the getting rid of attractions, which were represented as a revival 
of the Aristotelian “occult qualities," “substantial forms,*’ or 
w'liatever else was the most disparaging way of describing the bad 
philosophy of the dark ages^; — and the providing some material 
intermedium, by means of which a body may affect another at a 
distance; and thus avoid the reproach urged against the Newton- 
ians, that they made a body act where it was^not. And we are the 
less called upon to deny that this last feature in the Newtonian 
theory was a difficulty, inasmuch as Newton himself was never 


• Acadf Par. 1733. ^ 

'! Acad, Sc. •f7»x> If we abandon 
the clear principles of mechanics, the 
writer says, “ toute la lumi^re qae 
nous pouvons avoir cst Cteintc, et 
nous voilik replong6s de nouveau 
dans leg anciennes tenfibres du Peri- 
patctlsme, dont le del nous veuiUe 
preserver!” 

It was also objected to the New- 
tonian system, that it did not account 
for the remarkable facts, that all the 


motions of tlie primary planets, aU 
the motions of the satellites, and all 
the motions of rotation, including 
tl|at of tfie sun, arc in the some direc- 
tion, and nearly in the same plane ; 
&cts which have been urged by La- 
place as so strongly recommending 
the Nebular Hypothesis; and that 
hypothesis is, in truth, a hypothesis 
of vortices respecting the origin of 
the system of the world. 



TRANSFORMATION OF HYPOTHESES, &C, 499 

unwilling to allow that gravity^iglit be merely an effect produced 
by some ulterior cause. 

With such admissions on the two sides, it is plain that the New* 
tonian and Cartesian systems would coiiy;ide, if the hypothesis of 
vortices could be modified in such a way as to produce the force 
of gravitation. All attempts to do this, how^ever, failed : and 
even John Bernoulli, the most obstinate of the mathematical cham* 
pions of the vortices, was obliged to give them up. In his Prize 
Essay for 1734, (on the Inclinationa of the Planetary Orbits",) he 
says (Art. VIII.), ** The gravitation of the Plai.eLs towards the center 
of the Sun and the weight of bodies towards the center of the earth 
has not, for its cause, either the attraction of M, Newton, or the 
centrifugal force of the matter of the vortex according to M. Des- 
cartes ; ” and lie then goes on to assert that these forces are pro- 
duced by a perpetual torrent of matter tending to the center on 
all sides, and carrying all bodies with it. Such a hypothesis is very 
difficult to refute. It has been taken up in more modern times by 
Lo Sage^, with some modifications; and may be made to account 
fur the principal facts uf the universal gravitation of matter. The 
great difficulty in the way of such a hypothesis is, the overwhelming 
thought of the whole universe filled with torrents of an invisible* but 
material and tangible substance, rushing in every direction in infi- 
nitely prolonged straight lines and with immense velocity. Whence 
can such matter como, and whither can it go? Where can be its 
perpetual and infinitely distant fountain, and where the ocean into 
which it pours itself w'lien its infinite course is ended ? A revolv- 
ing whirlpool is erjsily conceived and easily supplied ; but tlie 
central torrent of Bernoulli, the infinite streams of particles of 
Le Sage, are an explanation for more inconceivable than the thing 
explained. 

But however the hypothesis of vortices, or some hypothesis subs^ 
stituted for it, was adjusted to explain the facts of att^gaction to 
a center, this was really nearly*all that was meap^t by a vortex 


s NouuUe Physique 0|>. t 

Hi. p. 1G3. 

The dovlatiou of tlio orbits of the 
planets from the piano of the sun’s 
equator was of course a difficulty in 
the system wMch supimsed that tliey 
were carried round by the vortices 
which the sun’s rotation caused, or 


at least rendered evident Bernoulli’s 
explanation consists in supposing the 
planets to have a sort of leeway {di- 
rive des vais8eav3$i in the stream of 
the vortex. 

9 See Hist. Sc. Ideas, b. lit c. ix. 
Art 7. 


KK9, 



500 


APPENDIX G. 


or a 'Uoiirbilloii,** when tlie system was applied. Thus in the case 
of the last act of homage to the Cartesian theory which the French 
Academy rendered in the distribution of its prizes, the designa- 
tion of a Cartesian Ks^y in 1741 (along with three Newtonian 
ones) as worthy of a prize for an explanation of the Tides; the 
difference of high and low water was not explained, as Descartes 
has explained it, by the pressure, on the ocean, of the terrestrial 
vortex, forced into a strait where it passes under the Moon; but 
the waters were supposed to rise«towards the IMoon, the terrestrial 
vortex being disturbed and broken by the Moon, and therefore less 
effective in forcing them down. And in giving an account of a 
Tourmaline from Ceylon (Acad- Sc. 1717), when it has been ascer- 
tained that it attracts and repels substances, tho writer adds, ns 
a matter of course, “It would seem that it has a vortex.” As 
another example, the elasticity of a body was ascribed to vortices 
between its particles: and in general, us I have said, a vortex 
implied what we now imply by speaking of a central force, 

4. In the same manner vortices were ascribed to the Magnet, 
in order to account for its attractions and repulsions. But we may 
note -a circumstance udiieh gave a special turn to the hypothesis 
of vortices us applied to this subject, and which may serve os a 
further illustration of the manner in which a transition may be 
made from one to the other of two rival hypotheses. 

If iron tilings be brought near a magnet, in such a manner 
as to be at liberty to assume the position which its polar action 
as^igI)S to them; (for instance, by strewing them upon a sheet of 
pat)er while the two poles of the magnet are clise below the paper;) 
they will arrange themselves in certain curves, each proceeding 
from the N. to the S. pole of the magnet, like the meridians in 
a map of the globe. It is easily shown, on the supposition of 
Magnetic attraction and repulsion, that these magnetic curves^ as 
they are /ermed, are each a curve whoso tangent at every point is 
the dircction^^f a small lino of particle, as determined by the 
attraction and repul.sion of the two poles. But if we suppose a 
magnetic vortex constantly to flow out ofi^ one polo and into the 
other, in streams which follow such cflrves, it is cviMent that such a 
vortex, being supposed to exercise material pressure and impulse^ 
would arrange the iron filings in corresponding streams, ^nd would 
thus produce the phenomenon which 1 have described. And the 
hjrpothesis of central torrents of Bernoulli or Le Sage which 1 have 
referred to, would, in its application to magnets, really become this 
hypothesis of a magnetic vortex, if we farther suppose that the 
matter of the torrents which proceed to one pole and from the 



TRANSFORMATION OF HYPOTHESES, &C. 50I 

« 

Other, mingles its streams, so as at each point to produce a stream 
in the resulting direction. Of course we shall have to suppose two 
sets of magnetic torrents a boreal toi^cnt, proceeding to the 
north pole, and from the south pole of a magnet; and an austral 
torrent proceeding to the south and from the north pole:— and 
with these suppositions, we make a transition from the hypothesis 
of attraction and repulsion, to the Cartesian hypothesis of vortices, 
or at least, torrents, which determine bodies to their magnetic 
positions by impulse. 

Of course it is to be expected that, in this as in the other case, 
w'hcn wo follow' the hypothesis of impulse into detail, it will need to 
be loaded with so many subsidiary hypotheses, in order to accom- 
modate it |;o the phenomena, that it will no lunger seem tenable. 
But the plausibility of the hypothesis in its first application cannot 
be denied: — for, it may be observed, the two opposite streams 
w'ould counteract each other so as to produce no local motion, 
only direction. And this case may put us on our guard against 
other suggestions of forces acting in curve lines, which may at 
first sight appear to bo discerned in magnetic and electric phe- 
nomena. Probably such curve lines will all be found to bo only 
resulting lines, arising from the direct action and combination of 
elementary attraction and repulsion. 

5. There is another case in which it would not bo difficult 
to devise a mode of transition from one to the other of two rival 
theories; namely, in the case of the emission theory and the un- 
dulation theory of Ly^lit. Indeed several steps of such a transi- 
tion have already appeared in the history of optical speculation ; 
and the conclusive objection to the emission theory of light, as 
to the Cartesian theory of vortices, is, that no amount of additional 
hypotheses will reconcile it to the phenomena. Its defenders hada 
to go on adding one piece of machinery after another,^ as new 
classes of facts came into view, tjll it became more^ complex and 
unmochanical than the theory of epicycles and eccentrics at its 
worst period. Otherwise, as 1 have said, there was nothing to 
prevent the emission tlilory from migrating into the undulatorjr 
theory, and aa the theory of vorticea did into the theory of attrac- 
tion. For the emissionists allow that rays may interfere; and 
that these Interferences may be modified by alternate fits in the 
rays; now these fits are already a kind of undulation. Then again 
the phenomena of polarized light show that the fits or undulations 
must have a transverse character : and there is no reason why emit* 
ted rays should not be snbject to fits of transverse modification as 
well as to any other fits. In short, we may add to the emitted rays 



502 


APPENDIX G. 


of the one theory, all the properties which belong? to the nndula-* 
tions of the other, and thus account for all the phenomena on tho 
emission theory; with tjjLia limitation only, that the emission will 
hare no share in the explanation, and the undulations will have 
the whole. If, instead of conceiving the universe full of a sta- 
Horuiry ether, we suppose it to be full of etherial particles moving 
in every direction ; and if wo suppose, in the one cose and in the 
other, this ether to be susceptible* of undulations proceeding from 
every luminous point; the results of tho two hypotheses will be the 
same; and all we shall have to say is, that the supposition of the 
emissive motion of the particles is superfluous and useless. 

(>. This view of the manner in which rival theories pass into one 
another appears to be so unfamiliar to those who have only slightly 
attended to the history of |pience, that I havo thought it might bo 
worth while to illustrate it by a few examples. 

It might be said, for instance, by such persons ** Either the 
planets are not moved by vortices, or they do not move by the law 
by which heavy bodies fall. It is impossible that both opinions can 
be true.” But it appears, by what has been said above, that tho 
Cartesians did hold both o^dnions to be true ; and one with just ns 
much reason as the other, on their assumptions. It might be said 
in the same manner, ** Either it is false that the planets are made to 
describe their orbits by the above quasi-Cartesian theory of Ber- 
noulli, or it is false that they obey the Newtonian theory of gravi- 
tation.'* But this would be said quite erroneously ; for if the hypo- 
thesis of Bernottlli be true, it is so because agrees in its result 
with the theory of Newton. It is not only possible that both 
opinions may be true, but it is certain that if the first bo so, tho 
second is. It might be said again, Either the planets dcsc-:'ibo 
stheir orbits by an inherent virtue, or according to the Newton 
theory.**^ But this again would be erroneous, for tho Newtonian 
doctrine decided nothing as to«whether the force of gravitation 
was inherent or not. Cotes held that it was, though Newton 
strongly protested against being supposed to hold such an opinion. 
The word inherent is no part of the physical theory, and will bo 
asserted or denied according to our metaphysical views of the 
essential attributes of matter and force. 

Of course, the possibility of two rival hypotheses being tnie, 
one of which takes the explanation a step higher than the otiier, 
is not affected by the impossibility of two contradictory asser* 


10 Soe Mill's Loqin^ vol. L p. 3x1. 2nd ctL 




TRANSFORMATION OF HYPOTHESES, &C. 503 

tions of the same order of generalitj being both true. If thero 
be a new- discovered comet, and if one astronomer asserts that 
it vrill return once in every twenty years, and another, that it 
will return once in every thirty years* both cannot be right. 
But if an astronomer says that though its .interval was in the last 
instance 30 years, it will only be ^ years to the next return, in 
comseqnenoe of perturbation and resistance, he may be perfectly 
right. 

And thus, when different and rival explanations of the same 
phenomena are held, till one of them, though long defended by 
ingenious men, is at last driven out of the field by the pressure of 
facts, the defeated hypothesis is transformed before it is extin- 
guished. Before it has disappeared, it has been modified so as to 
have all palpable falsities squeezed out of it, and subsidiary provi- 
siona added, in order to reconcile it wiln the phenomena. It has, 
in short, been penetrated, infiltrated, and metamorphosed by the 
surrounding medium of truth, before the merely arbitrary and erro- 
neous residuum has been finally ejected out of the body of perma- 
nent and certain knowledge. 



t^rrENDix H. 


ON HEGEL’S CRITICISM OF NEWTON’S 

PRINCIPIA. 

• 

((7am. PhiL Soc. May 21, 1849.) 


Newtonian doctrine ISf nniTersal gravitation, as the cause of 
the motions which take place in the solar system, is so entirely 
established in our minds, and the fallacy of all the ordinary argu- 
‘nients against it is so clearly understood among us, that it would 
undoubtedly be deemed a waste of time to argue such questions in 
this place, so far as physical truth is concerned. But since in other 
parts of Europe, there are teachers of philosophy whose reputation 
and influence ore very great, and who are sometimes referred to 
among our own countrymen as the authors of new and valuable 
views of truth, and who yet reject the Newtonian opinions, and deny 
the validity of the proofs common! j given of them, it may be worth 
while to attend for a few minutes to the declarations of such 
teachers, as a feature in the present condition^of European philo- 
sophy. I the more readily assume that the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society will not think a communication on such a subject devoid of 
interest, in consequence of the favourable reception which it has 
^ven to philosophical speculations still more abstract, which 1 have 
on previous occasions offered to it. 1 will therefore proceed to 
make some repsarks on the opinfons concerning the Newtonian 
doctrine of gravitation, delivered by the celebrated Hegel, of Berlin, 
than whom no philosopher in modern, and pk^rhaps hardly any even 
in ancient times, has had his teaching received with more reverential 
submission by his disciples, or been followed by a more numerous 
and zealous band of scholars bent upon difPusing and applying his 
principles. 

The passages to which I shall principally refer are taken from one 
of his works which is called f Ac Encyclop<Bdia (EncyklopUdie), of 
which the First Part is the Science of Logic, the Second, the Philosophy 
of Nature, the Third, the Philosophy of Spirit. The Second Part, 



CRITICISM OF KEWTON’s PRINCIPIA. 505 

¦with which I am here concerned, has for an alitfr title, Lectures on 
Natural Philosophy (Vorlesungen iiber Natur-philosophie), and 
would through its whole extent oifer abundant material for criticism, 
by referring it to principles with which w#aro here familiar : but I 
shall for the present confine myself to that part which refers to the 
subject which 1 have mentioned, the Newtonian Doctrine of Gravi- 
tation, § 269, 270, of the work. Nor shall I, with regard to this 
part, think it necessary to give a continuous and complete criticism 
of all the passages bearing upon the subject; bu( only such speci- 
mens, and such remarks thereon, as may suffice to show in a general 
manner the value and the character of Hegel’s declarations on such 
questions. I do not pretend to offer here any opinion upon the 
value and character of llegol’a philosophy in general; but 1 think 
it not unlikely that some impression on that head may be suggested 
by the examination, here offered, of soAc points in which we can 
have no doubt whore the truth lies ; and I am not at all persuaded 
tiiut a like examination of many other parts of the Hegelian 
Nncyclopredia would not confirm the impression which we shall 
receive from the parts now to be considered. 

ITegel both criticises the Newtonian doctrines, or what he states 
as such ; and also, not denying the truth of the laws of phenomena 
which he refers to, for instance Kepler’s laws, offers his own proof 
of these laws. 1 shall make a few brief remarks on each of these 
portions of the pages before me. And I would beg it to be under- 
stood that where I may happen to put my remarks in a short, and 
what may seem a peremptory form, 1 du so for the sake of saving 
time ; knowing that* among us, upon subjects so familiar, a few 
words will sutlico. For the same reason, 1 shall take passages from 
Hegel, not in the order in which they occur, but in the order in 
which they best illustrate what I have to say. I shall do Hegel no 
injustice by this mode of proceeding : for I will annex a faithfd! 
translation, so far as I can make one, of the whole of tho» passages 
referred to, with the context. 

No one will bo surprised that a German, or indeed any lover of 
science, should speak vlith admiration of the discovery of Kepler’s 
laws, as a great event in the history of Astronomy, and a glorious 
distinction to the discoverer. But to say that the glory of the dis- 
covery of the proof of these laws has been unjustly transferred from 
Kepler to Newton, is quite another matter. This is ¦what Hegel 
says (a)^ And we have to consider the reasons which he assigns 
for saying so. 


^ These letters refer to passages in tlie Translation annexed to this Memoiiw 



APPENDIX H, 


506 

He says (ft) that "it is allowed by mathematicians that the Now-* 
tonian Formula maybe derired from the Keplerian laws,*’ and hence 
he seems to infer that the Newtonian law is not an additional truth. 
That is, he does not al^w that the discoreiy of the cause which 
produces a certain phenomenal law is anything additional to the 
discovery of the law itself. 

"The Newtonian formula may be derived from the Keplerian 
law.” It was professedly so derived; but derived by introducing 
the Idea of Force^ which Idea an6 its consequences were not intro- 
duced and developed till after Kepler's time. 

The Newtonian formula may be derived from the Keplerian 
law.** And the Keplerian law may be derived, and was derived, 
from the observations of the Greek astronomers and their suc- 
cessors ; but was not the less a new and great discovery on that 
account. 

But let us see what he says farther of this derivation of the New- 
tonian "formula** from the Keplerian Law. It is evident that by 
calling it a formula, he means to imply, what he also asserts, that it 
is no new law, but only a new form (and a bad one) of a previously 
known truth* 

How is the Newtonian ‘^formula,” that is, the law of the inverse 
squares of the central force, derived from the Keplerian law of the 
cubes of the distances proportional to the squares of the times ? 
This, says Hegel, is the " immediate derivation.’* (c}.>>By Kepler 

A® 

law, A being the distance and T the periodic time, is constant. 

But Newton calls — universal gravitation ; whence it easily follows 
that gravitation is inversely as 

This is Hegel’s way of representing Newton’s proof. Reading 
ft, any one who had never read the Principia might suppose that 
c A 

Newton definyf, gravitation to bo We, who have read the 

Principia, know that Newton proves that in circles, the central 

force (not the universal gravitation^ is as that he proves this, 

by setting out from the idea of force, as that which deflects a body 
from the tangent, and makes it describe a curved line 3 and that in 
this way, he passes from Kepler’s laws of mere motion to his own 
law of Force. 

But Hegel does not see any value in this. Such a mode of 
treating the subject he says (f) “offers tons a tangled web, formed 
ef the Lines of the mere geometrical construction, to which a 



CRITICISM OF newton’s PUINCIPIA. 507 

physical meaning of independent forces is given.’* That a mjRosuve 
of forces is found in such lines as the sngitta of the arc described in 
a given time, (not such a meaning arbitrarily given to them,) is 
certainly true, and is very distinctly provediin Newton, and in all our 
elementary books. 

But, says Hegel, as further showing the artificial nature of the 
Newtonian formulae, (h) "Analysis has long been able to derive tl:c 
Newtonian expression and the laws therewith connected out of the 
Form of the Keplerian Laws;”* an assertion, to verify which ho 
refers to Francccur’s Mecanique. This is apparently in order to show 
that the “ lines ** of the Newtonian construction are BuperHuon4. 
We know very well that analysis- dues not always refer to visiblo 
representations of such lines : but we know too, (and Franca* nr 
would testify to this also,) that the analytical proofs contain cqiii< 
valcnts to the Newtonian lines. We, in this place, are too familiar 
with the substitution of analytical for geometrical proofs, to be led 
to suppose that such a substitution affects the substance of the 
truth proved. The conversion of Newton’s geometrical proofs of 
his discoveries into analytical processes by succeeding writers, has 
not made them cease to be discoveries: and accordingly, those 
who have taken the most prominent share in such a conversion, 
have been the most ardent admirers of Newton’s genius and good 
fortune. 

So much for Newton's comi>arison of the Forces in different cir* 
cular orbits, and for Hegel’s power of understanding and criticising 
it. Now lot us look at the motion in different parts of the same 
elliptical orbit, as % further illustration of the value of Hegel's 
criticism. In an elliptical orbit the velocity alternately increases 
and diminishes. This follows necessarily from Kepler’s law of the 
equal description of the areas, and so Newton explains it. Hegel, 
however, treats of this acceleration and rcturdatioi] as a separate 
fact, and talks of another explanation of it, founded uppn Centri- 
petal and Centrifugal Force (o).* Where he finds tl)is explanation , 
1 know not; certainly not in Newton, who in the second and third 
section of the Principia explains the variation of the velocity in a 
quite different manner, as f have said; and nowhere, I think, em- 
ploys centrifugal force in his explanations. However, the notion 
of centrifugal as acting along with centripetal force is introduced 
in some treatises, and may undoubtedly be used with perfect truth 
and propriety. How far Hegel can judge when it is so used, we 
may see from what he 'says of the confusion produced by such an 
explanation, which is, he says, a maximum. In the first place, he 
speaks of the motion being uniformly accelerated and retarded in 



APPENDIX n. 


508 

an elliptical orbit, ^hicli, in any exact use of the word uniformly^ 
it is not. But passing by this, he proceeds to criticise an explana* 
tion, not of the variable velocity of the body in its orbit, but of the 
alternate access and reeoss of the body to and from the center. 
Let us overlook this confusion also, and see what is the value of his 
criticism on the explanation. He says (p), *' according to this ex- 
planation, in the motion of a planet from the aphelion to the peri- 
lielion, the centrifugal is less than the centripetal force ; and in the 
perihelion itself the centripetal* force is supposed suddenly to 
become greater than the centrifugal *,*’ and so, of course, tho body 
re<ascends to the aphelion. 

Now 1 will not say that this explanation has never been given in 
ii book professing to be scientific; but 1 have never seen it given ; 
and it never can liave been given but by a very ignorant and foolish 
person. It goes upon the utterly unmechanicjil 8iii>position that 
tho approach of a»body to the center at any moment depends solely 
upon the excess of the centripetal over the centrifugal force; and 
.reversely. But the most elementary knowledge of mechanics shows 
us that when a body is moving obliquely to the distance from the 
center, it approaches to or recedes from the center in virtue of this 
obliquity, even if no force at all act. And the total approach to 
the center is the approach due to this cause, plus the approach due 
to the centripetal force, minus the recess due to the centrifugal force. 
At the aphelion, the centripetal is greater than the centiifugal 
force; and hence the motion becomes oblique; and then, the body 
approaches to the center on both accounts, and approaches on 
account of the obliquity of the path even whei^the centrifugal has 
become greater than the centripetal force, which it becomes before 
the body reaches the perihelion. This reasoning is so elementary, 
that when a person who cannot see this, writes on the subject with 
ail air of authority, 1 do not see what can be done but to point out 
the oversight and leave it. 

But there iB,^fays Hegel (q), an<9ther way of explaining the mo- 
tion by means of centripetal and centrifugal forces. The two forces 
are supposed to increase and decrease gradually, according to dif« 
ferent laws. In this case, there must be I point where they are equal, 
and in equilibrio ; and this being the case, they will always continue 
equal, for there will be no reason for their going out of equilibrium. 

This, which is put as emother mode of explanation, is, in fact, the 
same mode; for, as 1 have already said, the centrifugal force, which 
is less than the centripetal at the aphelion, becomes the greater of 
the two before the perihelion ; and there is an intermediate position, 
at which the two forces are equal. But at this point, is there no 



CRITICISM OP newton’s PRINCIPIA. 509 

reason why, being equal, the forces should become unequal? Reason 
abundant : for the body, being there, moves in a line oblique to the 
distance, and so changes its distance; and the centripetal and cen- 
trifugal force, depending upon the distance by difterent laws, they 
forthwith become unequal. 

Blit these modes of explanation, by means of the centripetal and 
centrifugal forces and their relation, are not necessary to Newton's 
doctrine, and are nowhere used by Newton; and undoubtedly much 
confusion has been produced in other minds, a‘i well as IJegers, by 
speaking of the centrifugal force, which is a mere intrinsic geome- 
trical result of a body’s curvilinear motion round a center, in con- 
junction with centripetal force, which is an extrinsic force, acting 
upon the body and urging it to the center. Neither Newton, nor 
any intelligent Newtonian, ever spoke of the centripetal and cen- 
trifugal force as two distinct forces both extrinsic to the motion, 
which Hegel accuses them of doing, (n) 

I have spoken of the third and second of Kepler’s laws; of New- 
ton’s exjjlanations of them, and of IJegcl’s criticism. Let us now, 
in the samo manner, consider the first law, that the planets move 
in ellipses. Newton’s proof that this was the result of a central 
force varying inversely as the square of the distance, was the solu- 
tion of a problem at wdiich his contemporaries had laboured in vain, 
and is commonly looked upon os an iiii[)ortant step. “But,” says 
Hegel, (d) “ the proof gives a conic section generally, whereas the 
main point which ought to be proved is, that the path of the body 
is an ellipse only, not a circle or any other conic section.'* Cer- 
tainly if New’ton Aad proved that a planet cannot move in a circle, 
(which Hegel says he ouglit to have done), his system would have 
perplexed astronomers, since there are planets which move in orbits 
hardly distinguishable from circles, and the variation of the extre- 
mity from planet to planet shows that there is nothing to preveiiis 
the excentricity vanishing and the orbit becoming a circle., 

“But,” says Hegel again, (c) ^the conditions wlpch make the 
path to be an ellipse rather than any other conic section, are empi- 
rical and extraneous ;-^tUe supposed casual strength of the im- 
pulsion originally received.”'^ Certainly the circumstances which 
determine the amount of excentricity of a planet's orbit are de- 
rived from experience, or rather, observation. It is not a part of 
Newton's system to determine d priori what the excentricity of a 
planet's orbit must be. A system that professes to do this will 
undoubtedly be one very different from his. And as our knowledge 
of the excentricity is derived from observation, it is, in that sense, 
empirical and casual. The strength of the original impulsion is a 



510 APPENDIX H. 

hypothetical and impartial way of expressing this result of observa- 
tion. And as we see no reason why the excentricity should be of 
any certain magnitude, we see none why the fraction which ex- 
presses the excentricity«should not become as large as unity, that 
is, why the orbit should not become a parabola; and accordingly, 
some of the bodies which revolve about the same appear to move 
in orbits of this form : so little is the motion in an ellipse, as Hegel 
says, (/) "the only thing to be proved.” 

But Hegel himself has offered ^roof of Kepler's laws, to which, 
considering his objections to Newton's proofs, we cannot help 
turning with some curiosity. 

And drat, let us look at the proof of the Proposition which we 
have been considering, that the path of a planet is necessarily an 
ellipse. I will translate Hegel’s language as well as I can; but 
without answering for the correctness of my translation, since it 
does not appear to me to conform to the first condition of transla- 
tion, of being intelligible. The translation however, such as it 
is, may help us to form some opinion of the validity and value of 
Hegel’s proofs as compared with Newton's, (r) 

" For absolutely uniform motion, the circle is the only path.... 
The circle is the line returning into itself in which all the radii 
arc equal; there is, for it, only dne determining quantity, the 
radius. 

" But in free motion, the determination according to space and 
to time come into view with differences. There must be a dif- 
ference in the spatial aspect in itself, and therefore the form re- 
quires two determining quantities. Hence lUie form of the path 
returning into itself is an ellipse.” 

Now even if we could regard this as reasoning, the conclusion 
does not in the smallest degree follow. A curve returning into 
itself and determined by two quantities, may have innumerable 
forms beoides the ellipse; for instance, any oval form whatever 
besides that of the conic section.* 

But why must the curve be a curve returning into itself? Hegel 
has professed to prove this previously (m) fipom the determination 
of particularity and individuality of bodies in general, so that 
they have partly a center in themselves, and partly at the same 
time their center in another.'* Without seeking to find any precise 
meaning in this, we may ask whether it proves the impossibility of 
the orbits with moveable apses, (which do not return into them- 
selves,) such as the planets (affected by perturbations) really do 
describe, and such as we know that bodies must describe in all 
cases, except when the force varies exactly as the square of the 



CRITICISM 01? newton’s PRINCIPIA. 51 I 

distance ? It appears to do so : and it proves this impossibility of 
known facts at least as much as it proves anything. 

Let us now look at Hegers proof of Kepler’s second law, that 
the elliptical sectors swept by the radius yctor are proportional to 
the time. It is this : («). 

** In the circle, the ai*c or angle which is included by the two 
radii is independent of them. But in the motion [of a planet] as 
datcrriiined by the conception, the distance from the center and the 
ore run over in a certain time ^usl be compounded in one deter- 
mination, and must make out a whole. This whole is the sector, 
a space of two dimensions. And hence the arc is essentially a 
Function of the radius vector; and the former (the arc) being 
unequal, brinp^ with it the inequality of the radii.” 

As was said in the former case, if we could regard this as reason- 
ing, it would not prove the conclusion, but only, that the arc is 
some function or other of the radii. 

Hegel indeed oilers (t) reason why there must be an arc in- 
volved. This arises, he says, from **tho dcterminatencss [of the 
nature of motion], at one while as time in the root, at another 
while as space in the square. But here the quadratic character of 
the space is, by the returning of the line of motion into itself, 
limited to a sector.” 

Probably my readers have had a sufficient specimen of Hegel's 
mode of dealing with these matters. I will however add his proof 
of Kepler’s third law, that the cubes of tbe distances are as the 
squares of the times. 

Hegel’s proof in Jhis case (u) has a reference to a previous doc- 
trine concerning falling bodies, in which time and space have, he 
says, a relation to each other as root and square. Falling bodies 
however are tbe case of only half-free motion, and the determina- 
tion is incomplete. • ‘ 

But in the case of absolute motion, the domain of free masses, 
the determination attains Us totidity. The time tlie root is a 
mere empirical magnitude: but as a component of the developed 
Totality, it is a Totality in itself : it produces itself, and therein has 
a reference to itself. And i« this process. Time, being itself the 
dimensionless element, only conies to a formal identity with itself 
and reaches the square: Space, on the other hand, as a. positive 
external relation, oomes to the full dimensions of the conception of 
space, that is, the cube. The Realization of the two conceptions 
(space and time) preserves their original difference. This is the 
third Keplerian law, tlie relation of the Cubes of the distances to 
the squares of the times.'’ 



512 


APPENDIX H. 


And this,** he adds, (v) Tvith remarkable complacencj, ** repre- 
sents simply and immediately the reason of the thing : — awhile on 
the contrary, the Newtonian Formula, by means of which the Law 
is changed into a Law the Force of Gravity, shows the distortion 
and inversion of Beflexion, which stops half-way.” 

I am not able to assign any precise meaning to the Bejlewion, 
which is here used as a term of condemnation, applicable especially 
to the Newtonian doctrine. It is repeatedly applied in the same 
manner by Hegel. Thus he 8ay8,g(p) that what Kepler expresses 
in a simple and sublime manner in the form of Laws of the Celes- 
tial Motions, Newton has metamorphosed into the Rtfiexion»Form 
of the Force of Gravitation.” 

Though Hegel thus denies Newton all merit with regard to tlio 
explanation of Kepler’s laws by means of the* gravitation of the 
planets to the sun, he allows that to the Keplerian Jaws Newton 
added the Principle of Perturbations (Zc). This Principle he accepts 
to a certain extent, transforming the expression of it after his 
.peculiar fashion. “It lies,” ho says, (J) “in this: that matter in 
general assigns a center for itself : the collective bodies of the sys- 
tem recognise a reference to their sun, and all the individual bodies, 
according to the relative positions into which they are brought by 
their motions, form a momentary relation of their gravity towards 
each other.” 

This must appear to us a very loose and insiifhcicnt way of 
stating the Principle of Perturbations, but loose as it is, it recognises 
that the Perturbations depend upon the gravity of the planets one 
to anotlicr, un(j| to the sun. And if the Pertu^ations depend upon 
those forces, one can hardly suppose that any one who allows this 
will deny that the primary undisturbed motions depend upon these 
forces, and must be explained by means of them ; yet this is what 
Jlegel denies. 

It is evident, on looking at Hegel’s mode of reasoning on such 
subjects. That his views approach towards those of Aristotle and the 
Aristotelians ;*accordiug to which motions were divided into na- 
tural and unnatural; — the celestial mot jpns were circular and uni- 
form in their nature; — and the likej Perlaps it may be worth 
whde to show how completely Hegel adheres to these ancient 
views, by an extract from the additions to the Articles on Celes- 
tial Motions^ made in the last edition of the Bnoycjopcedia^ He 
says (w), 

“ The motion of the heavenly bodies is not a being pulled this 
way and that; as is imagined (by the Newtonians). They go aJbng^ 
oi the ancients said, like blessed gods. The celestial conformity is 



CRITICISM OR newton’s PRINCIPU. 5I3 

not inch a one as has the principle of rest or motion external to 
itself, Xt is not right to aaj because a stone is inert, and the whole 
earth consists of stones, and the other heayenly bodies are of the 
same nature as the earth, therefore the h^renly bodies are inert. 
This conclusion makes the properties of the whole the same as 
those of the part. Itnpnlse, Pressure, Resistance, Friction, Pulling, 
and the like, are yalid only for other than celestial matter.*’ 

There can be no doubt that this is a very different doctrine from 
that of Newton. • 

1 will only add to these specimens of Hegel’s physics, a specimen 
of the logic by which he refutes the Newtonian argument which 
has just been adduced ; namely, that the celestial bodies are matter, 
and that matter, as we see in terrestriid matter, is inert. He 
says (x)y 

"Doubtless both are matter, as a good thought and a bed thought 
are both thoughts; but the bad one is not therefore good, because 
it is a thought.” ^ ^ " 


APPENDIX TO THE MEMOIR ON HEGEL’S CRITICISM 
OF NEWTON’S PRINCIPIA. 


Hegel. £ncyciop<sdia (2nd £d. 1827 ), Port xk. p. 250, 

C. Absolute Mechanics. 

§ 260. * 

G ravitation is the true and determinate conception of ma- 
terial Corporeity, which (CoiSception) is realized the Idea (zur 
Idee). General Corporeity is separable essentially into parHeular 
Bodies, and connects ^elf with the Element of Jndividttaiiiy or 
enbjectivity, as apparent (f^ienomenal) presence in the MoHen, 
which by this means is immediately a system of sevenU Bodies, 
Universal gravitation must, as to itself, be recognised as a pro- 
found tbottglit, although it was principally as apprehended in the 
sphere of Reflexion that it eminently attracted notice ah^ confi- 
dence on aecount of the quantltarive determinations therewith con- 
nected, and was supposed to find its confirmation in BjsperimSnis 
(Erfabrong) pursued from the Solar System down to the phenomena 


LL 



APPENDIX 11. 


514 

of Capillary Tubes. — ^But GraTltatioo contradicts itnmediaiely the 
Law of Inertia, for in virtue of it (Gravitation) njatter tends out of 
itself to the other (matter). — In the Conception of Weight, tliere 
are, as has been shown,* nvotved the two elements— •Self-existence, 
and Continuity, which takes away self-existence. These elements 
of the Conception, however, experience a fate, as particular forces, 
con-esponding to Attractive and Uepnisive Force, and are thereby 
apprehended in nearer determination, as Centripetal and Centri- 
fitgal Force ^ which (Forces) like freight, act upon Bodies^ independ- 
ent of each other, and are supposed to coqie in contact accidentally 
in a third tiling. Body. By this means, wliat there is of profound 
in the thought of universal weight is again reduced to nothing; 
and Conception and Reason cannot make their way into the doc- 
Vine of absolute motion, so long as the so highly-prised discoveries 
of Forces are dominant there. In the conclusion which contains the 
Idea of Yf eight, namely, [contains this Idea] as the Conception 
which, in the case of motion, enters into external Reality through 
'the particularity of the Bodies and at the same time into this 
[Reality] and into their Ideality and self-regarding Reflexion, 
(Reflexion-in-sich), the rational identity and inseparability of the 
elements is involved, which at other times are represented as inde- 
pendent. Motion itself, as such, has only its meaning and existence 
in a fiystem of several bodies, and those, such as stand in relation to 
each other according to different determinations, 

§ 270 , 

c 

As to what eonoems bodies in which the conception of gravity 
(weight) is reslised free by itself, we say that they have for the 
determinations of their different nature the elements ( momente) of 
Jheir conception. One [conception of this kind] is the universal 
center of the abstract reference [of a body] to itself. Opposite to 
this [coifbeptionj stands the Sm|[iediate, extrinsic, centerless ih- 
dividtudUy, alSpearing as CtrrpgrAy similarly independent. - Those 
[Bodies] however Which are parUoular, which stead in the determi- 
nation of extrinsio, and at the same t^me ol intrinsic relation, are 
centers for thetuselvis, and [also] have a reference to the first as to 
their essential unity. 

The Planetary Bodies, ah the immediately concrete, are 
in their existaoce the most complete. Men are aeonstomed 
to take the Son aa the most excellent, inasmuch as the under- 
standing prefers the abstract to the concrete, and in like 
manner the fixed stars afe asteemed higher than the Bodies 



EXTRACTS FROM HEGEL. 515 

of the Solar System. Centerless Corporeity, as belonging to 
externality, naturally separates itself into tho opposition of the 
lunar and the cometary Body. The^laws of absolutely free 
motion, as is well known, were discovered by Kepler; — a dis- 
covery of immortal fame. Kepler has proved these laws in 
tliis sense, that for the empirical data he found their general 
expression. Since then, it has become a oominon way of 

(a) speaking to say that Newton^rst found out the proof of these 
Laws. It has rarely happened that fame has been more un- 
justly transferred from the first discoverer to another person. 
On this subject I make the following remarks. 

1 . That it is allowed by Mathematicians that the New* 
Ionian Formulm may be derived from the Keplorian Laws. 

(b) The completely immediate derivation is this: In the third 

(r) Keplcrian Law, ^ is the constant quantity. This being put 

A A* A 

as - yg , and calling, with Newton, Universal Gravita- 
tion, his expression, of the effect of gravity in tlie reciprocal 
ratio of the square of the distances is obvious.* 

id) 2. That the Newtonian proof of the Proposition that a body 
subjected to the Law of Gravitation moves about the central 
body in an Ellipse, gives a Conic Section generally, while the 
main Fropbsition which ought to be proved is that the fall 
of such a Body is not a Circle or any other Conic Section, 
but an Ellipse only. Moreover, there are objections which 
may be made against this proof in itself {Princ. Math. 1. 1. 
Sect. 1C. Prop. 1) ; and although it ia the foundation of the 

(e) Newtonian Theory, analysis has no longer any need of it. 
Tho conditions which in the sequel make the path of the 
Body to a determinate Conic Section, are referred t(f an em-* 
piHcal ciroumBtance, namely,^ particular positiefc of the Body 
at a determined paoment of time, and tbecorunZ strength of an 

(/) which Ms supposed to have received originally; so 

that the circumstance which makps the Curve be an Ellipse, 
which alone ought to be the thing proved, is extraneous to the 
Formula. 

S. That the Newtonian Law of the so-called Force of Gra* 
vitatlon Is in like manner only proved from experience by 
Induction. 

(g) The sum of the difference is this, that what Kepler ex- 
pressed in a simple and subHme manner in the Form of Zawt 

LL J 



5i6 


APPENDIX H, 


of the CelesHal Motions^ Newton has metamorphosed into the 
Itefleciion^Form of the Force of Qraoltaiion, If the New- 
tonian Form has not only its conTonience but its necessity 
in reference to the'analytical mcthod« this is only a difference 
(h) of the mathematical formula; Analysis had'long been able to 
derive the Newtonian expression^ and the Propositions there- 
with connected, out of the Form of the Keplerian Laws; (on 
this subject I refer to the elegant exposition in Frane€Bur^s 
(t) Traite EUm. do Meeanique, Liv. xi. Ch. xi. n. 4 )— The old 
method of so-called proof is conspicuous as offering to us a 
tangled web, formed of the Lines of the mere geometrical 
construction, to which a physical meaning of independent 
Forces is given ; and of empty Jleflexion -determinations of 
the already mentioned Accelerating Force and Vis Inertiee, 
and especially of the relation of the so-called gravitation itself 
to the centripetal force and centrifuged force, and so on. 

The remarks wMch are here made would undoubtedly have 
need of a further explication to show how well founded they 
are: in a Compendium, propositions of this kind which do not 
agree with that which is assumed, can only have the sl)ape of 
assertions. Indeed, since they contradict such high authori- 
ties, they roust appear as something worse, as presumptuous 
assertions. 1 will not, on this subject, support myself by say- 
hy the bye, that an interest in these subjects has occupied 
me for 25 years; but it is more precisely to the purpose to 
remark, that the distinctions and determinations which Ma- 
thematical Analysis introduces, and the^course which it must 
take according to its method, is altogether different from that 
which a physical reality must have. The Presuppositions, the 
Gonrse, ahd the BosultB, which the Analysis necessarily has 
and gives, remain quite extraneous to the considerations which 
detinniue the physioil value and* the slgniffcation of those de- 
terininatlons hnd of that course. To this it is that attention 
should be direbted. Vfo hare to do with a consciousness 
relative to the deluging of physi^ MkchUnics with an ineon- 
eeimble {unsUglicfaen) A^etaphysiOt whicii-^^ontrary to ex- 
perierbee and conception— has those mathematical determina- 
tions alone for its source. 

Tt is recognized that what Newton— besides the foundation 
of the analytioal treatment, the development of wbiejh, by the 
bye, has of itself rendered superflnous, or indeed rqjeeted 
much which belonged to Newton's essential Principles and 
glory — has added to the Keplerian Laws is the Principle of 



EXTRACTS PROM HEGEL. 517 

PerturbaHoru , — a Principle whose importance we may here 
accept thus for (hier in sofern anzufuhren ist); namelyi so 
{k) far as it rests upon tlie Proposition that the so«.called attrac- 
tion is an operation of all the indiviiaal parts of bodies, as 
(0 being material* It lies in thi^ that matter in general assigns 
a center for itself (aich das centrum setzt}, and the figure of 
the body is an element in the determination of its place; that 
collective bodies of the system recognize a reference to their 
Sun (sich ihre Sonne setzen), bat also the individual bodies 
themselves according to the relative position with regard to 
each other into which they come by their general motion, 
form a momentary relation of their gravity (schwere) towards 
each other, and are related to each other not only in abstract 
spatial relations, but at the same time ossigu to themselves a 
joint center, which howevw is agmn resolved [into the general 
center] in the universal system. 

As to what concerns the features of the path, to show how 
the fundamental determinations of Free Motion are connected 
with the Conception, cannot here be undertriten in a satisfac. 
tory and detailed manner, and must therefore be left to its fate. 
The proof from reason of the quantitative determinations of 
free motion can only rest upon the determinations of Conoqt- 
Hons of space and time, the elements whose relation (intrinsic 
not extrinsic) motion is. 

(m) That, in the first place, the motion in general if a motion 
returfang into itulf, is founded on the determination of parti- 
cularity and inAviduality of the bodies in general ( § 269), so that 
partly they have a center in themselves, and partly at the same 
time their center in another. These are the determinations of 
Conceptions which form the basis of the false representatives 
(a) of Centripetal Force and Centrifugal Force, as if each of 
these were self-existiog, extraneous to the other, jmd inde- 
pendent of it; and os if tiiey only came In pontaot in their 
operations and consequently eaeUrndlli/. They are, as has 
already been mentioned, the Lines which must be drawn for 
the matheumtioal detttminatlons, transformed into physical 
realities. 

Farther, this motion is unffinrmly acederaied, (and—uq 
returning into itself- in turn unifionnly retarded), la motion 
anfireet Time and Space enter as things which are to 

make themielvet egbotive in the determination of the motion 
(0) (S 266, note). In the so-called EnphaiaHon of the nniformly 
accelerated and retaidad motion, by means of the alternate 



5i 8 APPBNDiX H. 

decrease and increase of the magnitade of the Centripetal 
Force and Centrifugal Force, the confiuim which the asintnp- 
tion of such independent Forces produces is at its greatest 

(p) height. According to this explanation, in the motion of a 
Planet from the Aphelion to the Perihelion, the centrifugal 
is /ess than the centripetal force, and on the contrary, in the 
Perihelion itself, the centrifugal force is supposed to become 
greater than the centripetal. For the motion Arom the Peri- 
helion to the Aphelion, thia representation makes the forces 
pass into the opposite relation in the same manner. It is ap- 
parent that such a sudden conversion of the preponderance 
which a force has obtained over another, into an inferiority to 
the other, cannot be anything taken out of the nature of 
Forces. On the contrary it must be concluded, that a pre- 
ponderance which one Force has obtained over another must 
not only be preserved, but must go onwards to the complete 
annihilation of the other Force, and the motion must either, 
by the Preponderance of the Centripetal Force, proceed till it 
ends in rest, that is, in the Collision of the Planet with the 
Central Body, or till by the Preponderance of the CentriAigal 

(q) Force it ends in a straight Hue. But now, if in place of the 
suddenness of the conve/slon, we suppose a gradual increase 
of the Force in question, then, since rather the other Force 
ought to be assumed as increasing, we lose the opposition 
which is assumed for the sake of the explanation ; and if the 
increase of the one is assumed to be different from that of the 
other, (which is the case in some represettatione,) then there 
is found at th4 mean distance between the apsides a point in 
which the Forces are in equilibrio. And the transition of the 
Forces out of Equilibrium is a thing just as little without any 
sufllcient reason as the aforesaid suddenness of inversion. 
And in the whole of thia kind of explanation, we see that the 
modb of remedying a bod mo^e of dealing with a subject leads 
to newer*Snd greater confosion.-^A similar confnsion makes 
its appearance in the explanation of the phsenomenon that 
the pendulum oscillate more sWwlyat the equator. This 
phsnomenon is ascribed to the Centrifhgiil Forces which it is 
asserted most then be greater ; but it is easy to see that we 
niayjnst as well ascribe it to the augmented grarity, inasmuch 
as that holds the pendulum mote strongly to the perpondi* 
oulor line of rest. 



EXTRACTS FROM HEGEL. 519 

$ 240 . 

(r) And now first, as to what concerns the Form of the Path, 

the Circie only can be ooncelTed as the path of an absolutely 
uniform motion. Conceivable, as people express it, no doubt 
it is, that an increasing and diminishing motion should take 
place in a circle. But this oonoeirablenessor possibility means 
only an abstract capability of being repi^sented, which leaves 
out of sight that Determinate Thing on which the question 
turns. • 

The Circle is (he line returning into itself in which all the 
radii are equal, that is, it is completely determined by means of 
the 1 adius. There is only one Determination, and that is the 
whole Determination. 

But in free motion, in which the fteterminations according 
to space and according to time come into vfew with Differ- 
ences, in a qualitative relation to each other, this Relation 
appears in the spatial aspect as a Difference thereof in itself, 
which therefore requires two Detennioatiohs. Hereby tho 
Form of the path returning into itsdlf js euentially an 
Ellipse. 

(s) The abstract Determinateness which produces the circle 
appears also in this way, that the arc or angle which is in- 
cluded by two Radii is independent of them, a magnitude with 
regard to them completely empirical, But since in the motion 
as determined by the Conception, the distance from the 
center, and the arc which is run orer in a certain time, must 
be comprelientled in one determinateness, [aruf ] make out a 
whole, this is the sectmr, a space-determination of two dimen- 
sions : in this way, the arc is essentially a Function of the 
Radius Vector ; and the former (the arc) being unequal, brings 
with it the inequality of the Radii. That the determination 
with regard to the space by means of the time appears as a 
Determination of two DlmChsions,— 4m a Supea^cies-Determi- 

(#) nation,— agrees with what was said before (S 2Cfi) respecting 
Falling Bodies, #fith regard to the exposition of the same 
Petermlnatenesi^ at oiae whfie $b Time in the root, at another 
while as Space in the Square. Here, however, the Quadratic 
character of the space is, by the returning of the Line of 
motion into itself, limited to a Sector. These are, M may be 
seen, the general principles on which the Keplerian Law, that 
In equal times equal aeotors are cut off, rests. 

This Law becomes, as is clear, only the ration of the are 
fo the Radius Vector, attd the Time enters tharenathn abstract 



520 


APPENDIX H. 


Unity, in which the different Sectors are oompared, because 
as Unity it is the Determining Element. Bat the farther 
relation is that of the Time, not as Unity, bat as a Quantity 
in genera),— as th^ time of Berolution— to the magnitude of 
the Path, or, what is the same thing, the distance from the 
center. As Boot and Square, we saw that Time and Spaco 
had a relation to each other, in the case of Falling Bodies, tlie 
case of half-free motion— because that [motioa] is determined 
on one side by the conception, on the Other by external 
[con^Uom], But in the case of absolute motion-^the domain 
(tf) of free masses— the determination attains its Totality. The 
Time as the Boot is a mere empirical magnitude ; but as a 
component (moment) of the developed Totality, it is a Total- 
ity in itself,— it produces itself, and therein has a reference to 
itself; as the Dimensionless Element in itself, it only comes 
to a formal Identity with itself, the Square; Space, on the 
other hand, as the positive Dbtribution (aussereinander) 
[comes] to the Dimension of the Conception, the Cube. Their 
(e) Bealization preserves their original difference. This is the 
third Keplerian Law, the relation of the Cubes of the jDir- 
iances to the Squares of the TYiaav -a Law which is so great 
on this account, that it represents so simply and immediately 
Heason as belonging io ihc thing t while on the contrary the 
Newtonian Formula, by means of which the Law is changed 
into a Jiaw for l he. Force of Gravity, shows the Distortion, 
Perversion and Inversion of H^xion which stops half-way. 

Additions to new Edition, g 261^. 

The center has no sense without the oironmfereoee, nor the 
drcumferenoe without the center* This makes all physical 
hypotheses vanish which sometimes proceed from 1i)ie center, 
sometimen from the portioular bodies, and sometimes assign 
this, sometimes that, as the original [cause of liiotioD]...lt is 
silly (Ihppiseh) to suppose tha^ the Centrifugal force, as a 
tendency to fly off in e Tahgent, has been produced by a 
lateral prqfection, a ptojeotlle force> an impulse which they 
have retained ever rinse they set out on their Journey (von 
Hans ans). Such casualty of the motion prodnced by ex* 
temal causes belongi to Inert matter; aa when a stone Ihsten* 
ed to a thread which is thrown tiittsversely tries to 
from the thread. We are not to talh in this way of Forces. 
If we will speak of Force, there is one Forue, wh^ eldmenta 



EXTRACTS FROM HEGEL. 521 

do not draw bodies to different sides as if they were two 
(t<r) Forces. The motion of the heavenly bodies is not a bein^ 
pulled this way or that, such as is thus Imagined ; it is free 
motion ; they go along, as the anelefts said, as blessed Gods 
(aie gehen als selige Gdtter einher). The celestial corporeity 
is not such a one as has the principle of rest or motion ex- 
ternal to itself. Because stone is inert, and all the earth 
consists of stones, and the other heavenly bodies are of the 
same nature^is a conclusion which mahcs the properdes of 
the whole the same as those of the part. Impulse, Pressure, 
Resistance, Friction, Pulling, and the like, are valid only for 
(xj an existence of matter other than the celestial. Doubtless 
that which is common to the two is matter, as a good thought 
and a bad thought are both thoughts ; but the bad one is not 
tborcfore good, because it is a thought. 



Appekdix K. 


DBMONSTEATIOK THAT ALL MATTER IS 
HEAVY. 

{Cam. PhU. Soc. Feb. 22, 1841.) 


discnssion of the nature of the grounds and proofs of tbe 
^ most general propositions which the physical sciences include^ 
belongs rather to Metaphysics than to that course of experimental 
and mathematical investigation by which the sciences ore formed. 
But such discussions seem by no means unfitted to occupy the at- 
tention of the cultivators of ph} slept science. The ideal^ as well as 
the experimental side of our knowledge must be carefully studied 
and scrutinized I in order that its true import may be seen; and 
this province of hunisn speculation has been perhaps of late un. 
justly depreciated and neglected by men of science. Yet it can be 
prosecuted in the most advantageous manner by them only : for no 
one can speculate securely and rightly respecllng the nature and 
proofs of the truths of science without a steady possession of some 
large and soUd portions of such truths. A man must be a mathe« 
matician, a mechanical philosopher, a natural historian, in order 
tVat he may philosophize well concerning mathematics, and me- 
chanics, apd natural history; and the mere metaphysician who 
without such preparation and fitftess sets himself to determine 
the grounds of mathematical or Hieohanloal truths, or the prin- 
ciples of olassificatioD, will be liable to be Igd into error at every 
step. He must speculate by means of general terms, which be will 
not be able to nse as instruments of discovering and eonveying 
philosophical tnitfa, because be oanno^ in his own mind, habitually 
and familiarly, embody their import in special examples. 

Acting upon auch views, I have already laid before the Fhilosor 
phioal Society of Cambridge essays on such subjects as 1 here refer 
to; especially a memoir ** On the Natnre of the Tmtb of tbe X^aws 
of Motion,’* which was printed by rite Society In its Tmsactions. 



ALL MATTER IS HEAVY, 523 

This inemoir appears to hare excited in other places, notice of such 
a kind as to show that the minds of many speculative persons are 
ready for and inclined toivards the discussion of such questions. 
I am therefore the more willing to br||ig under consideration 
anotlier subject of a kind closely related to the one just men- 
tioned. ^ 

The general questions which all such discussions suggest, are 
(in the existing phase of English philosophy) whether certain pro- 
posed scientific truths, (as the lavis of motion.) be mces^ary truths; 
and if they are necessary, (which 1 have atteutpted to show that in 
a certain sense they are,) on what ground their necessity rests. 
These questions may be discussed in a general form, as 1 have 
elsewhere attempted to show. But it may be instructive also to 
follow the general arguments into the form which they assume in 
special cases ; and to exhibit, in a distinct shape, the incongruities 
into which the opposite false doctrine leads us, when applied to parti- 
cular examples. This accordingly is what I propose to do in the 
present memoir, with regard to the proposition stated at the head 
of this paper, namely, that all matter is heavy* 

At first sight it may appear a doctrine altogether untenable to 
assert that thi^ proposition is a necessary truth : for, it may be 
urged, we have no difficulty in conceiving matter which is not 
heavy; so that matter without weight is a conception not incon- 
sistent with itself ; which it must be if the reverse were a necessary 
truth. It may be added, that the possibility of conceiving matter 
without weight was shown in the controversy which ended in the 
downfall of the phAogiston theory of chemical composition ; for 
some of the reasoners on this subject asserted phlogiston to be a 
body with positive levity instead of gravity, which hypothesis, how- 
ever false, shows that such a supposition is possible. Again, it 
may be said that weight and inertia are two separate propertie% 
of matter: that mathematicians measure the quantity oj! matter 
by the inertia, and that we leim by experimeni^only that the 
weight Is proportional to the inertia ; Newton's experiments with 
pendulums of differenl^materials having been made with this very 
object. * 

1 proceed to reply to these arguments. And first, as to the 
possibility of conceiving matter without weight, and the argument 
thence deduced, that the universal gravity of matter is not a neces* 
sary truth, I remark, that it is indeed just, to say that vre cannot 
even distinctljr conceive the contrary of a necessary truth to be 
true ; but that this Impossibility can be asserted only of those p«r4i 
fectly distinct conceptions which result from a complete develop^^ 



524 


APPENDIX K. 


ment of the fundamental idea and ito consequeneeB. Till we reach 
this stage of development, the obscurity and indistinctnesB may 
prevent our perceiving absolnte contradictions, though they exist. 
We have abundant stoxa of examples of this, even in geometry and 
arithmetic ; where the truths are nniversally allowed to be neces- 
sary, and where the relations which are impossible, ar^also incon- 
ceivable, that is, not conceivable distinctly. Snch relations, though 
not distinctly conceivable, still often appear conceivable and pos- 
sible, owing to the indistinctness of onr ideas. Who, at the first 
outset of his geometrical studies, sees any impossibility in suppos- 
ing the side and the diagonal of a square to have a common mea- 
sure ? Yet they can be rigorously proved to be incommensurable, 
u\id therefore the attempt distinctly to conceive a common measnre 
of them must fail. The attempts at the geometrical duplication of 
the cube, and the supposed solutions, (as that of Hobbes,) have 
involved absolute contradictions; yet this has not prevented their 
being long and obstinately entertained by men, even of minds acute 
and clear in other respects. And the same might be shewn to 
be the cose in arithmetic. It is plain, therefore, that we cannot, 
from the supposed possibility of conceiving matter without weight, 
infer that the contrary may not be a necessary truth. 

Our power of judging, from the compatibility or incompatibility 
of onr conception^ whether certain propositions respecting the 
relations of ideas are true or not, must depend entirely, as 1 have 
said, upon the degree of development which such ideas have under- 
gone in onr minds. Some of the relations of our conceptions on 
any subject are evident upon the first steady Contemplation of the 
fhndamental Idea by a sonud mind: these are the axioms of the 
subject. Other propositions may be deduced from the axioms by 
strict logical reasoning. These propositions are no less necessary 
than the axioms, though to common minds their evidence is very 
diiferentt Yet as we become Ikmiliar with the steps by which these 
ulterior truthfsare deduced froof the axioms, their truth also be- 
comes evident, and the contrary becomes inconceivable. When a 
person has familiarised htms^f with the fimt twenfy-six proposi- 
tions of Euclid, and not till then, it becomes evident to him, that 
parallelograms on the same base and between the same parallels 
ore eqoal ; and he cannot even conceive the contrary. When he 
has a little fhrther cultivated his geometrical powers, the equality 
of the square on the hypothenuse of a right-angled triangle to the 
squares on the sides, becomes also evident ; the steps by which 4 la 
demonstratedr being so familiar to the mind as to be apprehended 
without a conscious aet And thus, the contrary of a necessary 



ALL MATTEE IS HEAVY. 525 

troth cannot be distlnctlj conceived ; bnt the incapacity of forming 
such a conception is a condition which depends upon cultivation, 
being intimately connected with the power of rapidly and clearly 
perceiving the connection of the necessary Imth under consideration 
with the elementary principles on which it depends. And thus, 
again, it may be that there is an absolute impossibility of conceiving 
matter without weight; but then, this impossibility may not bo 
apparent, till we have traced our fundamental conceptions of matter 
into some of their Consequences. * 

The question then occurs, whether we can, by auy steps of rea- 
soning, point out an inconsistency in the conception of matter 
without weight. This I conceive we may do, and this 1 shall 
attempt to show. 

The general mode of stating the argument is thi8:.»the quantity' 
of matter is measured by those sensible properties of matter which 
undergo quantitative addition, subtraction and division, as the mat- 
ter is added, subtracted and divided. The quantity of matter can- 
not be known in any other way. But this mode of measuring the 
quantity of matter, in order to be true at all, must be universally 
true. If it were only partially true, the limits within which it is 
to be applied would be arbitrary; and therefore the whole proce- 
dure would be arbitrary, and, as a method of obtaining philosophi- 
cal truth, altogether futile. 

We may unfold this argument further. Let the contrary be sup- 
posed, of that which we assert to be true : namely, let it be sup- 
posed that while all other kinds of matter are heavy (and of course 
heavy in proportiou’to the quantity of matter), there is one kind of 
matter which is absolutely destitute of weight; as, for instance, 
phlogiston, or any other element. Then where this tpeigktlets 
element (as we may term it) is miaed with weighty elements, we 
shall have a compound, in which the weight is no longer proper* 
tional to the quantity of matter. If, for example, 2 qieaanres of 
heavy matter unite with one measure of phlogistqqi the weight is 
as 2, and the quantity of matter os 3. In all such cases, therefore, 
the weight ceases be the measure of the quantity of matter. 
And as the proportion of Ihe weighty and the weightless matter 
may vary in Innumerable degree in such compounds, the weight 
affords no criterion at all of the quantity of matter in them. And 
the smallest admixture of the weightless element is sufficient to 
prevent the weight from being taken os the measure of the quan- 
tity of matter. 

But on this hypothesis, how are we to distinguish such eom- 
ponnds from bodies consisting purely of heavy matter? How are 



APPENDIX K. 


526, 

we to satisfy ourselves that there is not, in every body, some admix- 
ture, small or great, of the weightless element? If we call this 
element phlogiston, how shall we know that the bodies with whioh 
we have to do arc, any of them, absolutely free from phlogiston ? 

We cannot refer to the weight for any such assurance; for by 
supposition the presence and absence of phlogiston makes no dif- 
ference in the weight. Nor can any other properties seoure Us at 
least from a very small admixture; for to assert that a mixture of 
1 in iOO or 1 in 10 of phlogiston would always manifest itself in 
the properties of the body, must be au arbitrary procedure, till we 
bave proved this assertion by experiment; and we cannot do this 
till we have learnt some m<»dc of measuring the quantities of matter 
in bodies and parts of bodies; which is exactly what we question 
the possibility of, in the present hypothesis. 

Thus, if we assume the existence of an element, phlogiston, 
devoid of .weight, we cannot be sure that every body does not con- 
tain some portion of tliis element; while we see that if there be an 
admixture of such an element, the weight is no longer any criterion 
of the quantity of matter. And thus wc bave proved, that if there 
be any kind of matter which is not heavy, the weight con no longer 
avail us, in any case or to any extent, as a measure of the quantity 
of matter. 

1 may remark, tliat the same conclusion is easily extended to the 
case in which phlogiscon is supposed to have absolute levity; for in 
that case, a certain mixture of phlogiston and of heavy matter 
would have no weight, and might be substituted for phlogiston in 
the preceding reasoning. 

1 may remark, also, that the same conclusion would follow by 
the same reasoning, if any kind of matter, instead of being void of 
weight, were heavy, indeed, but not so heavy, in proportion to its 
quantity of matter, as other kinds. 

On all these hypotheses there would be no possibility of measur- 
ing quantity of matter by weight at kU, in any ease, or to any extent* 

But it may be urged, that we have not yet reduced the hypothe- 
sis of matter without weight to a coot^udict^n; for that mathe<* 
maticians measure quantity of matter, not by weight, but by the 
other property, of which we have spoken, inertia. 

To this 1 reply, that, proctioally speaking, quantity of matter is 
always measured by weight, both by mechanicians and chemists t 
and as we have proved that this procedure is utterly insecure in all 
cases, on the hypothesis of weightless matter, the practice rests 
upon a conviction that the hypothesis is false. And yet the prao<^ 
tice is universal. Every experimenter measures quantity of matter 



ALL MATTER IS HEAVY. 


^27 

by the biilance. Ko one has ever thought of measuring quantity of 
matter by its inertia practically: no one has constructed a measure 
of quantity of matter in which the matter produces its indications 
of quantity by its motion. When we have-lbo take into account the 
inertia of a body, we inquire what its weight is^ and assume this as 
the measure of the inertia; but we never take tho contrary course, 
and ascertain the inertia hrst in order to determine by that means 
the weight. 

But it may be askedi Is it .tot then true, and an important 
scientific truth, that the guantliy of tuatier is measured by the 
inertia ? Is it not true, and proved by experiment, that the might 
is proportional to the inertia t If this be not the result of Newton’s 
experiments mentioned above, s^hat, it may be demanded, do they 
prove ? 

To these questions X reply : It is true that quantity oi matter is 
measured by the inertia, for it is true that inertia is as the quantity 
of matter. This truth is Indeed one of the laws of motion. That 
weight is proportional to inertia Is proved by experiment, as far as 
the laws of motion are so proved : and Newton’s experiments prove 
one of the laws of motion, so far as any experiments can prove 
them, or are needed to prove them. 

That inertia is proportional to weight, is a law equivalent to that 
law which asserts, that when pressure produces motion in a given 
body, tiie velocity produced in a given time is as tho pressure. For 
if the velocity be as the pressure, when the body is gi^en, the 
velocity will be constant if the inertia also be as the pressure. For 
the inertia is underlbood to be that property of bodies to which, 
ceteris paribus^ the velocity impressed isinversdy proportional. One 
body has twice os much inertia as another, if, when the same force 
nets upon it for the same time, it acquires but half the velocity. 
This is the fundamental conception of inertia* > 

In Newton’s pendulum experiments, the pressure prodycing mo- ' 
tion was a certain resolved part ol the weight, and wjis proportional 
to the weight. It appeared by the experiments, that whatever were 
the material of which |he pendulum was formed, the rate of osett- 
latiou was the same; that il, the velocity acquired was the same. 
Hence the inertia of the different bodies must have been in each 
cose as the weight : and thus this assertion is true of all different 
kinds of bodies. 

Thos It appears that the assertion, that inertia is nniversally 
proportional to weight is equivalent to the law of motion^ that the 
velocity is as the pressure. The conception of inertia (of which, 
ns we have said, the ftindamental conception U, that the veloolty 



APPENDIX K, 


528 

impressed is inversely proportional to the inertia,) oonnpcts the 
two propoations so as to make them identical. 

Hence onr argument with regard to the universal gravity of 
matter brings us to thr above law of motion, arid is proved by 
Newton’s experiments in the same sense in which that law of mo- 
tion is so proved. 

Perhaps some persons might conceive that the identity of w'eight 
and inertia is obvious at once ; for both are merely resistance to 
motion;— inertia, resistance to all motion (or change of motion) — 
weight, resistance to motion upwards. 

But there is a difference in these two kinds of resistance to 
motion. Inertia is instantaneous, weight is continuous resistance. 
Any momentary impulse which acts upon a free body overcomes its 
inertia, for it changes its motion ; and this change on(v» effected, 
the inertia opposes any return to the former condition, as well as 
any additional change. The inertia is thus overcome by a momen- 
tary force. But the weight can only be overcome by a continuous 
iorce like itself. If an impulse act in opposition to the weight, it 
may for a moment neutralize or overcome the weight; but if it be 
not continued, the weight resumes its effect, and restores the con- 
dition which existed before the Impulse acted. 

But weight not only produces rest, when it is resisted, but mo- 
tion, when it is not resisted. Weight is measured by the reaction 
which would balance it; but when unbalanced, it produces motion, 
and the velocity of this motion increases constantly. Now what 
determines the velocity thus produced in a given time, or its rate of 
increase? What determines it to have one magnitude rather than 
another? To this we must evidently reply, the iner^a. When 
weight produces motion, the inertia is the reaction which makes the 
motion determinate. The accumulated motion produced by the 
gotioD of unbalanced weight is as determinate a condition as the 
equilibriup produced by balanced weight. In both cases the con- 
dition of the bgdy acted on is determined by the opposition of the 
action and reaction. 

Hence inertia Is the reaction which opppses the weight, when 
unbalanced. But by the conception 'of action and reaction, (as 
mutually determining and determined,) they are measured by eot'h 
other: and hence the inertia is necessarily proportional to the 
weight. 

But when we have reached this conclusion, the origin^ objection 
may be again urged against it. It may be said, that there must bo 
some fallacy in this reasoning, for it proves a state of things to be 
necessary when we can so easily conceive a contrary state of things. 



ALL MATTER IS HEAVY. 


. 5^9 

Tb it denied, the opponent may ask, that we can readily imagine 
a state of things in which bodies hare no weight? Is not the 
uniform tendency of all bodies in the same direction not only not 
necessary, but not eren true ? For the^ do in reality tend, not" 
with e<xual forces in parallel lines, but to a center with noequal 
forces, according to their position : and we can conceive these 
di^erences of intensity and direction in the force to be greater 
than they really are ; and can with equal ease suppose the force to 
disappear altogether* • 

To this 1 reply, that certainly we may conceive the weight of 
bodies to vary in intensity and direction, and by an additional effort 
of imagination, may conceive the weight to vanish : but that in all 
these suppositions, even in the extreme one, we must suppose the 
rule to be universal. If any bodies have weight, all bodies must 
have weight. If the direction of weight be different iu different 
points, this direction must still vary according to the law of con^ 
iinuity / and the same is true of the intensity of the weight. For if 
this were not so, the rest and motion, the velocity and direction, 
the permanence and change of bodies, as to their mechanical con- 
dition, would be arbitrary and incoherent : they would not be sub- 
ject to mechanical ideas; that is, not to ideas at all: and hence 
these conditions of objects would in fact be inconceivable. In 
order that the universe may be possible, that is, may fall under the 
conditions of intelligible conceptions, wo must be able to conceive a 
body at rest. But the rest of bodies (except in the absolute nega- 
tion of all force) implies the equilibrium of opposite forces. And 
one of these opposite forces must be a general force, as weight, in 
order that the universe may be governed by general conditions. 
And this general force, by the conception of force, may produce 
motion, as well as equilibrium; and this motion again must be 
determined, and determined by general conditions; which cannoh 
be, except the communication of motion be regulated by pn inertia 
proportional to the weight. ^ 

But it will be asked. Is it then pretended that Newton*8 experi- 
ment, by which it was intended to prove inertia proportional to 
weight, does really pro% nothing but what may be demonstrated a 
priori .* Could we know, without experiment, that all bodies,-— 
gold, iron, wood, cork, — ^have inertia proportional to their weight ? 
And to this we reply, that experiment holds the same place in the 
establishment of this, as of the other .fundamental doctrines of 
mechanics. Intercourse with the external world is requisite for 
developing our ideas ; measurement of phenomena is needed to fix 
our conceptions and to render them precise ; but the result of our 



530 


APPENDIX K. 


experimental studies is, tiiat we reach a position in which our con- 
victions do not rest upon experiment. We learn by observation 
truths of which we afterwards see the necessity. This is the t aae 
with the Jaws of motion, p I have repeatedly endeavoured to slmw. 
The same will appear to bo the case with the proposition, that 
bodies of different kinds have their inertia proportional to their 
weight. 

For bodies of thg same hind have their inertia proportional to 
their weight, both quantities being proportional to the (|uui)tity of 
matter. And if we compress the same quantity of matter into iialf 
the space, neither the weight nor the inertia is altered, because 
these depend on the quantity of matter alone. But in this way we 
obtain a body of twice the density ; and in the same manner we 
obtain a body of any other density. Therefore whatever be the 
density, the inertia is proportional to tlic quantity of matter. But 
the mechanical relations of bodies cannot depend upon any dif- 
ference of hindi except a difference of density. For if we suppose 
any fundamental difference of lueclmnioal nature in the particles or 
component elements of bodies, we are led to the same conclusion, 
of arbitrary, atid therefore impossible, results, wliicdi we deduced 
from this supposition with regard to weigiit. Therefore all bodies 
of different density, and Iience, all bodies wliatevcr, must have tlieir 
inertia proportional to their weight. 

Hence we see, that the propositions, that all bodies are heavy, 
and tliat inertia is proportional to weight, necessarily follow from 
those fundamental ideas which we unavoidably employ in all attempts 
to reason concerning the mechanical relations ^f bodies. This con- 
clusion may perhaps appear the more startling to many, because 
they have been accustomed to expect that fundamental ideas and 
their relations should be self-evident at our first contemplation of 
^hem. This, however, is far from being the cose, as 1 have already 
shown. It is not the firsts but the roost complete and developed 
condition of our conceptions wjiich enables us to see what are 
axiomatic trulfis in each province of human speculation. Our fun- 
damental ideas are necessary conditions of knowledge, universal 
forms of intuition, inherent types oC mental development; they 
may even be termed, if any one chooses, results of connate intel- 
lectual tendencies; but we cannot term them innate ideas, without 
calling up a large array of false opinions. For innate ideas were 
considered as capable of composition, but by no means of simplifica- 
tion: as most perfect in tbeir original condition ; as to be found, if 
any where, in the most uneducated and most uncultivated minds ; 
as the same in all ages, nations, and stages of intelleotual culture;. 



ALL MATTER IS HEAVY. 


531 

as capable of being referred to at once, and made the basis of 0U5 
reasonings, 'without any special acuteness or effort: in all which 
circumstances the Fundamental Ideas of which we have spoken, 
are opposed to Innate Ideas so understoodw 
1 shall not, however, here prosecute this subject. T will only 
remark, that Fundamental Ideas, as wc view them, are not only 
not innate, in any usual or useful sense, but they are not necessarily 
ultimate elements of our knowledge. They are the results of our 
analysis so far as wc have yet prosecuted it; hut ihey may them- 
selves subsequently be analysed. It may hereafter appear, that 
what we have treated as different Fundamental Ideas have, in fact, 
a connexion, at some point below the structure which 'wc erect 
upon them. For instance, we treat of the mechanical ideas of force, 
matter, and the like, as distinct from the idea of substance. Yet 
the principle of measuring the quantity of matter by its weight, 
wliich we have deduced from mechanical ideas, is applied to deter- 
mine the substances which enter into the composition of bodies. 
The idea of substance supplies the axiom, that the whole quantity 
of matter of a compound body is equal to the sum of the quantities 
of mutter of its elements. The mechanical ideas of force and matter 
lead tie to infer that the quantity both of the whole and its parts 
must bo measured by their weights. Substance may, for some pur- 
poses, be described as that to 'which X)ropertieB belong ; matter in 
like manner may bo described as that which resists force. The 
former involves the Idea of permanent Being ; the Utter, the Idea 
of Causation. There may bo some elevated point of view from 
which these ideas maf be seen to run together. But even if this be 
so, it will by no means affect the validity of reasonings founded 
upon these notions, when duly determined and developed. If we 
once adopt a view of the nature of knowledge which makes nec^- 
sary truth possible at all, we need be little embarrassed by finding* 
how closely connected different necessary truths are; and liflw often, 
in exploring towards their roots, different branches appear to spring 
from the same stem. 


END OF THE APPENDIX. 


U H 2 



CaminriKfie : 

PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY. M.A. 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRES3. 



WORKS BY 


WILLUM WIIEWELL, DD. F.K.S. 

MASTBB OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE. 


HISTORY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 

Third and Cheaper Edition. Threo Volumes, Small Oo 
tavo, 34s. 

HISTORY OP SCIENTIFIC IDEAS, being the 

First Part of a Third Edition of the ^'Philosophy of the 
Inductive Sciences,*’ with Additions. Two Volumes, 14s. 

NOVUM OR^IANON RENOVATUM ; being the 
Second Part of a Third Edition of the " Philosophy of the 
Inductive Sciences.** With large Additions. 7s. 

INDICATIONS OP THE CREATOR: Theolo^dU 

Extracts from the "History and the Philosophy of the 
Inductive Sciences.” Second Edition. 5 ^* 

ELEMENTS OP MORALITY, INCLUDING 

POLITY. Third Edition, with a Supplement. Two 
Volumes, 15s. 

LECTURES ON SYSTEMATIC MORALITY. 

7 s. 6d. 



TforAa hy William Whewellf D.D. F.R.S, 


S 

LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OP MORAL 
PHILOSOPHY 1];^ ENGLAND. 8 ». 

OP A LIBERAL EDUCATION IN GENERAL, 

and with Particular Reference to the Studies of the Univer- 
sity of Cambridge. Parts 1. and 11., in Oue Volume, 
7 «. 6d. Part 111., sowed, m. 

ON THE PRINCIPLES OP ENGLISH UNI- 
VERSITY EDUCATION. Second Edition. 5 *. 

COLLEGE CHAPEL SERMONS, los. 6d. 

NOTES ON GERMAN CHURCHES. Third Edi- 
tion. 

THE MECHANICAL EUCLID. Fifth Edition. 5 #. 
THE MECHANICS OF ENGINEERING. 9 <r. 
THE DOCTRINE OP LIMITS. Octavo, 93. 
CONIC SECTIONS. 23. 6 d. 


, EDITED BT DR. WHEWELL. 

BUTLER’S” THREE SERMONS ON HUMAN 
NATUBEy and a Dissertation on Virtue ; \vitli a Preface 
and Syllabus. Third Edition, yr, 

BUTLERS SIX SERMONS ON MORAL SUB- 
JECTS. With Preface and Syllabus. 3 s. dcZ. 


LONDON; JOHN W. PABItEE AND SON, WEST BTBAND. 



|l>fo ^00hs niitr 

• Publiahed hy John ff. Parher and i:lon, Went Strand. 


History of England, from the Fall of 

Wolsoy to tbo Death of KUzabeth. Fifth and Sixth 
Voluinea, containing the Itdgns of Edward the Sixth and 
Mary. By J. Anthony Fiioudk. In the Press. 

A Second Edition of tho First Four Volumes, containing the 
Reign of Henry VI JI. 1 . 1 , 14s. 

History of England, during the Keign of 

Cloorge the Third. By AV. Massky, M.P. Vols. I. and • 
II. 128, each. The Third Volume in the Press. 

History of €!ivilization in England. By 

IIknry Thomas Buckle. The First Volume. Octavo. 
Second Edition, us. 

Friends in Council. Second Series. Tlie 

Second Edition. Two Volumes. i4«. • 

• •. 

Friends in Council. First Series. New 

Edition. Two Volumes 9s. 

On Liberty. By John Stuart Mill. The 

Second Edition. 7s. 6d. 

The Recreations of a Country Parson; 

Essays Parochial, Architectural, .rEsthetical, Moral, Social, 
and Domestic. Being a Selection from the Contributions of 
A. K. H. B. to ‘'Fraser's Magazine." 9^. 



New Booha and New Edittona, 


Major Hodson’s Twelve Years of a Soldier’s 

Life in India. Edik.^d by bis Brother, the Kev. George H. 
Hodson, M.A, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Third Edition, with Additions, and a Portrait, los. 6d, 

The Saint’s Tragedy. By Charles Kings- 

LEY, Chaplain in Ordinary tc the Queen. The Third Edi*- 
tion. Foolscap Octavo. 

On the Classification and Geographical 

Distribution of Mammalia : On the Gorilla, On the Extinc* 
tion and Transmutation of Species. By Richard Owen, 
F.R.S. Octavo. 5*. 

The Odes of Horace. Translated into 

English Verse, with a Life and Notes. By Theodore 
Martin. • ja . Od . 

Arundihes Cami. Edited by the Rev. 

Henry Drury, M.A. Canon of Salisbury, Chaplain to the 
House of Commons. The Fifth and Cheaper Editicn. 

The N ew Cratylus. By J. W. Donaldson, 

D.D. Classical Examiner in the Universfuy of Loudon. The 
Third Edition, Revised throughout and considerably^ En- 
larged. 208. 

Night Lessons from Scripture. Compiled 

by tb© Author of ‘ Amy Herbert.* Demy, Red Edges. 3s. 

Paley’s Evidences of Christianity. With 

Annotations by the Archbishop 9f Dublin. Octavo. 9s. 

Paley’s Moral Philosophy. With Annota- 

tions by the Archbishop of Dublin. Octavo. 7s. 

The Good News of God. Sermons by 

Charles Kingsley, Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen. 
The Second Edition. 6<. 




hy John W, Parker and Son, West Strand. 5 


Sermons on the Atonement and other Sub- 
jects, preached before the Uni verity of Cambridge. By 
E. Habold Browne, M.A. Norrisian Professor of Divi- 
nity in the University ; Canon of Exeter. Octava 5s. 

An Exposition of the Thirty-nine Articles, 

Historical and Doctrinal. By Professor Harold Bbowne. 
Fourth Edition. Octavo* i6s. 

Critical and Grammatical Commentary on 

St. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians. By Charles J. Elli- 
COTT, B.D. Professor of Divinity, King's College, London. 
The Second Edition, Enlarged. 8«. 6 d. 

Lately Published : 

I. Galatians. Second Edition, Enlarged. 8s. 6d. 

II. Pastoral Epistles. Second Edition. In the Press. 

III. Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon. los. 6 d. 

IV. Thessalonians. 7s. 6 d. 

Peloponnesus : Notes of Study and Travel. 

By W. G. Clark, M.A. Follow and Tutor of Trinity Col- 
lege, Cambridge. los. 6 d. 

Revolutions in English History. By Ro- 

BERT Vauuhan, D.D. The First Volume, Bovolutiona of 
Pace. 15s. • 

Histdry of the Literature of Ancient Greece. 

From the Manuscripts of the late Professor K. 0 . Mliller. 
The first half of the Translation by the Bight Hon. Sir 
Gbobqe Cornewall Lewis, !&irt. M.P. The remainder 
of the Translation, and the Completion of thc^ Work, by 
John William Donaldsmn, D.D. Three '^{plumes, Octavo. 
36s. The new portion soj^arately. Two Volumes, 20s. 

Soldiers and* their Science. By Captain 

Bbabazon, B.A. 74. 

Essays written in the Intervals of Business. 

The Seventh Edition. 2s. 6 d. 

Companions of My Solitude. The Fifth 

Edition. 3s. 6 d. 




6 


New Books and New Editions, 


t)n the Study of Words. By Richard 

CriJSNEvrx TbencHo I>.T). Dean of Westminster. The 
Ninth Edition, Bevised and Enlarged. 4ir. 

A Select Glossary of English Words used 

fonnerly in Sen.sca ditferent from their Present. By IlicH- 
ABD CuKNJfiVix Trench, D.D. Dean of Westminster. The 
Second Edition, Ke vised and Improved. 4«. 

Intellectual Education, and its Influence on 

the Character and Happiness of Women. By Emily 
S uiKREFP. Octavo. lOS. 

The Cloister Life of the Emperor Charles 

the Fifth. By William Stiuling, M.P. The Third Edi- 
tion. 8^. 

Man and His Dwelling Place. An Essay 

towards the Interpretation of Nature. 9^. 

Dissertations and Discussions, Political, 

Philosophical and Historical. By John Stuaut Mill. 
Two Volumes. Octavo. 24s. 

Of the Plurality of Worlds. An Essay. 

The Fifth Edition. 68 . • ^ 

Bacon’s Essays. With Annotations by the 

< Archbishop of Dublin. The Fourth Edition. ro«. od. 

Extracts from Jean Paul Richter. Trans- 

lated by Lady Chattrrton. ^s. 6 d. 

Shipwrecks of the Royal Navy. By W. 0. 

S. GtLLY. With Preface by the Kev, Dr. Gilly. The Third 
Edition. 5«. 

ii ' 

The Kingdom and People of Siam ; with a 

Narrative of the Musion to that Country, By Sir John 
Bowbing, F.li.S. Two Volumes, with lllustrationd and 
Map. 32». 



hy John W. Parker and Son^ West Strand, 7 


The Spanish Conquest in America, and iti 

Relation to tlio Histciry of Slavery, /ind to the (ioveminent 
of Colonies. By Abthuu Helph. Octavo. Volumes I. II. 
28.'(. Volume III. ids. 

Notes on Hospitals. By Florence Night- 

TNG.VLE. The Second Edition. 5«. 

The Mediterranean ; A Memoir Historical, 

Geographical, and Nautical. By Admiral W. H. Smytu, 
D.C.L., F. R.S. Octavo. 15s. 

Lectures on Astronomy. By Henry Mose- 

LEY, M.A., F.K.S. Canon of Bristol. The Fourth Edition. 

3 «. 6d. 


Elements of Chemistry. By William Alle.v 

Mtllew, M.D., F.R.S. Professor of Chemistry, King’s Col- 
lege, London. Complete in Three I*arts, with numerous 
Illustrations. £2, 63. 6d, 


Manual of Human Microscopic Anatomy. 

By Albkht I^dLLiKEU. With 289 Illustrations, Octavo. 

Lectures on the Principles and Practice of 

Physic. By Thomas Watson, M.T). Physician Extraor- 
dinary to the Queen. Fourth Edition, revised. T\jo 
Volumes. Octavo. 34^. 


. * •% 

Anatomy, Descriptive and Surgical. By 

Henry Gray, ^B.S. Lecturer on Anatomy at St. George’s 
Hospital. With 363 *large Woodcuts, from Original Draw- 
ings. Royal Octavo, 782 pages. 28^. 

Practical Geodesy : Chain Surveying, Si r- 

veying Instruments, Levelling, Trigonometry, and Mining ; 
Maritime, Estate, Parochial, and Railroad Surveying. By 
Butleb Williams, C.E. The Third Edition, revised. 
Octavo. 8s. 6d, 


8 


New Books and New Editions^ 


IvEanual of Greographical Science. Part the 

Second, Descriptive Geography, containing 

Ancient Geography, by the Rev. W, L. Bevan, M.A. Vicar 
of Hay, Brecon. 

Maritime J)i9covery and Modem Geography, by the Rev. 
C. G. Nicolay, F.R G.S. 

With Copious Index. Octavo. 15s. 

The First Fart, Octavo, 10s. 6</. contains: 

Mathematical Geography, by M. O’Buibn, M.A. 

Physical Geography, by D. T. Anstbd, M.A., F.R.S. 
Chartography, by J. Jackson, F.R.S. 

Geographical Tenninology, by Rov. C. G. Nioolat. 

The Institutes of Justinian ; with linglish 

Introduction, Translation, and Notes. By Thomas C. San- 
PARS, M.A. late Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. The 
Second Edition, revi^^ed. Octavo. 15s. 


Principles of Political Economy. By J oiin 

Stuart Mill. Fourth Edition. Two Volumes. Octavo. 
30s. < 

The Senses and the Intellect. The Emo- 

tioDB and the Will : completing a Systematic Exposition of 
t the Human Mind. By Alkkandeb Bain, M.A., Examiner 
in L^gic and Moral Philosophy in the University of Lou- 
don. Oc^vo. 15s. each. « 

Babrii Fabulse JEsopeae,^ e Oodice Manu- 

Boripto Partem Secundam nuno primum edidit Georgius 
C oBNRWALL Lbwis, A.M., .^is Christi, in Universitate 
Oxoniensi, Alumnus Honorarius. 3s. 6d. 

Babrii Eabulse jEsopese, cum Pabularum 

deperditarum Fragmentis, recensuit et breviter Uluatravit 
Georgius Cobnswall Lewis, M.A. 51. 6d. 




hy John W, Parker and Son, West Strand. 9 


The Choephorse of -^schylus; with Note^ 

By John Coninoton, M.A. Professor of Latin, Oxford. 6s. 


Notes upon Thucydides. By John G. 

Shfpfakd, M.A. Head Master of Kidderminster School, 
and Lewib Evans, M.A. Head Master of Sandbach 
School. Books I. and 11. 8s. 


The Ethics of Aristotle. By Sir Alex- 

ANDER GR4\nt, Bart., M.A. The First Volume, the Essays, 
8«. 6d. The Second Volume, Books I. — VI., with Notes, 


The Politics of Aristotle; with Introduc- 

tion, Essays, Notes, and Index. By K. Gonqreve, 
M.A. i6s. 

Platonis Philebus; with Introduction, and 

Notes, Critical and Explanatory. By Charles Badham, 
D.D., Head Master of Birmingham and Edgbasion Proprie- 
taiy School. 5s. 


Phfedrus, Bysis, and Protagoras of Plato, 

literally translated. By J. Wright, M.A. 4«. 6d. 

The Greek Testament; with Notes, Gram- 
matical and Exegetical. By W. Wkbbtbr, M.A.,*of 
King’s College, London * and W. F. WiLKiNfeON, M.A., 
Vicar of St. Werburgh, Derby. Volume If, contaiiiing the 
Four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, aos. 

• 

Synonyms of the New Testament. By K. 

Chenevix Trbnoh, D.D. Dean of Westminster. Fourth 
Edition. 5s. 


Select Private Orations of Demosthenes; 

with English Notes. By 0. T. Pxnbose, M.A. 4s. 




10 


New Books and New Editions, 


tThe Frogs of Aristophanes; with English 

Notes. By Rev. H. P. Cookesley, M.A. 7«. 

f 

Aristophanes. Edited, with Notes and 

Index, by H. A. Holden, M.A., Head Master of Ipswich 
School. 15s. 

The Plays separately, is, each ; Notulaj Critical and 
OiiouiastlcoD. 45. 

Greek Versos of Shrewsbury School; with 

Account of the Tainlnc Metre, and Exercises in Creek 
Tragic Senarii, Edited by Dr. Kennedy, Head Master. 8«. 

Antigone of Sophocles, in Greek and En- 

gUsb ; with Notes. By Dr. Donaldson, ga, 

Agamemnon of Aeschylus, in Greek and 

English; with Notes. By J. Conington, M.A. 7^. Od. 

.^schylus translated into English Verse; 

with Notes, Life of dEschylus, and Discourse on Greek 
Tragedy. By J. S. Blackie, Professor of GreeK, Edin- 
burgh. Two Voluoies, 46^. 

The Alcestis of Euripides; with' Notes. By 

J. H. Monk, D.D., Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol. 
4jr. 6 d. 

P,indar; with Notes. By Dr. Donaldson. 

i 6 s. 

Homeric Ballads. The Text, with Transla- 

tion in Verse, and Notes. By Dr. Ma(^nn. 6s. 

Muller’s Dissertations on the Eumenides of 

.^schylus. Second Edition. Ga, 6 d. 

C. Cornelii Taciti* Opera ad Codices Anti- 

^ssimoB oommentario critioo edidit Fbanoisous Ritteb, 
Professor Bonnensifi. Four Voltunes, Octavo. «8s. 



hy John, ir. Parker and Son, West Strand. 11 


Propertius; with English Notes. By F. A.| 

Pa LL\, Editor of Octavo. los. 6t/. 

Plautus; Aiilularia; with Votes. By J. 

IllLDlARD, li.D. 7a. (nl. 

Plautus: McnaQchtnoi; with Notes. By J. • 

^ HlLDlAJtD, B.l). 7a. (td. ^ 

Longer Exercises in Latin J’rose Coniposi- 

tion, with a CommoTitar^ and on the 1 m mode 

of formiiiij a collect Latin Style. Dr. Domld'sON. 

6^. 6f/. 

Elements of Tjogic. By Richard Wiiatklt, 

Arclihishop of Ihibliu. Oiowii Svo. 4a. Cr7. OcUvo. 
106. (id. 

Elements of Rhetoric. By Archbishop 

WniiLiiV. Clown 8vo. ^3. Cl, OrUvo. loa. 6(7. 

System of Logie, Ratiociuative and Indue- 

ti\L. By J(»nx SiiT\ttT Mill. Eouith Edition. Two 
Volumes, Octavo. 25s. 

An Historical and Explanatory Treatise on 

the Book of Common Piaycr. By W, O. llrMrnB\, B.D., 
late Follow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Second Edition, 
onkut^cd 76. 6 d. 

Churchman’s Guide : A Copious Index of 

yermons and other Works, by eminent Church of England 
llivines; digested and aiianged accoiding to theii subjects. 
By J. Fobuter, M.A. Odfeavo. 7^. •• 

On l\iblic Reading : Garrick’s Mode of 

Beading the Liturgy ;»with Notes, and a Pi&ooiirse on Pub- 
lic Reading. By R, Cull, Tutor in Elocution, ^a, 6<i. 

The Churchman’s Hieological Dictionary. 

By Robert Edkn, M.A., Chaplain to the Bishop of Nor- 
wich. Demy i2mo. 5s, 


LONDON: JOHN W, PARKER AND SON, WEST STRAND. 




‘VttB IHTRODlErcnOirSi ID&TBH, and WSUOIBS, 
J9i«to(iail, J|i«snt|^iral anti €titi<a(, 

BY ROBERT BEtL- 


Is V^boiot^ 2s. Od. B^OH, BOCXD ur cloth. 

ANCItNT K)BM«, BALLADS, AND SONCS OF 

tBB peasantry. 2t. 60. 

ORBBNE and MARLOWE 2». 6(f 

BARLT BALLADS ILLUSTRATIVE OF HISTORY, 
TRADITIONS, AND CUSTOMS. 3«. W. 

BRN JONSON. 2*. 9d. 

CHAUCER. £%bt VoliiiDeg, 20a. 

BUTLBE Three Yolumeg, 7a. 6d. 

THOIl^O^^^ Tw Volumes, 6a. 

DRYDEN. Three Volumes, 7a. 6d. 

SUAESPEARB. ' 2a. 6d. 

COWPER. Three Volumes. 7a. 6d. 

SURREY, MINOR CONTEMPORANEOUS POETS, 
AND fiUCKHURST. 2s. 60. 

SONGS FROM THE DRAMATISTS; from the first 
regular Corned/ to the close of tlie 18th Century. 2«. 60. 

WYAW. 2». Cd 
OXiDHAM. 2a, ed. 

WAt^LER. 2a. 6dL 


LOtmos ! JOHN W, PARKER and SON, West Steahd. 