LECTURES 


METAPHYSICS AND LOGIC 



 



ON EARTH, THERE IS NOTOINO GREAT BUT MAN; 
IN MAN, THERE IS NOTHING GREAT RUT MIND. 


 


LECTURES 



ON 


METAPHYSICS AND LOGIC 


DY 

SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON, BART. 

rnoFKmoR or looic and mrtafiitbics in tub 

CN1VKIUHTY OF KDINHir UGH 

Ad»ofM*, A.M. (Oxoa) Ac. ; Corrwpondini Member of (he Irurtitute of Franco; Honorary Member of Ibe 
American Arademj of Arte and Hritnm ; and eflh* l.ailn Rorirty of Jena, Ac. 


EDITED BY THE 


REV. H. L. HANSEL, B.D., LL.D. 

winTruni 1 - hu*f»«« or kokaf. and mTAPHYriCAi. rniMwornr, uxn«o 



AMD 



WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON 
MDCCCLX 


i 


77tc Riaht q( Frafisfotfan is referral 


 





LECTURES 


ox 

LOGIC 


SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON, BART. 


EDITED BT TIIE 

REV. n. L. MANSEL, B.I)., LL.D. 

wAYsrurr* mortmnn or mora v. anu *KTAriiY*icAt fhiuwomiy, oi mwn 

AND 

JOHN VEITCH, M.A. 

i*norr««0R or io<>tc, R»ir toric, and MWTAnnmr*, trr a*vukx%-« 


VOL. I. 


WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON 
MDCCCLX 


The Right of Irantkxlion u rt*trr«i 


 


PREFACE. 


The Lectures comprised in the present Volumes form 
the second and concluding portion of the Biennial Course 
on Metaphysics and Logic, which was commenced by 
Sir William Hamilton on his election to the Professorial 
Chair in 1836, and repeated, with but slight alterations, 
till his decease in 1856. The Appendix contains various 
papers, composed for the most part during this period, 
w'hich, though portions of their contents were publicly 
taught at least as early as 1840, were only to a very 
small extent incorporated into the text of the Lectures. 

The Lectures on Logic, like those on Metaphysics, 
were chiefly composed during the session in which they 
were first delivered (1837-8) ; and the statements made 
in the preface to the previous volumes, as regards the cir- 
cumstances and manner of their composition, are equally 
applicable to the present course. In this, as in the 
preceding series, the Author has largely availed himself 
of the labours of previous writers, many of whom are 
but little known in this country. To the works of the 
German logicians of the present century, particularly to 
those of Krug and Esser, these Lectures are under espe- 
cial obligations. 


 



Vlll 


PREFACE. 


Ill the compilation of the Appendix, some responsi- 
bility rests with the Editors ; and a few words of explan- 
ation may be necessary as regards the manner in which 
they have attempted to perform this portion of their task. 
In publishing the papers of a deceased writer, composed 
at various intervals during a long period of years, and 
treating of difficult and controverted questions, there are 
two opposite dangers to be guarded against. On the 
one hand, there is the danger of compromising the 
Authors reputation by the publication of documents 
which his maturer judgment might not have sanctioned ; 
and, on the other hand, there is the danger of commit- 
ting an opposite injury to him and to the public, by 
withholding writings of interest and value. Had Sir 
William Hamilton, at any period of his life, published a 
systematic treatise on Logic, or had his projected New 
Analytic of Logical Forms been left in a state at all 
approaching to completeness, the Editors might probably 
have obtained a criterion by which to distinguish between 
those speculations which would have received the final 
imprimatur of their Author, and those which would not. 
In the absence of any such criterion, they have thought 
it better to run the risk of giving too much than too 
little ; — to publish whatever appeared to have any philo- 
sophical or historical interest, without being influenced 
by its coincidence with their own opinions, or by its 
coherence with other parts of the Authors writings. It 
is possible that, among the papers thus published, may 
be found some which are to be considered rather as 
experimental exercises than as approved results ; but no 


PREFACE. 


IX 


papers have been intentionally omitted, except such as 
were either too fragmentary to be intelligible, or mani- 
festly imperfect sketches of what has been published 
here or elsewhere in a more matured form. 

The Notes, in these as in the previous volumes, are 
divided into three classes. Those printed from the 
manuscript of the Lectures appear without any dis- 
tinctive mark : those supplied from the Author’s Com- 
monplace-Book and other papers are enclosed within 
square brackets without signature ; and those added by 
the Editors are marked by the signature “ Ed.” These 
last, as in the Lectures on Metaphysics, are chieHy con- 
fined to occasional explanations of the text and verifica- 
tions of references. 

In conclusion, the Editors desire to express their ac- 
knowledgments to those friends from whom they have 
received assistance in tracing the numerous quotations 
and allusions scattered through these and the preceding 
volumes. In particular, their thanks are due to Hubert 
Hamilton, Esq., whose researches amoDg his father’s books 
and papers have supplied them with many valuable ma- 
terials ; and to H. W. Chandler, Esq., Fellow of Pem- 
broke College, Oxford, who has aided them from the 
resources of a philosophical learning cognate in many 
respects to that of Sir William Hamilton himself. 


 



CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 


LECTURE I 


INTRODUCTION, 


LOGIC— I. ITS DEFINITION 


1 


LECTURE II. 

LOGIC. — I. ITS DEFINITION — HISTORICAL NOTICES OF OPINIONS 

REGARDING ITS OBJECT AND DOMAIN. — IL ITS UTILITY, 19 

LECTURE III. 

LOGIC. II. ITS UTILITY. TIT. ITS DIVISIONS STTR.TF.OTTVE 

AND OBJECTIVE — GENERAL AND SPECIAL, ... 38 


LOGIC. — HI. ITS DIVISIONS — PURE AND MODIFIED. . . 57 


PART I. STOTCHEIOLOOY- SECTION I. NOETIC. — ON THE FUN - 

DAMENTAL LAWS OF THOUGHT — THEIR CONTENTS AND 



LECTURE V. 


HISTORY, 


72 


Xll 


CONTENTS. 


LECTURE VI. 

THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THOUOHT— THEIR CLASSIFI- 
CATION AND IMPORT, 


LECTURE VII. 

SECTION II. OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT.— I. ENNOEMATIC 
—OF CONCEPTS OR NOTIONS— A, OF CONCEPTS IN GENE - 
RAL, 


LECTURE VIII. 

ENNOEMATIC — A. OF CONCEPTS IN GENERAL; B. IN SPECIAL. 
— 1, THEIR OBJECTIVE RELATION — QUANTITY, 


LECTURE IX. 

ENNOEMATIC. — B. OF CONCEPTS IN SPECIAL. — II. THEIR 
SUBJECTIVE RELATION — QUALITY. .... 


LECTURE X. 

ENNOEMATIC. — IMPERFECTION OF CONCEPTS. 

LECTURE XI. 

ENNOEMATIC. — III. RECIPROCAL RELATIONS OF CONCEPTS. — 
A- QUANTITY OF EXTENSION — SUBORDINATION AND CO- 
ORDINATION. 


LECTURE XII. 

ENNOEMATIC. — IIL RECIPROCAL RELATIONS OF CONCEPTS. — 
B. QUANTITY OF COMPREHENSION, 


Pack 

2fi 


11(1 


1.10 


m 


m 


m 


212 


 


CONTENTS, 


Xlll 


Pace 

IL APOPHANTIC, OR THE DOCTRINE OF JUDGMENTS. — JUDG- 
MENTS — THEIR NATURE AND DIVISIONS, . . 225 


LECTURE XIV. 

APOPHANTIC. — JUDGMENTS — THEIR QUALITY, OPPOSITION, 

AND CONVERSION, 249 


LECTURE XV. 

III. DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. REASONING IN GENERAL. 

— SYLLOGISMS — T HEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO IN- 
TERNAL FORM, 2GS 


LECTURE XVT. 

DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. — SYLLOGISMS THEIR DIVISIONS 

ACCORDING TO INTERNAL FORM. — A. SIMPLE — CATE - 
GORICAL. — I. DEDUCTIVE IN EXTENSION, . . . 293 


LECTURE XVII. 

DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. — SYLLOGISMS — THEIR DIVISIONS 
ACCORDING TO INTERNAL FORM. — A SIMPLE — CATE - 
GORICAL. — II. DEDUCTIVE IN COMPREHENSION. — III. 
INDUCTIVE IN EXTENSION AND COMPREHENSION. — B. 
CONDITIONAL — DISJUNCTIVE. 313 


LECTURE XVIII. 

DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. — SYLLOGISMS — THEIR DIVISIONS 
ACCORDING TO INTERNAL FORM. — B. CONDITIONAL — 
HYPOTHETICAL AND HYPOTHETICO-DISJUNCTIVE, 


337 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


LECTURE XIX. 

DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS.— SYLLOGISMS — THEIR DIVISIONS 
ACCORDING TO EXTERNAL FORM. — A. COMPLEX — EPI- 
CHEIREMA AND SORITES, 


LECTURE XI 

DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. — SYLLOGISMS — THEIR DIVISIONS 

ACCORDING TO EXTERNAL FORM, R. DEFECTIVE — F.X - 

THYMEME. — C. REGULAR AND IRREGULAR — FIGURE 
AND MOOD — FIRST AND SECOND FIGURES, 


LECTURE XXI. 

DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. SYLLOGISMS — THRTR DTVTKTONR 

ACCORDING TO EXTERNAL FORM. — THIRD AND FOURTH 
FIGURES 


LECTURE XXII. 

DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS.— SYLLOGISMS — THEIR DIVISIONS 
ACCORDING TO EXTERNAL FORM. — C. REGULAR AND 
IRREGULAR.— FIGURE — REDUCTION, .... 



DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS — SYLLOGISMS — THEIR DIVISIONS 
ACCORDING TO VALIDITY.— FALLACIES, 


Page 

3G2 


38G 


412 


429 


449 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECTUEE I . 1 

INTRODUCTION. 

LOGIC. — I. ITS DEFINITION. 

Gentlemen, — We are now about to enter on the con- lect. 

sideration of one of the most important branches of L 

Mental Philosophy, — the science which is conversant 
about the Laws of Thought. But, before commencing “* 
the discussion, I would premise a w r ord in regard to to°h.°ran- 
the mode in which it ought to be conducted, with a duct “ i ' 
view to your information and improvement. The End of 
great end which every instructor ought to propose m “ lruc “ un ' 
in the communication of a science, is, to afford the 
student clear and distinct notions of its several parts, 
of their relations to each other, and to the whole of 
which they are the constituents. For unless he ac- 
complish this, it is of comparatively little moment 
that his information be in itself either new or impor- 
tant ; for of what consequence are all the qualities of 
a doctrine, if that doctrine be not communicated ? — 
and communicated it is not, if it be not understood. 

But in the communication of a doctrine, the me- Method, of 

a The first seven Lectures of the delivered by Sir W. Hamilton as a 
Metaphysical Course* (Lectures on General Introduction to the Course of 
Metaphysics, vol. i. p. 1-128), were Logic proper. — Ed. 

VOL. I. A 


 



2 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

I. 


written and 
oral instruc- 
tion differ- 
ent. 


Use of Text- 
book in a 
systematic 
course of 
Lectures. 


thods to be followed by an instructor who writes, 
and by an instructor who speaks, are not the same. 
They are, in fact, to a certain extent, necessarily dif- 
ferent : for, while the reader of the one can always 
be referred back or forward, can always compare one 
part of a book with another, and can always meditate 
at leisure on each step of the evolution ; the hearer 
of the other, on the contrary, must at every moment 
be prepared, by what has preceded, to comprehend at 
once what is to ensue. The oral instructor has thus 
a much more arduous problem to solve, in accom- 
plishing the end which he proposes. For if, on the 
one hand, he avoid obscurity by communicating only 
what can easily be understood as isolated fragments, 
he is intelligible only because he communicates no- 
thing worth learning : and if, on the other, he be 
unintelligible in proportion as his doctrine is concate- 
nated and systematic, he equally fails in his attempt ; 
for as, in the one case, there is nothing to teach, so, 
in the other, there is nothing taught. It is, therefore, 
evident, that the oral instructor must accommodate his 
mode of teaching to the circumstances under which 
he acts. He must endeavour to make his audience 
fully understand each step of his movement before 
another is attempted ; and he must prepare them for 
details by a previous survey of generals. In short, 
what follows should always be seen to evolve itself 
out of what precedes. It is in consequence of this 
condition of oral instruction, that, where the develop- 
ment of a systematic doctrine is attempted in a course 
of Lectures, it is usual for the lecturer to facilitate the 
labour to his pupils and himself, by exhibiting in a 
Manual or Textbook the order of his doctrine and a 
summary of its contents. As I have not been able to 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


3 


prepare this useful subsidiary, I shall endeavour, as lect. 
far as possible, to supply its want. I shall, in the first — 1 — 
place, endeavour always to present you with a general mcthSif 
statement of every doctrine to be explained, before Prelect,on - 
descending to the details of explanation ; and in order 
that you may be insured in distincter and more com- 
prehensive notions, I shall, where it is possible, com- 
prise the general statements in Propositions or Para- 
graphs, which I shall slowly dictate to you, in order 
that they may be fully taken down in writing. This 
being done, I shall proceed to analyse these proposi- 
tions or paragraphs, and to explain their clauses in 
detail. This, I may observe, is the method followed 
in those countries where instruction by prelection is 
turned to the best account ; — it is the one prevalent 
on the Continent, more especially in the universities 
of Germany and Holland. 

In pursuance of this plan, I at once commence by 
giving you, as the first proposition or paragraph, the 
following. I may notice, however, by parenthesis, 
that, as we may have sometimes occasion to refer 
articulately to these propositions, it would be proper 
for you to distinguish them by sign and number. 

The first paragraph, then, is this : — 

IT I. A System of Logical Instruction consists Par. t. 
of Two Parts, — 1°, Of an Introduction to the system of 
science ; 2°, Of a Body of Doctrine constituting fe. c c ° u 
the Science itself. 

These, of course, are to be considered in their order. 


TF II. The Introduction to Logic should afford p ar . ii. 

^ The Intro- 

answers to the following questions : — i. What IS duction to 


4 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


Logic 1 ii. What is its Value 1 iii. What are 
its Divisions \ iv. What is its History ? and, 
v. What is its Bibliography, that is, what are 
the best books upon the subject 1 

In regard to the first of these questions, it is evi- 
dent that its answer is given in a definition of Logic. 
I, therefore, dictate to you the third paragraph. 

p sr . ni. If III. What is Logic ? Answer — Logic is the 

tio^of 11 Science of the Laws of Thought as Thought. 

Logic. 

F.ipii«- This definition, however, cannot be understood 
without an articulate exposition of its several parts. 
I, therefore, proceed to this analysis and explanation, 
and shall consider it under the three following heads. 
In the first, I shall consider the meaning, and history, 
and synonyms of the word Logic. In the second, I 
shall consider the Genus of Logic, that is, explain 
why it is defined as a Science. In the third, I 
shall consider the Object- matter of Logic, that is, 
explain to you what is meant by saying, that it is con- 
versant about the Law's of Thought as Thought, 
l. Thcwoni First, then, in regard to the signification of the 
Huwry 1 ’ 1 " word. Logic, you are aware, is a Greek word, Xoyi/oj ; 
and koyucrj, like ypappaTticrj, prjTopLicj, TroirjTiicq, 8ia- 
keicnKT), I need hardly tell you, is an adjective, one 
or other of the substantives imanjpr), science, riyyt], 
art, or npaypareCa, study or rather matter of study, 
being understood. The term Xoyucq, in this special 
signification, and as distinctly marking out a parti- 
cular science, is not so old as the constitution of that 
Ariatotie. Bcience itself. Aristotle did not designate by the 
terra \oyticr), the science whose doctrine he first fully 



 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


5 


developed. He uses, indeed, the adjective Xoyocos in lect. 
various combinations with other substantives. Thus 
I find in his Physics koyucr) an opla, a — in his Rhetoric, 
koyucal Svcryepdaif — in his Metaphysics , XoyiK-d? 
airoSeifets, 7 — in liis Posterior Analytics, evia koyuca, s 
— in his Topics, koyucov npofikyp a.‘ He, likewise, not 
unfrequently makes use of the adverb koyisax;^ By 
whom the term koyucr) was first applied, as the word 
expressive of the science, does not appear. Boethius, Ancient 
who flourished at the close of the fifth and commence- 
ment of the sixth century, says, in his Commentary 
on the Topics of Cicero , v that the name of Logic was 
first given by the ancient Peripatetics. In the works of 
Alexander of Aplirodisias, the oldest commentator we Alexander 
possess on the works of Aristotle, (he flourished to- Diae. 
wards the end of the second century), the term 
koyucr ), both absolutely and in combination with 
npaypareia, &c., is frequently employed ; 6 and the 
word is familiar in the writings of all the subsequent 
Aristotelians. Previously, however, to Alexander, it Cicero, 
is evident that koyucr) had become a common designa- 
tion of the science ; for it is once and again thus 


o B. iii. C. 3. *Ex«i 8’ hiroplay A oyi- 
k4\v. “ Dubitationem qua* non e rerum 
singularitim (physicarum) contemplati- 
one, sed o ratiocinations sola orta eat.” 
Waitz, ad A rist. Org., vol ii. p. 354. 
Logical and dialectical reasoning in Ar- 
istotle mean the same thing, — viz. rea- 
soning founded only on general princi- 
ples of probability, not on necessary 
truths or on special experiences. — Ed. 

8 Thus expression occurs not in the 
Rhetoric , but in the Metaphysics, B. 
iii. (iv.) c. 3, and B. xiii. (xiv.) c. 1. In 
the Rhetoric we find the expression 
koyiKol trvWoyifffAoi, B. i. c. 1 . — Ed. 

y B. xiii. (xiv.) c. 1. Cf. Dt Clener. 
A nim., ii. 8 . — Ed. 


8 B.Le. 24 .- Ed. 

« B. v. c. 1 . — Ed. 

C E. g., Anal. Post., i. 21, 32; Phys. 
viii. 8; Metaph ., vL 4, 17; xi. 1. — 
Ed. 

if L. i., sub init.—~ Ed. 

0 See especially his commentary on 
the Prior. Analytics, f. 2, {Scholia, ed. 
Brandis, p. 141), where ho divides rj 
\oyitcij t « kou auWoyurriKb xpaypa- 
r tla into four branches, 4ito5«uctuc^, 
biaXtKTiid), wfipaorisrby and ooqnxrruci). 
Here Logic is used in a wider sense 
than the adjective and adverb bear 
in Aristotle, while the cognate term 
dialectic retains its original significa- 
tion. — E d. 


 



G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

I. 


b. Its deri- 
vation and 
meaning. 

Twofold 
meaniug of 
\ 6yos. 


How ex- 
pressed by 
Aristotle. 


By others. 


applied by Cicero.® So much for the history of the 
word Logic , in so far as regards its introduction and 
earlier employment. We have now to consider its 
derivation and meaning. 

It is derived from Xoyos, and it had primarily the 
same latitude and variety of signification as its origi- 
nal. What then did Xoyos signify \ In Greek this 
word had a twofold meaning. It denoted both thought 
and its expression ; it was equivalent both to the ratio 
and to the oratio of the Latins. The Greeks, in order 
to obviate the ambiguity thus arising from the con- 
fusion of two different things under one expression, 
were compelled to add a differential epithet to the 
common term. Aristotle, to contradistinguish Xoyos, 
meaning thought , from Xoyo?, meaning speech , calls 
the former top ec rco, — rov ip rf} ipvxf), — that unthin , — 
that in the mind; and the latter, top cfco, — that with - 
out? The same distinction came subsequently to be 
expressed by the Xoyos ipSiddeTos, for thought , the 
verbum mentis ; and by Xoyos Trpotyopucbs, for lan- 
guage, the verbum oris. y It was necessary to give you 
this account of the ambiguity of the word Xoyos, 
because the same passed into its derivative Xoyuaj; 
and it also was necessary that you should be made 
aware of the ambiguity in the name of the science, 
because this again exerted an influence on the views 
adopted in regard to the object-matter of the science. 

a See Dc Finibus, L 7 ; Tusc. Qu<rst., edit. Paris, 1640; Plutarch, Pit ilos. csst, 
iv. 14. Cicero probably borrowed cam prindpibus, c. 2, (vol. ii. p. 777, C., 
this use of the term from the Stoics, ed. Francof., 1620); Sextus Empiricus, 
to whose founder, Zeno, Laertius (vii. Pyrrh. Hyp., i. 65 ; Simplicius, In 
39) ascribes the origin of the division Catty. A rist., p. 7 ; Damascenus, Fid. 
of Philosophy into Logic, Physics, Orthod., ii. 21. The expressions pro- 
and Ethics, sometimes erroneously bably originated with the Stoics. See 
attributed to Plato. — E d. Wyttenbach’s note on Plutarch's Mor- 

0 Anal. Post., i. 10. — Eo. alia, p. 44 A, (tom. vL pars 1, p. 378 

y E.g., Philo, Dt Vita Mosis, p. 672, edit. Oxon, 1810 ). — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


7 


But what, it may be asked, was the appellation of lect. 
the science before it had obtained the name of Logic f — . — 
for, as I have said, the doctrine had been discrimi- uoMtftbc 
nated, and even carried to a very high perfection, before XJwd* 
it received the designation by which it is now gene- 
rally known. The most ancient name for what was 
subsequently denominated Logic, , was Dialectic. But 
this must be understood with certain limitations. By 
Plato the term dialectic is frequently employed to 
mark out a particular section of philosophy. But this 
section is, with Plato, not coextensive with the domain 
of Logic ; it includes, indeed, Logic, but it does not 
exclude Metaphysic, for it is conversant not only 
about the form, but about the matter, of our know- 
ledge. (The meaning of these expressions you are 
soon to learn.) 

This word, SiaXe/m/o), {re)(irq, or inuTnjfiyj, or rrpayfia- &io**ktuOi 
rcta, being understood), is derived, you are aware, logy, 
from SiaXeyearOcu, to hold conversation or discourse 
together ; dialectic , therefore, literally signifies, a con- 
versation, colloquy, controversy, dispute. But Plato, u«* of the 
who defined thought an internal discourse of the soul lectic by 
with itself,® and who explained to SiaXeyecrtfai by the 
ambiguous expression rip \6ya> did not 

certainly do violence either to the Greek language or 
to his own opinions, in giving the name of dialectic 
to the process, not merely of logical inference, but 
of metaphysical speculation. In our own times the By HegeL 
Platonic signification of the word has been revived, 
and Hegel has applied it, in even a more restricted 

a Fischaber, p. 10 [Lehr buck dcr biaXtyurOcu Kal to \6yq> xpv^bai row- 
Loyik, Einleitung. See Themtetus, p. t 6 v ttov KaXttt ; AA. IlcU'u yt. CL Gas- 
189. Sophista, p. 263 . — Ed.] sendi, Loyxca, Prooem. Opera, t. i. p. 

0 I. A Icib., p. 129. M. T b 84 32.— Ed. 


 


8 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. meaning, to metaphysical speculation alone. a But if 
Plato employed the term Dialectic to denote more 


employment than Logic, Aristotle employed it to denote less, 
of laiedic. J){ a l ec ti c is not a term for the pure science, 

or the science in general, but for a particular and an 
applied part. It means merely the Logic of Probable 
Matter, and is thus convertible with what he other- 
wise denominates Topics ( Tomtcrj )P This, I may ob- 
serve, has been very generally misunderstood, and it 
is commonly supposed that Aristotle uses the term 
Dialectic in two meanings, in one meaning for the 
science of Logic in general, in another for the Logic 
of Probabilities. This is, however, a mistake. There 
is, in fact, only a single passage in his writings, on 
the ground of which it can possibly be maintained, 
that he ever employs Dialectic in the more exten- 
sive meaning. This is in his Rhetoric i. I , 7 but the 
passage is not stringent, and Dialectic may there be 
plausibly interpreted in the more limited signification. 
But at any rate it is of no authority, for it is an evi- 
dent interpolation, — a mere gloss which has crept in 
from the margin into the text . 6 Thus it appears that 
Aristotle possessed no single terra by which to desig- 
nate the general science of which he was the principal 
or .1 nah/- author and finisher. A nalytic , and Apodeictic with 
deictic, To- Topic , (equivalent to Dialectic, and includ ingSojyhist ic ) , 
were so many special names by which he denoted 
particular parts or particular applications of Logic. 
I say nothing of the vacillating and various employ- 


a See Encylclopddie , § 81. — Ed. 8 See Balforeus [7?. Balforei Com- 

/9 Topira, i. 1. A<oA«kti*c&i 84 <rvK- mentarius in Organ uni Logicnm Aris- 
\oyurpbs 6 ivS6£a. >v <rvk\oyi£6p*vos. tote l its, Burdigalsc, 1618. Qu. II. § 3, 

— Ed. p. 12. Muretus in his version omits 

7 rifpl 84 (rvWoyiapov ipolus airavros this passage as an interpolation. — 
rfjf 8iaAeKTiKTjs icrTivlhtiv, f) aings o\ ijs Ed.] 
t) ptpovs tiv6s. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


9 


ment of the terms Logic and Dialectic by the Stoics, lf.ct. 

Epicureans, and other ancient schools of philosophy ; — 

and now proceed to explain to you the second head of 
the definition, — viz. the Genus, — class, of Logic, which 
I gave as Science. 

It was a point long keenly mooted by the old logi- ?. Lu- 
cians, whether Logic were a science, or an art, or, -whether 
neither, or both ; and if a science, whether a science An. 
practical, or a science speculative, or at once specula- 
tive and practical. Plato and the Platon is ts viewed 
it as a science ; ° but with them Dialectic, as I have 
noticed, was coextensive with the Logic and Metaphy- 
sics of the Peripatetics taken together. By Aristotle 
himself Logic is not defined. The Greek Aristotelians, 
and many philosophers since the revival of letters, 
deny it to be either science or art/ The Stoics, in 
general, viewed it as a science ; 7 and the same was 
done by the Arabian and Latin schoolmen . 8 In more 
modern times, however, many Aristotelians, all the 
Kamists, and a majority of the Cartesians, maintained 
it to be an art ; * but a considerable party were found 
who defined it as both art and science/ In Germany, 
since the time of Leibnitz, Logic has been almost 


universally regarded as a science. The controversy The 
which has been waged on this point is perhaps one of " on 


JUCT- 

lutilc. 


a [Camerarius, Disputat tones PhiUb Logica Conimbricenns, [Tract i. g 1. 
sophicat, p. SO.] [Pare i. qu. 3, ed. subs. 4, et seg., p. 8, ed. 1711 . — Ed.] 
P&risiis, 1030. See also Qu. 4, p. 44. Gerard John Vossius, De Xat.Artium, 
— Ed.] five de Logica, c, vi.] 

0 [See Themistius, In Anal. Post., y [See Laertius, In Vita Zenonis, 1. 
Lie. 24, [Opera, p. 6, Venice, 1554. vii.] [§ 62 . — Ed.] 

— Ed.] Ammoniua Hernia?, In Categ., 0 [Scotus, Prtrdicamenta, Qu. i. Al- 
Praef. [p. 3, ed. Aid. 1503. — Ed.] Sim- bertus Magnus, In Dt Pradicabi libit s, 
plicius, In Categ. , Praof. [§ 25, p. 5, c. 1.] 

ed. Basilea*, 1551 . — Ed.] Zabarella, « [Ramus, Inst it. Dialect., 1. i. c. 1. 

De Natura Logictr, [1. i. c. 5, et seq. — Burgersdicius, Inst it. Log., 1. L c. 1, [§ 
Ed.] Smiglecius, Logica, Disp. ii. qu. 4 . — Ed.] 

4, [p. 69, ed. Oxonii, 1658. — Ed.J ( See Smiglecius, as above. — E d. 


 



10 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

L 


Whatcly 

quoted. 


Criticised. 


the most futile in the history of speculation. In so 
far as Logic is concerned, the decision of the question 
is not of the very smallest import. It was not in 
consequence of any diversity of opinion in regard to 
the scope and nature of this doctrine, that philoso- 
phers disputed by what name it should be called. 
The controversy was, in fact, only about what was 
properly an art, and what was properly a science ; 
and as men attached one meaning or another to these 
terms, so did they affirm Logic to be an art, or a sci- 
ence, or both, or neither. I should not, in fact, have 
thought it necessary to say anything on this head, 
were it not to guard you against some mistakes of 
the respectable author, whose work on Logic I have re- 
commended to your attention, — I mean Dr Whately. 
In the opening sentence of his Elements , it is said : 
— “ Logic, in the most extensive sense which the name 
can with propriety be made to bear, may be consi- 
dered as the Science and also the Art of Reason- 
ing. It investigates the principles on which argumen- 
tation is conducted, and furnishes rules to secure the 
mind from error in its deductions. Its most appro- 
priate office, however, is that of instituting an analysis 
of the process of the mind in reasoning ; and in this 
point of view it is, as has been stated, strictly a 
science : while considered in reference to the practical 
rules above mentioned, it may be called the art of 
reasoning. This distinction, as will hereafter appear, 
has been overlooked or not clearly pointed out, by most 
writers on the subject ; Logic having been in general 
regarded as merely an art, and its claim to hold a place 
among the sciences having been expressly denied.” 

All this is from first to last erroneous. In the first 
place, it is erroneous in what it says of the opinion 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


11 


prevalent among philosophers in regard to the genus lect. 

of Logic. Logic was not, as is asserted, in general re- — 

garded as an art, and its claim to hold a place among 
the sciences expressly denied. The contrary would 
have been correct ; for the immense majority of logi- 
cians, ancient and modem, have regarded Logic as a 
science, and expressly denied it to be an art. In the 
second place, supposing Dr Whately’s acceptation of 
the terms art and science to be correct, there is not a 
previous logician who would have dreamt of denying 
that, on such an acceptation. Logic was both a science 
and an art. But in the third place, the discrimination 
itself of art and science is wrong. Dr Whately considers 
science to be any knowledge viewed absolutely, and 
not in relation to practice, — a signification in which 
every art would, in its doctrinal part, be a science ; 
and he defines art to be the application of knowledge 
to practice, in which sense Ethics, Politics, Religion, 
and all practical sciences, would be arts. The dis- 
tinction of arts and sciences is thus wrong." But in 
the fourth place, were the distinction correct, it would 
be of no value, for it would distinguish nothing, 
since art and science would mark out no real differ- 
ence between the various branches of knowledge, but 
only different points of view under which the same 
branch might be contemplated by us, — each being in 
different relations at once a science and an art. In 
fact, Dr Whately confuses the distinction of science 
theoretical and science practical with the distinction 
of science and art. I am well aware that it would be 
no easy matter to give a general definition of science 
as contradistinguished from art, and of art as contra- 
distinguished from science ; but if the words them- 

a Compare Lecture t on Metaphysics , vol. i. p. 115 et seq.— Eo. 


 



12 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

L 


3, Logic, — 
it* object- 
Dial ter. 


a, Thought, 
— what. 


In it* wider 
anil narrow- 
er meaning. 


selves cannot validly be discriminated, it would be 
absurd to attempt to discriminate anything by them. 
When I, therefore, define Logic by the genus science, 
I do not attempt to give it more than the general de- 
nomination of a branch of knowledge ; for I reserve 
the discrimination of its peculiar character to the 
differential quality afforded by its object-matter. You 
will find, when we have discussed the third head of 
the definition, that Logic is not only a science, but a 
demonstrative or apodictic science ; but so to have 
defined it, w r ould have been tautological, for a science 
conversant about laws is conversant about necessary 
matter, and a science conversant about necessary mat- 
ter is demonstrative. 

I proceed, therefore, to the third and last head of the 
definition, — to explain to you what is meant by the 
object-matter of Logic, — viz. the Laws of Thought as 
Thought. The consideration of this head naturally 
divides itself into three questions, — 1, What is Thought? 
2, What is Thought as Thought ? 3, What are the Laws 
of Thought as Thought ? 

In the first place, then, in saying that Logic is con- 
versant about Thought, we mean to say that it is con- 
versant about thought strictly so called. The term 
thought is used in two significations of different extent. 
In the wider meaning, it denotes every cognitive act 
whatever ; by some philosophers, as Descartes and his 
disciples, it is even used for every mental modification 
of which we are conscious, and thus includes the Feel- 
ings, the Volitions, and the Desires. 0 In the more lim- 
ited meaning, it denotes only the acts of the Under- 

a I)e* cartes, Principia, p. i.§ 9. “Co- Atque ita non modo intelligcre, velle, 
gitationis nomine intelligo ilia omnia imaginari, Bed etium sentire, idem ost 
qua? nobis consciis in nobis hunt, qua- hie quod cogitore.” — E d. 
teuua coritrn iu nobis conscientia est. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


13 


standing properly so called, that is, of the Faculty of lect. 
Comparison, or that which I distinguished as the Ela- — - — 
borative or Discursive Faculty.® It is in this more 
restricted signification that thought is said to he the 
object-matter of Logic. Thus Logic does not consider 
the laws which regulate the other powers of mind. It 
takes no immediate account of the faculties by which 
we acquire the rude materials of knowledge ; it sup- 
poses these materials in possession, and considers only 
the manner of their elaboration. It takes no account, 
at least in the department of Pure Logic, of Memory 
and Imagination, or of the blind laws of Association, 
but confines its attention to connections regulated by 
the laws of intelligence. Finally, it does not consider 
the laws themselves of Intelligence as given in the Re- 
gulative Faculty, — Intelligence, — Common Sense ; for 
in that faculty these laws are data, facts, ultimate and, 
consequently, inconceivable ; but whatever transcends 
the sphere of the conceivable transcends the sphere of 
Logic. 

Such are the functions about which Logic is not con- 
versant, and such, in the limited signification of the 
word, are the acts which are not denominated Thought. 

We have hitherto found what thought is not, we must 
now endeavour to determine generally what it is. 

The contemplation of the world presents to our sub- Thought 
sidiary faculties a multitude of objects. These objects ’ ,roiM,r ‘ 
are the rude materials submitted to elaboration by a 
higher and self-active faculty, which operates upon 
them in obedience to certain laws and in conformity 
to certain ends. The operation of this faculty is 
Thought. All thought is a comparison, a recognition 
of similarity or difference ; a conjunction or disjunc- 

a See Lecture* on Metaphyeic t, vol. ii. lect. xxxiv., p. 277 . — Ed. 


 



14 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

I. 


b, Thought 
us thought, 
— what. 


tion, in other words, a synthesis or analysis of its ob- 
jects. In Conception, that is, in the formation of con- 
cepts (or general notions), it compares, disjoins or 
conjoins attributes ; in an act of Judgment, it com- 
pares, disjoins or conjoins concepts ; in Reasoning, it 
compares, disjoins or conjoins judgments. In each 
step of this process there is one essential element ; to 
think, to compare, to conjoin or disjoin, it is necessary 
to recognise one thing through or under another, and, 
therefore, in defining Thought proper, we may either 
define it as an act of Comparison, or as a recognition 
of one notion as in or under another. It is in per- 
forming this act of thinking a thing under a general 
notion, that we are said to understand or comprehend 
it. For example : An object is presented, say a book ; 
this object determines an impression, and I am even 
conscious of the impression, but without recognising 
to myself what the thing is ; in that case, there is only 
a perception, and not properly a thought. But sup- 
pose I do recognise it for w T hat it is, in other words, 
compare it with and reduce it under a certain concept, 
class, or complement of attributes, which I call booh ; 
in that case, there is more than a perception, — there is 
a thought. 

All this will, however, be fully explained to you in 
the sequel ; at present I only attempt to give you a 
rude notion of what thinking is, to the end that you 
may be able vaguely to comprehend the limitation of 
Logic to a certain department of our cognitive func- 
tions, and what is meant by saying that Logic is a 
science of thought. 

But Thought simply is still too undetermined ; the 
proper object of Logic is something still more definite ; 
it is not thought in general, but thought considered 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


15 


merely as thought, of which this science takes cognis- lf.ct. 

ance. This expression requires explanation ; we come 

therefore to the second question, — What is meant 
by Thought as Thought ? 

To answer this question, let us remember what has 
just been said of the act constitutive of thought, — viz. 
that it is the recognition of a thing as coming under 
a concept ; in other words, the marking an object by 
an attribute or attributes previously known as common 
to sundry objects, and to which we have accordingly 
given a general name. “ In this process we are able, by 
abstraction, to distinguish from each other, — 1°, The Muter and 
object thought of ; and, 2°, The kind and manner of Th™ K i°i. 
thinking it. Let us, employing the old and established 
technical expressions, call the first of these the matter, 
the second the form, of the thought. For example, when 
I think that the book before me is a folio, the matter of 
this thought is book and folio, the form of it is a judg- 
ment. Now it is abundantly evident, that this analy- 
sis of thought into two phases or sides is only the work 
of a scientific discrimination and contrast ; for as, on 
the one hand, the matter of which we think is only 
cogitable through a certain form, so, on the other, the 
form under which we think cannot be realised in con- 
sciousness, unless in actual application to an object.”® 

Now, when I said that Logic was conversant about p">- 

° pcrly con- 

thought considered merely as thought, I meant simply ver»«nt only 
to say, that Logic is conversant with the form of Former 

D t Thought. 

thought to the exclusion of the matter. This being 
understood, I now proceed to show how Logic only 
proposes,- — how Logic only can propose, the form of 
thought for its object of consideration. It is indeed 
true, that this limitation of Logic to the form of thought 

a Enser, Logit, § 3, p. 4, 2d edit. MunBter, 1880 . — Ed. 


 



1G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. lias not always been kept steadily in view by logicians, 
— 1 — that it is only gradually that proper views of the 
science have been speculatively adopted, and still more 
gradually that they have been carried practically into 
effect, insomuch that to the present hour, as I shall 
hereafter show you, there are sundry doctrines still 
taught as logical, which, as relative to the matter of 
thought, are in fact foreign to the science of its form. 
This shown “ But although it is impossible to show by the history 
deration of of the science, that Logic is conversant with the form, 
I':, to the exclusion of the matter, of thought ; this can, 
thing it- however, be satisfactorily done by a consideration of 
the nature and conditions of the thing itself. For, if 
it be maintained that Logic takes not merely the form 
but the matter of thought into account, (the matter, 
you will recollect, is a collective expression for the 
several objects about which thought is conversant), in 
that case, Logic must either consider all those objects 
without distinction, or make a selection of some alone. 
Now the former of these alternatives is manifestly 
impossible ; for if it were required that Logic should 
comprise a full discussion of all cogitable objects, in 
other words, if Logic must draw within its sphere all 
other sciences, and thus constitute itself in fact the 
one universal science, every one at once perceives the 
absurdity of the requisition and the impossibility of 
its fulfilment. But is the second alternative more 
reasonable! Can it be proposed to Logic to take 
cognisance of certain objects of thought to the exclu- 
sion of others 1 On this supposition, it must be shown 
why Logic should consider this particular object and 
not also that ; but as none but an arbitrary answer, 
that is no answer at all, can be given to this interro- 
gation, the absurdity of this alternative is no less 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


17 


manifest than that of the other. The particular ob- 
jects, or the matter of thought, being thus excluded, - 
the form of human thought alone remains as the ob- 
ject-matter of our science ; in other words, Logic has 
only to do with thinking as thinking, and has no, at 
least no immediate, concernment with that which is 
thought about. Logic thus obtains, in common par- 
lance, the appellation of a formal science, not indeed 
in the sense as if Logic had only a form and not an 
object, but simply because the form of human thought 
is the object of Logic ; so that the title foi'mal science 
is properly only an abbreviated expression.” ° 

I proceed now to the third question under thisc. 
head, — viz. what is meant by the Laws of Thought as u 
Thought \ in other words, what is meant by the For- 
mal Laws of Thought 1 

We have already limited the object of Logic to the 
form of thought. But there is still required a last and 
final limitation ; for this form contains more than 
Logic can legitimately consider. “ Human thought, 
regarded merely in its formal relation, may be con- 
sidered in a twofold point of view ; for, on the one 
hand, it is either known to us merely from experience 
or observation, — we are merely aware of its phenomena 
historically or empirically, or, on the other, by a reflec- 
tive speculation, — by analysis and abstraction, we seek 
out and discriminate in the manifestations of thought 
what is contained of necessary and universal. The 
empirical or historical consideration of our thinking 
faculty does not belong to Logic, but to the Phse- 
nomenology of Mind, — to Psychology. The empirical 
observation of the phenomena necessarily, indeed, pre- 

o Esser, Logik, § 3, pp. 5, 6. Cf. et teq. 2d edit. 1819 . — Ed. 

Krug, Daiklchre oder Logik, § 8, p. 17 

VOL. I. B 


LF.CT. 

I. 


The Laws 

Thought 

Thought. 


 


18 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lf.ct. cedes their speculative analysis. But notwithstanding 
— . — this, Logic possesses a peculiar province of its own, 
and constitutes an independent and exclusive science. 
For where our empirical consideration of the mind 
terminates, there our speculative consideration com- 
mences ; the necessary elements which the latter 
secures from the contingent materials of observation, 
— these are what constitute the laws of thought as 
thought.” ° 

a Cf. Esser, Lngik, § 4, pp. 0, 7 - — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


19 


LECTURE II. 

INTRODUCTION. 

LOGIC — I. ITS DEFINITION. — HISTORICAL NOTICES OF 

OPINIONS REGARDING ITS OBJECT AND DOMAIN. 

II. ITS UTILITY. 

In my last Lecture, I commeuced the consideration of lect. 

Logic, — of Logic properly so denominated, — a science — ^ 

for the cultivation of which eveiy European university J^ p,tultt * 
has provided a special chair, but which, in this country, 
in consequence of the misconceptions which have lat- 
terly arisen in regard to its nature and its end, has 
been very generally superseded : insomuch that, for a 
considerable period, the chairs of Logic in our Scottisli 
universities have in fact taught almost everything 
except the doctrine which they were established to 
teach. After some precursory observations in regard 
to the mode of communication which I should follow 
in my Lectures on this subject, I entered on the treat- 
ment of the science itself, and stated to you that a 
systematic view of Logic would consist of two parts, 
the one being an Introduction to the doctrine, the 
other a body of the Doctrine itself. In the introduc- 
tion were considered certain preparatory points, neces- 
sary to be understood before entering on the discus- 
sion of the science itself ; and I stated that these pre- 
paratory points were, in relation to our science, 
exhausted in five questions and their answers — 1°, 


20 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

II. 


What is Logic \ 2°, What is its value 1 3°, How is it 
distributed \ 4°, What is its history 1 5°, What are its 
subsidiaries ? 

I then proceeded to the consideration of the first of 
these questions ; and as the answer to the question, 
— what is Logic, — is given in its definition, I defined 
Logic to be the science conversant about the laws of 
thought considered merely as thought ; warning you, 
however, that this definition could only be understood 
after an articulate explanation of its contents. Now 
this definition, I showed you, naturally fell into three 
parts, and each of these parts it behoved to consider 
and illustrate by itself. The first was the word sig- 
nificant of the thing defined, — Logic. The second was 
the genus by which Logic was defined, — science. The 
third was the object-matter constituting the differen- 
tial quality of Logic, — the laws of thought as thought. 
Each of these I considered in its order. I, first of 
all, explained the original meaning of the term Logic , 
and gave you a brief history of its application. I 
then stated what was necessary, in regard to the genus, 
— science ; and, lastly, what is of principal importance, 
I endeavoured to make you vaguely aware of that 
wdiich you cannot as yet be supposed competent dis- 
tinctly to comprehend, I mean the peculiar character 
of the object, — object-matter, — about which Logic is 
conversant. The object of Logic, as stated in the 
definition, is the laws of thought as thought. This 
required an articulate explanation ; and such an ex- 
planation I endeavoured to afford you under three 
distinct heads ; expounding, 1°, What was meant by 
thought ; 2°, What was meant by thought as thought ; 
3°, What was meant by the laws of thought as thought. 

In reference to the first head, I stated that Logic is 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


21 


conversant about thought taken in its stricter signifi- 
cation, that is, about thought considered as the opera- 
tion of the Understanding Proper, or of that faculty 
which I distinguished as the Elaborative or Discur- 
sive, — the Faculty of Relations, or Comparison. I at- 
tempted to make you vaguely apprehend what is the 
essential characteristic of thought, — viz. the compre- 
hension of a thing under a general notion or attribute. 
For such a comprehension enters into every act of the 
discursive faculty, in its different gradations of Con- 
ception, Judgment, and Reasoning. But by saying 
that Logic is conversant about thought proper, Logic 
is not yet discriminated as a peculiar science, for there 
are many sciences, likewise, inter alia , conversant 
about the operations and objects of the Elaborative 
Faculty. There is required a further determination 
of its object-matter. This is done by the limitation, 
that Logic is conversant not merely about thought, 
but about thought as thought. The explanation of 
this constituted the second head of our exposition of 
the object-matter. Thought, I showed, could be 
viewed, by an analytic abstraction, on two sides or 
phases. We could either consider the object thought, 
or the manner of thinking it, in other words, we could 
scientifically distinguish from each other the matter and 
the form of thought. Not that the matter and form have 
any separate existence ; no object being cogitable except 
under some form of thought, and no form of thought 
having any existence in consciousness except some 
object be thought under it. This, however, formed 
no impediment to our analysis of these elements, 
through a mental abstraction. This is in fact only 
one of a thousand similar abstractions w T e are in the 
making ; and if such were impossible, all 


habit of 



LECT. 

ii. 


 


22 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

II. 


human science would be impossible. For example, 
extension is only presented to sense, under some mo- 
dification of colour, and even imagination cannot re- 
present extension except as coloured. We may view 
it in phantasy as black or white, as translucent or 
opaque ; but represent it we cannot, except either 
under some positive variety of light, or under the nega- 
tion of light, which is darkness. But, psychologically 
considered, darkness or blackness is as much a colour, 
that is, a positive sensation, as whiteness or redness ; 
and thus we cannot image to ourselves aught extended, 
not even space itself, out of relation to colour. But 
is this inability even to imagine extension, apart from 
some colour, any hindrance to our considering it 
scientifically apart from all colour 1 Not in the small- 
est ; nor do Mathematics and the other sciences find 
any difficulty in treating of extension, without even a 
single reference to this condition of its actual mani- 
festation. The case of Logic is precisely the same. 
Logic considers the form apart from the matter of 
thought ; and it is able to do this without any trouble, 
for though the form is only an actual phenomenon 
when applied to some matter, — object, — yet, as it is not 
necessarily astricted to any object, we can always 
consider it abstract from all objects ; in other words, 
from all matter. For as the mathematician, who can- 
not construct his diagrams, either to sense or to ima- 
gination, apart from some particular colour, is still 
able to consider the properties of extension apart from 
all colour ; so the logician, though he cannot concretely 
represent the forms of thought except in examples of 
some particular matter, is still able to consider the 
properties of these forms apart from all matter. The 
possibility being thus apparent of a consideration of 


Digitized by GoogI 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


23 


the form abstractly from the matter of thought, I lect. 

showed you that such an abstraction was necessary. 

The objects (the matter) of thought are infinite ; no 
one science can embrace them all, and, therefore, to 
suppose Logic conversant about the matter of thought 
in general, is to say that Logic is another name for the 
encyclopaedia, — the omnescibile , — of human knowledge. 

The absurdity of this supposition is apparent. But if 
it be impossible for Logic to treat of all the objects of 
thought, it cannot be supposed that it treats of any ; 
for no reason can be given why it should limit its 
consideration to some, to the exclusion of others. As 
Logic cannot, therefore, possibly include all objects, 
and as it cannot possibly be shown why it should 
include only some, it follows that it must exclude 
from its domain the consideration of the matter of 
thought altogether ; and as, apart from the matter of 
thought, there only remains the form, it follows that 
Logic, as a special science of thought, must be viewed 
as conversant exclusively about the form of thought. 

But the limitation of the object-matter of Logic to c. The Laws 
the form of thought, (and the expression form of « Thought. 
thought is convertible with the expression thought as 
thought ), is not yet enough to discriminate its province 
from that of other sciences ; for Psychology, or the 
Empirical Science of Mind, is, likewise, among the 
other mental phenomena, conversant about the phe- 
nomena of formal thought. A still further limitation 
is, therefore, requisite ; and this is given in saying, 
that Logic is the science not merely of Thought as 
Thought, but of the Laws of Thought as Thought. It 
is this determination which affords the proximate and 
peculiar difference of Logic, in contradistinction from 
all other sciences ; and the explanation of its meaning 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


24 

lf.ct. constituted the third head of illustration, which the 
— — 1 — object-matter in the definition demanded. 

The pluono- The phenomena of the formal, or subjective phases 
formal* of thought, are of two kinds. They are either such as 
of'uvo kimu are contingent, that is, such as may or may not .appear ; 
gout »nd or they are such as are necessary, that is, such as can- 
™y- not but appear. These two classes of phenomena are, 
however, only manifested in conjunction ; they are 
not discriminated in the actual operations of thought ; 
and it requires a speculative analysis to separate them 
into their several classes. In so far as these pheno- 
mena are considered merely as phenomena, that is, in 
so far as philosophy is merely observant of them as 
manifestations in general, they belong to the science 
of Empirical or Historical Psychology. But when 
philosophy, by a reflective abstraction, analyses the 
necessary from the contingent forms of thought, there 
results a science, which is distinguished from all others 
by taking for its object-matter the former of these 
classes ; and this science is Logic. Logic, therefore, 
is at last fully and finally defined as the science of 
the necessary forms of thought. Here terminated 
our last Lecture. But though full and final, this 
definition is not explicit ; and it still remains to evolve 
it into a more precise expression. 

Now when we say that Logic is the science of the 
necessary forms of thought, what does the quality of 
necessity here imply 1 

Form of “In the first place, it is evident that in so far as a 
Four con- form of thought is necessary, this form must be deter- 
it* necessity. mined or necessitated by the nature of the thinking 
mined by subject itself ; for if it were determined by anything 
of Uio u external to the mind, then would it not be a necessary 
but a merely contingent determination. The first con- 


Digitized by GoogI 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


25 


dition, therefore, of the necessity of a form of thought 
is, that it is subjectively, not objectively, determined. 

“ In the second place, if a form of thought be subjec- 
tively necessary, it must be original and not acquired. 
For if it were acquired, there must have been a time 
when it did not exist ; but if it did ever actually not 
exist, we must be able at least to conceive the possi- 
bility of its not existing now. But if we are so able, 
then is the form not necessary ; for the criterion of a 
contingent cognition is, that we can represent to our- 
selves the possibility of its non-existence. The second 
condition, therefore, of the necessity of a form of 
thought is, that it is original, and not acquired. 

“ In the third place, if a form of thought be neces- 
sary and original, it must be universal ; that is, it 
cannot be that it necessitates on some occasions, and 
does not necessitate on others. For if it did not ne- 
cessitate universally, then would its necessitation be 
contingent, and it would consequently not be an ori- 
ginal and necessary principle of mind. The third 
condition, therefore, of the necessity of a form of 
thought is, that it is universal. 

“ In the fourth place, if a form of thought be neces- 
sary and universal, it must be a law ; for a law is 
that which applies to all cases without exception, and 
from which a deviation is ever, and everywhere, im- 
possible, or, at least, unallowed. The fourth and last 
condition, therefore, of the necessity of a form of 
thought is, that it is a law.”“ This last condition, like- 
wise, enables us to give the most explicit enunciation 
of the object-matter of Logic, in saying that Logic is 
the science of the Laws of Thought as Thought, or the 
science of the Formal Laws of Thought, or the science 

a Esscr, Logik, § 6, pp. 9. 10, with a few original interpolations. — E d. 


LECT. 
I L 


2. Original. 


3.UnivcrsaL 


4. A law. 


The Object- 
matter of 
Logic ex- 
plicitly 
enounced. 


 



2G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.cr. of the Laws of the Form of Thought ; for all these 

— are merely various expressions of the same thing. 

Qom wi Before proceeding further, it may be proper to take 
retrospect a very general retrospect of the views that have pre- 
reptni to vailed in regard to the object and domain of Logic, 
¦»<* 'Lmiin from the era when the science received its first grand 

of Logic. , . 0 . 

and distinctive development from the genius of Aris- 
totle to the present time. 

Merit of tho I may say, in general, that the view which I have 
view of now presented to you of the object and domain of 

Logic, is the one which concentrates, corrects, and 
completes the views which have been generally held 
by logicians of the peculiar province of their science. 
It is the one towards which they all gravitate. 

Aristotlo. It is unfortunate, that by far the greater number of 
the logical writings of Aristotle have perished, and 
that those which remain to us exhibit only his views 
of the science considered in its parts, or in certain 
special relations. None of the treatises which are now 
collected in the Organon ,“ considers the science from 
a central point ; and we do not even possess a general 
definition of Logic by its illustrious founder. It would, 
therefore, be unjust to the mighty master, if, as has 
usually been done, we estimated his conception of the 
science only by the partial views contained in the 
fragmentary or special treatises which have chanced 
to float ashore from the general wreck of his logical 
writings. These by themselves are certainly enough 
to place the Stagirite high above comparison with 
any subsequent logician ; but still if he has done so 
much in the half-dozen treatises that still remain, what 
may we not conceive him to have accomplished in the 
forty which are recorded and seem to have been lost 1 
It is, therefore, not to be attributed to Aristotle, that sub- 

a See below, p. 34. — Ei>. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


27 


sequent logicians, mistaking his surviving treatises of a lf.ct. 

logical nature, — few in number and written, in general, 1 — 

not in exposition of the pure science, but only of the sci- 
ence in certain modified applications, — for a systematic 
body of logical doctrine, should have allowed his views of 
its partial relations to influence their conceptions of the 
science absolutely and as a whole. By this influence 
of the Aristotelic treatises, we may explain the sin- 
gular circumstance, that, while many, indeed most, of 
the subsequent logicians speculatively held the sound- 
est views in regard to the proper object and end of 
Logic, few or none of them have attempted by these 
views to purify the science of those extraneous doc- 
trines, to which the authority of Aristotle seemed to 
have given a right of occupancy within its domain. I Greek a ru- 
sh all not attempt to show you, in extenso, how correct, and Latin 
in general, were the notions entertained by the Greek 8chooln,cn - 
Aristotelians, and even by the Latin schoolmen, for 
this would require an explanation of the signification 
of the terms in which their opinions were embodied, 
which would lead me into details which the import- 
ance of the matter would hardly warrant. I shall 
only say, in general, that, in their multifarious contro- 
versies under this head, the diversity of their opinions 
on subordinate points is not more remarkable than 
their unanimity on principal. Logic they all discri- 
minated as a science of the form and not of the matter 
of thought. 0 Those of the schoolmen who held the 
object of Logic to be things in general, held this, how- 
ever, under the qualification that things in genera] 
were not immediately and in themselves considered 

a “ Logicus BO las considered formas rella, De Natura Logical, lib. i. cap. 1 9 ; 
intentionum communes.’ 1 Albertos Smiglcciua, Logica, Oiap. ii. qu. 1 j Ca- 
Magnus, In Dc Anima, L. I. trac. i. merarius, Dirjiututiunca Philosophic^, 
c. 8. For various scholastic theories on Pars. i. qu. 1, p. 2, cl uq. Compare 
the object-matter of Logic, see Seotus, Liicustions, p. 1 38 .— Ed. 

Super Unit. Porphgrii, Qu. iii. ; Zuba- 


 



28 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

IL 


Leibnitio- 
Woltum and 
Kantian 
Schools. 


by the logician, but only as they stood under the 
general forms imposed on them by the intellect, (“ qua- 
tenus secundis intentionibus substabant”), — a mode of 
speaking which is only a periphrasis of our assertion, 
that Logic is conversant about the forms of thought . 0 
The other schoolmen, again, who maintained that the 
object of Logic was thought in its processes of simple 
apprehension, judgment, and reasoning, (three, two, 
or one), carefully explained that these operations were 
not in their own nature proposed to the logician, for 
as such they belonged to Animastic, as they called it, 
or Psychology, but only in so far as they were diri- 
gible or subject to laws, — a statement which is only a 
less simple expression of the fact, that Logic is the 
science of the laws of thought.^ Finally, those school- 
men who held that the object-matter of Logic was 
found in second notions as applied to first, only meant 
to say that Logic was conversant with conceptions, 
judgments and reasonings, not in themselves but only 
as regulators of thought, 7 — a statement which merely 
varies and perplexes the expression, that the object of 
Logic is the formal laws of thought. 

The same views, various in appearance, but, when 
analysed, essentially the same, and essentially correct, 
may be traced through the Leibnitio-Wolfian school 
into the Kantian ; so that, while it must be owned 
that they were never adequately carried out into 


a [G. J. Vossius, Dt Nat. Artium 
sirt Dt Logica, c. iv.] Compare Alex, 
do Ales, In Mctaph. 1. iv. t. 5. “Dia- 
lectic est inventa ad regulandum 
discursum intellectu* et rationis ; ideo 
quaxlam secund® intentions invents 
aunt ad rcgulandum discursum, de qui- 
bus proprie eet Logica.” See also Zaba- 
rella and CamerariuB as above. — Ed. 

/3 [Camcrarius, Disp. Phil., P. i. 


qu. 1, p. 3. — Ed.] Schuler, Philoso - 
phut, p. 307, [L. v., Logica, Exer. i., ed. 
Hagae Comitis, 1763. — Ed.] D’Abra 
do Raconia, [Tractatio Totius Philo - 
sophifT, Pracludia Logica, Poet., c. i. 
p. 48, ed. Parisiia, 1640. — Ed.] 

y See Zabarella and Camcrarius, as 
above. — Ed. [Compare Poncius, Cur- 
sum Philosophies, Disp. L qu. ult., p. 
48, 2d ed. Paris, 1649.] 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


29 


practical application, it cannot be denied that they lf.ct. 
were theoretically not unsound. — 

The country in which, perhaps, the nature of Logic iw»n,— 
has been most completely and generally misunder- 
stood, is Great Britain. Bacon wholly misconceived 
its character in certain respects ; but his errors are 
insignificant, when compared with the total misappre- 
hension of its nature by Locke. The character of 
these mistakes I shall have occasion to illustrate in 
the sequel ; at present I need only say, that, while 
those who, till lately, attempted to write on Logic in 
the English language were otherwise wholly incompe- 
tent to the task, they, at the same time, either shared 
the misconceptions of its nature with Locke, or only 
contributed, by their own hapless attempts, to justify 
the prejudices prevalent against the science which 
they professed to cultivate and improve. 

It would be unjust to confound with other attempts whueiy,— 
of our countrymen in logical science the work of Dr fhUZZLr of 
Whately. The author, if not endowed with any high 
talent for philosophical speculation, possesses at least a 
sound and vigorous understanding. He unfortunately, 
however, wrote his Elements of Logic in singular un- 
acquaintance with all that had been written on the 
science in ancient and in modem times, with the 
exception apparently of two works of two Oxford 
logicians, — the Institutio of Wallis, and the Compen- w»m.. 
dium of Aldrich, — both written above a century ago, Aldrich, 
neither of them rising above a humble mediocrity, even 
at the date of its composition ; and Aldrich, whom 
Whately unfortunately regards as a safe and learned 
guide, had himself written his book in ignorance of 
Aristotle and of all the principal authors on the 
science, — an ignorance manifested by the grossest 


 


30 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. errors in the most elementary parts of the science. 

It is not, therefore, to be wondered at, that the Ele- 
ments of Whately, though the production of an able 
man, are so far behind the advancement of the 
science of which they treat ; that they are deformed 
with numerous and serious errors ; and that the only 
recommendation they possess, is that of being the best 
book on the subject in a language which has absolutely 
no other deserving of notice ! “ 

whatciy's I have now, therefore, to call your attention to Dr 
objoct-mat- Whately ’s account of the object-matter and domain 
ml “of ‘ lo of Logic. “The treatise of Dr Whately,” says his 
ami criti- 11 Vice-Principal and epitomator Dr Hinds, 0 “ displays, 
and it is the only one that has clearly done so, the 
true nature and use of Logic ; so that it may be ap- 
proached, no longer as a dark, curious, and merely 
speculative study, such as one is apt in fancy to class 
with astrology and alchemy.” 

Let us try whether this eulogy be as merited as it 
is unmeasured. 

whately Now Dr Whately cannot truly be said dearly to 
Loirj’ffm display the nature of Logic, because in different pas- 

rent and x % . ' , .. r 

contradict- sages he proposes to it different and contradictory 
matter^ 1 objects ; and he cannot be said to display the true 
nature of Logic, for of these different objects there is 
not one which is the true. 

In several passages, 7 he says that “the process or 
operation of reasoning is alone the appropriate pro- 
vince of Logic.” Now this statement is incorrect in 
two respects. In the first place, it is incorrect, inas- 
much as it limits the object-matter of Logic to that 

a Seo THicuisims, p. 128, second p. viii., Oxford, 1827 . — Ed. 
edition, foot-note. 7 See pp. 1, 13, 140, third edi* 

0 Introduction to Logic , Preface, tion. 


•  


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


31 


part of the Discursive Faculty which is especially lect. 

denominated Reasoning. In this view Logic is made 1 — 

convertible with Syllogistic. This is an old error, 
which has been frequently refuted, and into which 
Whately seems to have been led by his guide Dr 
Wallis. 

In the second place, this statement is incorrect, in- The ojicra- 
asmuch as it makes the process, or, as he also calls soning not 
it, the operation, of reasoning the object-matter of mutter of 
Logic. Now a definition which merely affirms that wEJdy 
Logic is the science which has the process of reason- 
ing for its object, is not a definition of this science at 
all ; it does not contain the differential quality by 
which Logic is discriminated from other sciences ; 
and it does not prevent the most erroneous opinions, 

(it even suggests them), from being taken up in regard 
to its nature. Other sciences, as Psychology and 
Metaphysic, propose for their object, (among the other 
faculties), the operation of reasoning, but this con- 
sidered in its real nature : Logic, on the contrary, 
has the same for its object, but only in its formal 
capacity ; in fact, it has in propriety of speech no- 
thing to do with the process or operation, but is con- 
versant only with its laws. Dr Whately s definition 
is, therefore, not only incompetent, but delusive ; it 
would confound Logic and Psychology and Meta- 
physic, and tend to perpetuate the misconceptions in 
regard to the nature of Logic which have been so 
long prevalent in this country. 

But Dr Whately is not only wrong as measured by whately 
a foreign standard, he is wrong as measured by his ami contru- 
own ; he is himself contradictory. You have just seen 
that, in some places, he makes the operation of reason- ScqLlkT 
ing not only the principal but the adequate object of ^fof i^c. 


32 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

II. 


Tho true 
nature of 
Logic more 
correctly 
understood 
by the 
scholastic 
logicians 
than by 
Whately. 


Logic. Well, in others he makes this total or ade- 
quate object to be language. But as there cannot be 
two adequate objects, and as language and the opera- 
tion of reasoning are not the same, there is, therefore, 
a contradiction. “ In introducing,” he says, “ the 
mention of language previously to the definition of 
logic, I have departed from established practice, in 
order that it may be clearly understood that logic is 
entirely conversant about language ; a truth which 
most writers on the subject, if indeed they were 
fully aware of it themselves, have certainly not taken 
due care to impress on their readers .” 0 And again : 
“ Logic is wholly concerned in the use of language.”^ 

In our last Lecture, I called your attention to the 
ambiguity of the term Xoyo s, in Greek, meaning ambi- 
guously either thought or its expression ; and this 
ambiguity favoured the rise of two counter-opinions 
in regard to the object of logic ; for while it was 
generally and correctly held to be immediately con- 
versant about the internal Xoyos, thought, some, how- 
ever, on the contrary, maintained that it was imme- 
diately conversant about the external Xoyos, language. 
Now, by some unaccountable illusion. Dr Whately, in 
different places, adopts these opposite opinions, and 
enunciates them without a word of explanation, or 
without even a suspicion that they are contradictory 
of each other . 7 

From what I have now said, you may, in some 
degree, be able to judge how far credit is to be ac- 
corded to the assertion, that Dr Whately is the only 
logician who ever clearly displayed the true nature 
and use of Logic. In fact, so far is this assertion from 
the truth, that the object-matter and scope of Logic 

a Page 5 6. 0 Page 74. 7 Besides most vague. — Jotting. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


33 


LECT. 

II. 


was far more correctly understood even by the scho- 
lastic logicians than by Dr Whately ; and I may cau- 
tion you, by the way, that what you may find stated 
in the Elements of the views of the schoolmen touch- 
ing the nature and end of Logic, is in general wrong ; 
in particular, I may notice one most erroneous allega- 
tion, that the schoolmen “ attempted to employ logic 
for the purpose of physical discovery,” 

But if, compared only with the older logicians, 
the assertion of Dr Hinds is found untenable, what 
will it be found, if we compare Whately with the 
logicians of the Kantian and Leibnitian schools, of 
whose writings neither the Archbishop nor his abbre- 
viator seems ever to have heard \ And here I may 
observe, that Great Britain is, I believe, the only 
country of Europe in which books are written by 
respectable authors upon sciences, of the progress of 
which, for above a century, they have never taken 
the trouble to inform themselves. 

The second question, to which in the Introduction to iLThe 
Logic an answer is required, is, — What is the Value or Logic: 
Utility of this science % Before proceeding to a special 
consideration of this question, it may be proper to 
observe in general, that the real utility of Logic has 
been obscured and disparaged by the false utilities 
which have too frequently been arrogated to it ; for 
when Logic was found unable to accomplish what its 
unwise encomiasts had promised, the recoil was natural, 
and as it failed in performing everything, it was lightly 
inferred that it could perform nothing. Both of these 
extremes are equally erroneous. There is that which 
Logic can, and there is that which Logic cannot, per- 
form ; and, therefore, before attempting to show what 
it is that we ought to expect from the study of this 


VOL. i. 


o 


 


34 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

II. 


Utilities 
falsely attri 
butcif to 
Logic. 


As an in- 
strument of 
scientific 
discovery. 


science, it will be proper to show wbat it is that 
we ought not. I shall, therefore, in the first place, 
consider its false utilities, and, in the second, its 
true. 

The attribution of every false utility to Logic has 
arisen from erroneous opinions held in regard to the 
object of the science. So long as it was supposed that 
logic took any cognisance of the matter of thought, — 
so long as it was not distinctly understood that the 
form of thought was the exclusive object of this 
science, and so long as it was not disencumbered of 
its extraneous lumber ; so long must erroneous opin- 
ions have been prevalent as to the nature and com- 
prehension of its end. 

It was accordingly, in the first place, frequently 
supposed that Logic was, in a certain sort, an instru- 
ment of scientific disco very. The title of Organon , — 
instrument , — bestowed on the collection we possess 
of the logical treatises of Aristotle, contributed to this 
error. These treatises, as I observed, are but a few 
of the many writings of the Stagirite on Logic, and 
to him we owe neither the order in which they stand 
arranged, nor the general name under which they are 
now comprehended." In later times, these treatises 
were supposed to contain a complete system of Logic, 
and Logic was viewed as the organ not only of Philo- 
sophy but of the sciences in general. Thus it was that 
Logic obtained not only the name of instrument, or 
instrumental philosophy , but many other high sound- 
ing titles. It was long generally styled the Art of 
arts and Science of sciences. — “ Logica,” says Scotus, 
“est ars artium et scientia scientiarum, qua aperta, 
omnes abac aperiuntur ; et qua clausa, omnes alim 

o See Brandis A ristoteles, seine ala- Nachfohjcr, P. i. p. 1 4 0. Trendelenburg, 
dnnitchcn Zeitycnostcn unci ntichttcn Element a Log. A ristot p. 38 . — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


35 


eland untur ; cum qua quselibet, sine qua nulla.” a In lect. 

modern times, we have systems of this science under 1 — 

the titles of Via ad VentatemP — Cynosura Veritatis y 
— Caput et Apex Philosophies 3 — Heuristica , sive In - 
troductio ad Artem Inveniendi , c &c. But it was not As the cor- 
only viewed as an instrument of discovery, it was intellectual 

* vices* 

likewise held to be the infallible corrector of our 


intellectual vices, the invigorator of our intellectual 
imbecility. Hence some entitled their Logics, — The 
Medicine of the Mind f The Art of Thinking? The 
Lighthouse of the Intellect The Science teaching the 
Right Use of Reason ,* &c. &c. Now in all this there 
is a mixture of truth and error. To a certain extent, and 


in certain points of view, Logic is the organ of philo- 
sophy, the criterion of truth, and the corrector of 
error, and in others it is not. 

In reference to the dispute whether logic may with in what rc- 

. i nil* i ° _ spoct Logic 

propriety be called the instrument, the orqanon of i» an instru- 

1 . , . incut of the 

the other sciences, the question may be at once solved sciences, 
by a distinction. One science may be styled the 
instrument of another, either in a material or in a 
formal point of view. In the former point of view, 
one science is the organ of another when one science 


a Mauritii Expositio Quatstionum, 
Doctori8 Subtilis in quinque Univcr- 
salia Porphyrii, Quacst. i. (Scoti Opera, 
Lugd., 1639, tom. i. p. 434). Mauri- 
tius refers to St Augustin as his 
authority for the above quotation. It 
slightly resembles a passage in the De 
Ordine , 1. ii. c. 13 . — Ed. 

$ Guudling, Viaad VeritatemMora- 
lem , Hnhe, 1713. Dories, Via ad 
Veritatem, Jenae, 1764 (*2d edit) — E d. 

7 P. Laurembergius, Cy nosum Rome 
Mentis 8. Loyica, Rostoch, 1633. R. 
Loenus, Cynosura JRationis, Arnhem, 
1667. — Ed. 

S See Krug, Loyih, § 9, p. 23, from 
whom several of the above definitions 
were probably taken.— Ed. 


« Gunner, A rs Heuristica Intellec- 
tualis , Lipsuc, 1756. Trattato di 
Messer Sebastiano Erizzo, dell * Istru- 
me.nto et Via Jnrentrice de yli antichi 
nelle identic, Venice, 1554 . — Ed. 

( Tschirnhausen, Medicina Mentis, 
sive Artis Inveniendi Prcccepta Gene- 
ral ia, Amst. 1687. Lange, Medicina 
Mentis, llalaa, 1703. — Ed. 

t? L'A rtde Penser, commonly known 
as the Port Royal Logic. Several 
other works have appeared under the 
same title. — E d. 

6 Grosserus, Phams intellect us, sive 
Loyica Electiva, Lips., 1697 . — Ed. 

i Watts, Jjoyic, or the lliyht Use of 
Reason . — Ed. 


36 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

n. 


Logic not 
properly an 
art of dis- 
cover)’. 


determines for another its contents or objects. Thus 
Mathematics may be called the material instru- 
ment of the various branches of physical science ; 
Philology, — or study of the languages, Latin, Greek, 
Hebrew, Chaldee, &c., with a knowledge of their 
relative history, — constitutes a material instrument to 
Christian Theology ; and the jurist, in like manner, 
finds a material instrument in a knowledge of the 
history of the country whose laws he expounds.® Thus 
also Physiology, in a material point of view, is the 
organon of Medicine ; Aristotle has indeed well said 
that medicine begins where the philosophy of nature 
leaves off/ In the latter point of view, one science 
is the organon of another, when one science determines 
the scientific form of another. Now, as it is gene- 
rally admitted that Logic stands in this relation to 
the other sciences, as it appertains to Logic to con- 
sider the general doctrine of Method and of systematic 
construction, in this respect Logic may be properly 
allowed to be to the sciences an instrument, but only 
a formal instrument . 7 

In regard to the other titles of honour, Logic can- 
not with propriety be denominated a [Heuretic or] 
Art of Discovery. “ For discovery or invention is not 
to be taught by rules, but is either the free act of an 
original genius, or the consequence of a lucky accident, 
which cither conducts the finder to something un- 
known, or gives him the impulse to seek it out. Logic 
can at best only analytically teach how to discover, 
that is, by the development and dismemberment of 
what is already discovered. By this process there 

a See Genovesi, p. 41, [Elcmcntorum y Krug, Logih, § 9, p. 23 ; Cf. Plat- 
Artis-Logico-Criticce Libri V., 1. i. c. ner, Philosvphisckc A phorUmen, Part 
iii. — E d.] i. p. 23, ed. 1793.— Ed. 

/3 Lie Xcnsu ct Sensili, c. i. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


37 


is nothing new evolved, and our knowledge is not lect. 

amplified ; all that is accomplished is a clearer and — 

distincter comprehension of the old ; — our knowledge 
is purified and systematised.” a It is well observed by 
Antonius, in Cicero : — “ Nullum est praeceptum in hac 
arte quomodo vcrum inveniatur, sed tantum est, quo- 
modo judicetur .”/ 3 Logic is thus not creative ; it is 
only plastic, only formative, in relation to our know- 
ledge. 


Again, “ Logic cannot with propriety be styled the in «hnt 
medicine of the mind, at least without some qualify- can l»c 
ing adjective, to show that the only remedy it can medicine of 

1 • . rt i i i the mind. 

apply is to our tormal errors, while our material errors 
lie beyond its reach. This is evident. Logic is the 
science of the formal laws of thought. But we can- 
not, in limiting our consideration to the laws of formal 
thinking, investigate the contents, — the matter of our 
thought. Logic can, therefore, only propose to purge 
the understanding of those errors which lie in the 
confusion and perplexities of an inconsequent think- 
ing. This, however, it must be confessed, is no radi- 
cal cure, but merely a purification of the understand- 
ing. In this respect, however, and to this extent, 

Logic may justly pretend to be the medicine of the 
mind, and may, therefore, in a formal relation, be 
styled, as by some logicians it has in fact been, Ccttli - 
articon intellectus . 

“ By these observations the value of Logic is not 
depreciated ; they only prepare us to form an esti- 
mate of its real amount. Precisely, in fact, as too 
much was promised and expected from this study, did 
it lose in credit and esteem.” 7 


o Krug, Logik, § 9, p. 24. — Ed. Cf. y Krug, Logik, § 9, pp. 24-6. — Ed. 
[Richter, Logik, p. 83 et teq.] Cf. [Richter, Logik , p. 85.] 

6 De Oratore, ii. 38 . — Ed. 


38 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

III. 


Recapitula- 

tion. 


LECTURE III. 

INTRODUCTION. 

LOGIC — II. ITS UTILITY. — III. ITS DIVISIONS — SUBJEC- 
TIVE AND OBJECTIVE — GENERAL AND SPECIAL. 

The last Lecture was occupied with the consideration 
of the latter part of the introductory question, — What 
is Logic 1 and with that of the first part of the second, 
— What is its Utility 1 — In the Lecture preceding the 
last, I had given the definition of Logic, as the science 
of the laws of thought as thought, and, taking the 
several parts of this definition, had articulately ex- 
plained, 1°, What was the meaning and history of the 
w r ord Logic ; 2°, What was the import of the term 
science , the genus of Logic ; and, 3°, What was signi- 
fied by laws of thought as thought, the object-matter 
of Logic. This last I had considered under three heads, 
explaining, 1°, What is meant by thought ; 2°, What is 
meant by thought as thought ; and, 3°, What is meant 
by laws of thought as thought. It was under the last 
of these heads that the last Lecture commenced. I 
had, in the preceding, shown that the form of thought 
comprises two kinds of phenomena, given always in 
conjunction, but that we are able by abstraction and 
analysis to discriminate them from each other. The 
one of these classes comprehends what is contingent, 
the other what is necessary, in the manifestations of 
thought. The necessary element is the peculiar and 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


39 


exclusive object of Logic ; whereas the phenomena of 
thought and of mind in general are indiscriminately 
proposed to Psychology. Logic, therefore, I said, is 
distinguished from the other philosophical sciences by 
its definition, as the science of the necessary form of 
thought. This, however, though a full and final de- 
finition, is capable of a still more explicit enunciation; 
and I showed how we are entitled to convert the term 
necessary into the term laws, and, in doing so, I took 
the opportunity of explaining how, the necessity of a 
mental element being given, there is also implicitly 
given the four conditions, 1°, That it is subjective ; 
2°, That it is original ; 3°, That it is universal ; and, 
4°, That it is a law. The full and explicit definition of 
Logic, therefore, is, — the science of the Laws of Thought 
as Thought ; or, the science of the Laws of the Form 
of Thought ; or, the science of the Formal Laws of 
Thought : — these being only three various expressions 
of what is really the same. 

Logic being thus defined, I gave a brief and gene- 
ral retrospect of the history of opinion in regard to 
the proper object and domain of Logic, and showed 
how, though most logicians had taken speculatively 
and in general, a very correct view of the naturo of 
their science, they had not carried this view out into 
application, by excluding from the sphere of Pure or 
Abstract Logic all not strictly relative to the form 
of thought, but had allowed many doctrines relative 
merely to the matter of thought to complicate and to 
deform the science. 

I then called attention to the opinions of the author 
whom I recommend to your attention, and showed 
that Dr Whately, in his statements relative to the 
object-matter of Logic, is vague and obscure, errone- 


LKCT. 

in. 


 



40 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

III. 


Observa- 
tions inter- 
posed rela- 
tive to tho 
question, — 
What is 
Logic ? 


Tho terms 

Conception 
and C wi- 
cejit. 


ous and self-contradictory ; and that so far from being 
entitled to the praise of having been the only logician 
who has clearly displayed the true nature of the 
science, on the contrary, in the exposition of this 
nature, he is far inferior, not only in perspicuity and 
precision, but in truth, to the logicians of almost 
every age and country except our own. 

And here, taking a view of what we have already 
established, I would interpolate some observations 
which I ought, in my last Lecture, to have made, 
before leaving the consideration of the first question, 
— viz. What is Logic ? Logic, we have seen, is ex- 
clusively conversant about thought, — about thought 
considered strictly as the operation of Comparison or 
the faculty of Relations ; and thought, in this re- 
stricted signification, is the cognition of any mental 
object by another in which it is considered as in- 
cluded, — in other words, thought is the knowledge of 
things under conceptions. By the way, I would here 
pause to make an observation upon the word concep- 
tion , and to prepare you for the employment of a 
term which I mean hereafter to adopt. You are 
aware, from what I have already said, that I do not 
use conception in the signification in which it is 
applied by Mr Stewart. He usurps it in a very 
limited meaning, in a meaning which is peculiar to 
himself, — viz. for the simple and unmodified repre- 
sentation of an object presented in Perception.® Reid, 
again, vacillates in the signification he attaches to 
this term, — using it sometimes as a synonym for 
Imagination, sometimes as comprehending not only 
Imagination, but Understanding and the object of 
Understanding/ It is in the latter relation alone that 


o See Lectures on Metaphysics , vol. ii. lect. xxxiii. p. 261 . — Ed. 


£ Ibid. 


41 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

I ever employ it, and this is its correct and genuine lect. 

signification, whether we regard the derivation of the — 

word, or its general use by philosophers. Conception , Employment 
in English, is equivalent to conceptio and conceptus tennT° 
in Latin, and these terms, by the best philosophers 
and the most extensive schools, have been employed 
as synonymous for notion (notio) y the act or object 
of the Understanding Proper or Faculty of Relations. 

So far, therefore, you are sufficiently prepared not to 
attribute to the word conception , when you hear it 
from me, the meaning which it bears in the philoso- 
phical writings with which you are most likely to be 
familiar. What is the precise meaning of the term 
will be soon fully explained in its proper place, when 
we commence the treatment of Logic itself. But what 
I principally pause at present to say is, — that, for the 
sake of perspicuity, I think it necessary, in reference 
to this word, to make the following distinction. The 
term conception , like perception , imagination , etc., 
means two things, or rather the same thing in two 
different relations, — relations, however, which it is of 
great importance to distinguish, and to mark the dis- 
tinction by the employment of distinct words. Con- 
ception means both the act of conceiving, and the 
object conceived ; as perception , both the act of per- 
ceiving and the thing perceived ; imagination , both 
the act of imagining and what is imagined. Now 
this is a source of great vagueness in our philoso- 
phical discussions ; have we no means of avoiding this 
inconvenience 1 I think we have ; and that too with- 
. out committing any violence upon language. I would 
propose the following distinction. For the act of 
conceiving, the term conception should be employed, 
and that exclusively ; while for the object of con cep- 


 


42 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

III. 


tion, or that which is conceived, the term concept 
should be used.“ Concept is the English of the Latin 
conceptum, — id quod conceptum est, — and had it no 
vested right as an actual denizen of the language, it 
has good warrant for its naturalisation. There are a 
thousand words in English formed on precisely the 
same analogy, as precept, digest, etc. etc. But we 
have no occasion to appeal to analogy. The term 
concept was in common use among the older philoso- 
phical writers in English/ though, like many other 
valuable expressions of these authors, it has been over- 
looked by our English lexicographers. I may add 
that nearly the same fortune has befallen the term in 
French. Concept was in ordinary use by the old 
French philosophers, but had latterly waxed obsolete. 
It has, however, I see, been reinstated in its rights 
since the reawakening of philosophy in France ; and, 
in particular, it is now employed in that language 
in translating from the German the term Begriff. I 
shall, therefore, make no scruple in using the expres- 
sion concept for the object of conception, and con- 
ception I shall exclusively employ to designate the 
act of conceiving. Whether it might not, in like 
manner, be proper to introduce the term percept 
for the object of perception, I shall not at present 
inquire. 

But to return from this digression. Logic, we have 
seen, is exclusively conversant about thought strictly 


a See Biel [/» Sent., 1. i. diet. 
2, qu. 8; L ii. dist. 3, qu. 2. By 
Occam and most others, concept ut is 
used os 44 id quod terminat actum in- 
telligendi." See Occam, In Sent., 1. 
i. d. 2, q. 8 ; and Biel, 1. i. d. 3, q. 5.] 
/3 See Zachary Colce, A rt of Logick. 
London 1654, pp. 11, 101, et alibi ; 


Gideon Harvey, Archcloyia Ph i lotto- 
phica Nora, or New Principle* of Phi- 
losophy. Loml. 1003, P. i., b. ii., c. 4, 
p. 22. For several authorities for the 
use of this term among the older 
English logicians, see Baynes, New 
Analytic of Logical Forms, pp. 5, 0, 
note. — E d. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


43 


so denominated, and thought proper, we have seen, lect. 

is the cognition of one object of thought by another, 

in or under which it is mentally included, — in other u”*«n 
words, thought is the knowledge of a thing through a M«hc- 
concept or general notion, or of one notion through 
another. In thought, all that we think about is con- 
sidered either as something containing, or as something 
contained, — in other words, every process of thought 
is only a cognition of the necessary relations of our 
concepts. This being the case, it need not move our 
wonder, that Logic, within its proper sphere, is of 
such irrefragable certainty, that, in the midst of all the 
revolutions of philosophical doctrines, it has stood not 
only unshattered but unshaken. In this respect, Logic 
and Mathematics stand alone among the sciences, 
and their peculiar certainty flows from the same source. 

Both are conversant about the relations of certain a 
'priori forms of intelligence : — Mathematics about the 
necessary forms of Imagination ; Logic about the 
necessary forms of Understanding ; Mathematics 
about the relations of our representations of objects, 
as out of each other in space and time ; Logic about 
the relations of our concepts of objects, as in or under 
each other, that is, as, in different relations, respectively 
containing and contained. Both are thus demonstra- 
tive or absolutely certain sciences only as each de- 
velops what is given, — what is given as necessary, in 
the mind itself. The laws of Logic are grounded on 
the mere possibility of a knowledge through the con- 
cepts of the Understanding, and through these we 
know only by comprehending the many under the 
one. Concerning the nature of the objects delivered 
by the Subsidiary Faculties to the Elaborative, Logic 
pronounces nothing, but restricts its consideration to 


 



44 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. the laws according to which their agreement or dis- 
agreement is affirmed. 0 

Logic i» the It is of itself manifest, that every science must obey 

cS£hi the laws of Logic. If it does not, — such pretended 
science is not founded on reflection, and is only an 
irrational absurdity. All inference, evolution, con- 
catenation, is conducted on logical principles, — prin- 
ciples which are ever valid, ever imperative, ever the 
same. But an extension of any science through 
Logic is absolutely impossible ; for by conforming to 
logical canons we acquire no knowledge, — receive 
nothing new, but are only enabled to render what is 
already obtained more intelligible, by analysis and 
arrangement. Logic is only the negative condition 
of truth. £ To attempt by a mere logical knowledge 
to amplify a science, is an absurdity as great as if we 
should attempt by a knowledge of the grammatical 
laws of a language to discover what was written in 
this language, without a perusal of the several writ- 
ings themselves. But though Logic cannot extend, 
cannot amplify a science by the discovery of new 
facts, it is not to be supposed that it does not contri- 
bute to the progress of science. The progress of the 
sciences consists not merely in the accumulation of 
new matter, but likewise in the detection of the rela- 
tions subsisting among the materials accumulated ; 
and the reflective abstraction by which this is effected, 
must not only follow the laws of Logic, but is most 
powerfully cultivated by the habits of logical study. 
In these intercalary observations I have, however, in- 
sensibly encroached upon the second question, — What 
is the Utility of Logic 1 On this question I now dic- 
tate the following paragraph : — 

a Cf. Bnchmann, Logik , Einleitung, @ [Ancillon. Essais Philoeophiquet, 

§ 20. Edit. 1S28. — Ed. t. ii. p. 291.] 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


45 


If IV. As the rules of Logic do not regard the lect. 

matter but only the form of thought, the Utility of — 

Logic must, in like manner, be viewed as limited u^iu/of 
to its influence on our manner of thinking, and Lusic ' 
not sought for in any effect it can exert upon 
what we think about. It is, therefore, in the 
first place, not to be considered useful as a 
Material Instrument, that is, as a mean of extend- 
ing our knowledge by the discovery of new 
truths ; but merely as a Formal Instrument, that 
is, as a mean by which knowledge, already ac- 
quired, may be methodised into the form accom- 
modated to the conditions of our understanding. 

In the second place, it is not to be regarded as a 
Medicine of the mind to the extent of remedying 
the various errors which originate in the nature 
of the objects of our knowledge, but merely to 
the extent of purging the mind of those errors 
which arise from inconsequence and confusion in 
thinking .* 1 

Logic, however, is still of eminent utility, not only 
as presenting to us the most interesting object of 
contemplation in the mechanism of human thought, 
but as teaching how, in many relations, to discriminate 
truth from error, and how to methodise our knowledge 
into system ; while, at the same time, in turning the 
mind upon itself, it affords to our higher faculties one 
of their most invigorating exercises. Another utility 
is, that Logic alone affords us the means requisite to 
accomplish a rational criticism, and to communicate 
its results. 

What is now summarily stated in the preceding 
paragraph, I illustrated, in my last Lecture, in detail, — 

o Cf. Krug, Logit, $ 9. - Ed. 


 



4 G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. in so far as it was requisite to disencumber the real 

III 1 

1 — value of our science from those false utilities which, 

in place of enhancing its worth in the opinion of the 
world, have, in fact, mainly contributed to reduce the 
common estimate of its importance far beneath the 
truth. I now proceed to terminate what I have to 
say under this head by a few words, in exposition of 
what renders the cultivation of Logic, — of genuine 
logic, one of the most important and profitable of our 
studies. 

Logic gives “ Admitting, therefore, that this science teaches no- 
tain extent, thing new, — that it neither extends the boundaries of 
over our knowledge, nor unfolds the mysteries which lie be- 
thougbts. y 0nc | com p ass 0 f the reflective intellect, — and that 

it only investigates the immutable law’s to w r hich the 
mind in thinking is subjected, still, inasmuch as it 
develops the application of these laws, it bestows on 
us, to a certain extent, a dominion over our thoughts 
themselves. And is it nothing to watch the secret 
workshop in w r hich nature fabricates cognitions and 
thoughts, and to penetrate into the sanctuary of self- 
consciousness, to the end that, having learnt to know 
ourselves, we may be qualified rightly to understand 
all else % Is it nothing to seize the helm of thought, 
and to be able to turn it at our will % For, through a 
research into the laws of thinking, Logic gives us, in 
a certain sort, a possession of the thoughts themselves. 
It is true, indeed, that the mind of man is, like the 
universe of matter, governed by eternal laws, and 
follows, even without consciousness, the invariable 
canons of its nature. But to know and understand 
itself, and out of the boundless chaos of phaenomena 
presented to the senses to form concepts, through con- 
cepts to reduce that chaos to harmony and arrange- 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


47 


ment, and thus to establish the dominion of intelli- 
gence over the universe of existence, — it is this alone 
which constitutes man’s grand and distinctive pre- 
eminence.” “ “ Man,” says the great Pascal, “ is but a 
reed, — the very frailest in nature ; but he is a reed 
that thinks. It needs not that the whole universe 
should arm to crush him. He dies from an exhalation, 
from a drop of water. But should the universe con- 
spire to crush him, man would still be nobler than 
that by which he falls ; for he knows that he dies ; 
and of the victory which the universe has over him, 
the universe knows nothing. Thus our whole dignity 

consists in thought Let us labour, 

then, to think aright ; this is the foundation of 
morality.” P 

In the world of sense, illusive appearances hover 
around us like evil spirits ; unreal dreams mingle 
themselves with real knowledge ; the accustomed 
assumes the character of certainty ; and the associa- 
tions of thought are mistaken for the connections of 
existence. We thus require a criterion to discriminate 
truth from error ; and this criterion is, in part at least, 
supplied to us by Logic. Logic teaches us to analyse 
the concrete masses of our knowledge into its elements, 
and thus gives us a clear and distinct apprehension of 
its parts, it teaches us to think consistently and with 
method, and it teaches us how to build up our accu- 
mulated knowledge into a firm and harmonious edifice . 7 
“ The study of logic is as necessary for correct thinking, 
as the study of grammar is for correct speaking ; were 
it not otherwise and in itself an interesting study to 

o [Heinrich Richter], [ Ubcr den p. 84, ed. Fatig&re). Compare Discua- 
Gcgenstand uvd den Umfang der Logik, tions f p. 311 . — Ed. 
pp. 3, 4, Leipeic, 1825 . — Ed.] y Cf. Richter, Logik, pp. 5, 6, 12. — 

$ Pen tin, P. i. art. iv. § fi, (vol. ii. Ed. 


LF.CT. 

III. 


Supplies in 
part the cri- 
terion of 
truth from 
error. 


 



48 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

III. 


Invigorates 
the Under- 
standing. 


Par. V. 
Utility of 
Logic, — 
as affording 
a scientific 
nomencla- 
ture. 


Illustration, 


investigate the mechanism of the human intellect in 
the marvellous processes of thought. They, at least, 
who are familiar with this mechanism, are less exposed 
to the covert fallacies which so easily delude those 
unaccustomed to an analysis of these processes.” a 

But it is not only by affording knowledge and skill 
that Logic is thus useful ; it is perhaps equally condu- 
cive to the same end by bestowing power. The retor- 
sion of thought upon itself, — the thinking of thought, — 
is a vigorous effort, and, consequently, an invigorating 
exercise of the Understanding, and as the under- 
standing is the instrument of all scientific, of all 
philosophical, speculation, Logic, by pre-eminently cul- 
tivating the understanding, in this respect likewise 
vindicates its ancient title to be viewed as the best 
preparatory discipline for Philosophy and the sciences 
at large. 

There is, however, one utility which, though of a 
subordinate kind, I must not omit, though I do not 
remember to have seen it insisted on by any logical „ 
writer. In reference to this, I give you the following 
paragraph : — 

1 V. But Logic is further useful as affording a 
Nomenclature of the laws by which legitimate 
thinking is governed, and of the violation of these 
laws, through which thought becomes vicious or 
null. 

It is said, in Hudibras/ — 

“ That all a Rhetorician's rules 
Serve only but to name his tools 

and it may be safely confessed that this is one of the 
principal utilities of Rhetoric. A mere knowledge of 

a Krug, Logik, § 9, p. 20.— En. flP. L Cant. i. 89 . — Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


49 


the rules of Rhetoric can no more enable us to com- lect. 

pose well, than a mere knowledge of the rules of Logic 1 — 

can enable us to think well. There is required from 
nature in both the faculty ; but this faculty must, in 
both departments, be cultivated by an assiduous and 
also a well-directed exercise, that is, in the one, the 
powers of Comparison must be exercised according to 
the rules of a sound Rhetoric, in the other, according 
to the rales of a sound Logic. In so far, therefore, 
the utility of either science is something more than a 
mere naming of their tools. But the naming of their impm-unco 
tools, though in itself of little value, is valuable as the fic nomcn- 
condition of an important function, which, without claluro ' 
this, could not be performed. Words do not give 
thoughts, but without words thoughts could not be 
fixed, limited, and expressed. They are, therefore, in 
general, the essential condition of all thinking, worthy 
of the name. Now, what is true of human thought in 
general, is true of Logic and Rhetoric in particular. 

The nomenclature in these sciences is the nomencla- 
ture of certain general analyses and distinctions, which 
express to the initiated, in a single word, what the 
uninitiated could, (supposing, — what is not probable, — 
that he could perform the relative processes), neither 
understand nor express without a tedious and vague 
periphrasis ; while, in his hands, it would assume only 
the appearance of a particular observation, instead of 
a particular instance of a general and acknowledged 
rule. To take a very simple example, there is in Example. 
Logic a certain sophism, or act of illegal inference, by 
which two things are, perhaps in a very concealed and 
circuitous manner, made to prove each other. Now, 
the man unacquainted with Logic may perhaps detect 
and be convinced of the fallacy ; but how will he 

VOL. I. D 


 



50 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

III. 


expose it ? He must enter upon a long statement 
- and explanation, and after much labour to himself 
and others, he probably does not make his objection 
clear and demonstrative after all But between those 
acquainted with Logic, the whole matter would be 
settled in two words. It would be enough to say and 
show, that the inference in question involved a cir cuius 
in concludendo, and the refutation is at once under- 
stood and admitted. It is in like manner that one 
lawyer will express to another the ratio decidendi of 
a case in a single technical expression ; while their 
clients will only perplex themselves and others in 
their attempts to set forth the merits of their cause. 
Now, if Logic did nothing more than establish a certain 
number of decided and decisive rules in reasoning, 
and afford us brief and precise expressions by which 
to bring particular cases under these general rules, it 
would confer on all who in any way employ their 
intellect, that is, on the cultivators of every human 
science, the most important obligation. For it is 
only in the possession of such established rules, and 
of such a technical nomenclature, that we can accom- 
plish, with facility, and to an adequate extent, a criti- 
cism of any work of reasoning. Logical language is 
thus to the general reasoner, what the notation of 
Arithmetic, and still more of Algebra, is to the mathe- 
matician. Both enable us to comprehend and express, 
in a few significant symbols, what would otherwise 
overpower us by their complexity ; and thus it is that 
nothing would contribute more to facilitate and extend 
the faculty of reasoning, than a general acquaintance 
with the rules and language of Logic, — an advantage 
extending indeed to every department of knowledge, 
but more especially of importance to those professions 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


51 


•which are occupied in inference and conversant with lect. 

1 ttt 

abstract matter, — such as Theology and Law. 1 — 

I now proceed to the third of the preliminary ques- iii. Divi- 
tions — viz. How is Logic divided ? Now, it is mani- Logic, 
fest that this question may be viewed in two relations ; 
for in asking how is Logic divided, we either mean 
how many kinds are there of Logic, or into how many 
constituent parts is it distributed ? 0 We may consider 
Logic either as a universal, or as an integrate, whole. 

It is necessary to consider the former question first, i. The 
— for before proceeding to show what are the parts l^c!' ° f 
of which a logic is made up, it is requisite previously 
to determine what the logic is of which these parts 
are the components. Under the former head, I, there- 
fore, give you the following : — 


IT VI. Logic, considered as a Genus or Class, p«. vi. 
may, in different relations, be divided into differ- rcE n b u> 


ent Species. And, in the first place, considered by oj^«v« 
relation to the mind or thinking subject. Logic t?vc. ubjei ' 
is divided into Objective and Subjective, or, in 
the language of some older authors, into Logica 
systematica and Logica habitualisfi 


By Objective or Systematic Logic is meant that F.r P iic»- 
complement of doctrines of which the science of Logic 


a Division of Logic into Natural and 
Artificial, inept. 

u He hita each point with native force 
of mind. 

Whilst puzzled Logic struggles far 
behind.” 

Cf. Krug, Logik, p. 29. Troxler, 
Logit , i. 48. 

$ See Timpler, p. 877 ; Vosaius, p. 


217 ; Pacius. [Logics Syetema, authore 
M. Clemente Timplero , llano via.', 1612. 
Vossiua, De Natura A rtium, 1. iv., She 
De Logica, c. ix. Pacius, In Porphyrii 
Imgogen, p. 2, ed. Francof, 1697. On 
various divisions of Logic, see Timpler, 
Logicae Systcma , Lie. 1, q. 13-20, p. 
40-66 ; Giabert ab Isendoom, Effata 
Philoeophiea, [Cent. i. § 51-63, p. 95 
el teq., ed. Daventri®, 1643 . — Ed.] 


 


52 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. is made up ; by Subjective or Habitual Logic is meant 

— '1.1' the speculative knowledge of these doctrines which 

any individual, (as Socrates, Plato, Aristotle), may 
possess, and the practical dexterity with which he is 
able to apply them. 

noth thcso Now, it is evident that both these Logics, or, rather, 
Logic considered in this twofold relation, ought to be 

™T proposed to himself by an academical instructor. We 

ihm'. nstriK " must, therefore, neglect neither. Logic considered as 
a system of rules, is only valuable as a mean towards 
logic considered as a habit of the mind ; and, there- 
fore, a logical instructor ought not to think that he ful- 
fils his duty, — that he accomplishes all that he is called 
on to perform, if he limit himself to the mere enounce- 
ment of a code of doctrine, leaving his pupils to turn 
his instructions to their own account as best they 
may. On the contrary, he is bound to recollect that 
he should be something more than a book ; that he 
ought not only himself to deliver the one Logic, 
but to take care that his pupils acquire the other. 
The former, indeed, he must do as a condition of 
the latter ; but if he considers the systematic logic 
which he pronounces, as of any value, except in so 
far as his pupils convert it into an habitual logic, he 
understands nothing of the character of the function 
which he attempts to perform. It is, therefore, in- 
cumbent on an academical instructor, to do what in 
him lies to induce his pupils, by logical exercise, to 
digest what is presented to them as an objective 
system into a subjective habit. Logic, therefore, in 
both these relations belongs to us, and neither can be 
neglected without compromising the utility of a course 
like the present. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


53 


IT VII. In the second place, by relation to its lect. 
application or non-application to objects, Logic 


is divided into Abstract or General, and into 
Concrete or Special. The former of these isS^u 
called, by the Greek Aristotelians, SkxXcktiao) tcn ^ i , 0 
\o)pls irpayparcov, and, by the Arabian and Latin crown?" 
schoolmen, Logica docens ; while the latter is Spccia1 ' 
denominated, by the Greeks, SuxXe/m/cr/ iv yprjcrei 
kcll yvpvacria irpaypaToiv ; by the Arabians and 
Latins, Logica utens. 


Abstract Logic considers the laws of thought as Expiica- 
potentially applicable to the objects of all arts and 
sciences, but as not actually applied to those of any ; 
Concrete Logic considers these laws in their actual and 
immediate application to the object-matter of thi3 or 
that particular art or science. The former of these 
is one, and alone belongs to philosophy, whereas the 
latter is as multiform as the arts and sciences to which 
it is relative.® 

This division of Logic does not remount to Aris- tub din- 
totle, but it is found in his most ancient commen- re- 
tator, Alexander the Aphrodisian, and, after him, in Alexander 
most of the other Greek Logicians. Alexander illus- dXim!; hro 
trates the opposition of the logic divorced from things, 
'irpaypdrojv, — rebus avulsa) > to the logic ap- 
plied to things, (eV XPV° r€i K<LL yvpvacria tt pay par (or , — 
rebus applicata), by a simile. “ The former,” he says, 

“may be resembled to a geometrical figure, say a 
triangle, when considered abstractly and in itself ; 
whereas the latter may be resembled to the same 
triangle, as concretely existing in this or that parti- 
al See Krug, p. 27 [Logik, § 10, Aum. — E d.] 


54 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

III. 


Illnst rated 
by com- 
parisons. 


cular matter : for a triangle considered in itself Is 
ever one and the same ; but viewed in relation to its 
matter, it varies according to the variety of that 
matter ; for it is different as it is of silver, gold, lead, 
as it is of wood, of stone, etc.° The same holds good of 
Logic. General or Abstract Logic is always one and 
the same ; but as applied to this or to that object of 
consideration, it appears multiform.” So far Alex- 
ander. This appearance of multiformity I may, how- 
ever, add, is not real ; for the mind has truly only 
one mode of thinking, one mode of reasoning, one 
mode of conducting itself in the investigation of 
truth, whatever may be the object on which it exer- 
cises itself. Logic may, therefore, be again well com- 
pared to the authority of an universal empire, — of an 
empire governing the world by common laws. In 
such a dominion there are many provinces, various 
regions, and different prefectures. There is one pre- 
fect in Asia, another in Europe, a third in Africa, and 
each is decorated by different titles ; but each governs 
and is governed by the common laws of the Empire 
confided to his administration. The nature of Gene- 
ral Logic may, likewise, be illustrated by another 
comparison. The Thames, for instance, in passing 
London, is a single river, — is one water, but is there 


a [Isendoorn, Effata, Cent. i. 55; 
Crellius, Isagoge Logica, p. 12.] The 
illustration is fully given by Balfo- 
reus, Commentanus in Organ um, p. 
23, q. v. § 2. 41 Alexander Aphro- 

disiensis Logicam illam abjunctam 
similem esse ait figune geometric®, 
utpotc triangulo, dum in se et per 
se spectatur ; Logicam vero cum 
rebus conjunctam similem eidem tri- 
angulo huic aut illi materi® impresso. 
Nam trianguli in se una est et cadein 
ratio ; at pro varietate materi®, vnria. 


Aliud enim cat argenteum, aliud 
aureum, aliud ligneum, lapideum aut 
plumbeum.” The passage referred to 
is probably one in the Commentary on 
the Prior Analytics, y. 2, cd. Aid. The 
distinction itself, though not the illus- 
tration, is given more exactly in the 
language of the text by some of the 
later commentators. See the Intro- 
ductions of Ammonius to the Cate- 
gories, and of Philoponua to the Prior 
Analytics . — Ed.] 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


55 


applied to many and different uses. — It is employed lect. 

for drinking, for cooking, for brewing, for washing, ill 

for irrigation, for navigation, etc. ; in like manner, 

Logic in itself is one : — as a science or an art, it is 
single, but, in its applications, it • is of various and 
multiform use in the various branches of knowledge, 
conversant be it with necessary, or be it with con- 
tingent matter. — Or further, to take the example of a 
cognate science, if any one were to lay down different 
grammars of a tongue, as that may be applied to the 
different purposes of life, he would be justly derided 
by all grammarians, indeed by all men ; for who is 
there so ignorant as not to know that there is but 
one grammar of the same language in all its various 
applications 1 ° 

Thus, likewise, there is only one method of reason- General 
ing, which all the sciences indifferently employ ; and alone one ; 
although men are severally occupied in different pur- Logie is 
suits, and although one is, therefore, entitled a Theo- ami part of 
logian, another a Jurist, a third a Physician, and so m which* 
on, each employs the same processes, and is governed 18 appl,ed * 
by the same laws, of thought. Logic itself is, there- 
fore, widely different from the use, — the application 
of Logic. For Logic is astricted to no determinate 
matter, but is extended to all that is the object of 
reason and intelligence. The use of Logic on the con- 
trary, although potentially applicable to every matter, 
is always actually manifested by special reference to 


a See Rami Sch. t p. 350, [P. Rami 
Scholae in Liberates Artes, Basilese, 
1578. * Unus est Lutetiro Sequana, 

ad multos tamen usub et varios accom- 
modatus, lavandutn, aquandum, velien- 
dum, irrigandum, coquendum : Bic 
una est Logica, varii etmultiplicis usus, 
in proporiitione necessaria, probabili, 


captiosa; ars tamen una. Si Gram- 
maticas tres aliquis ineptus nobis in- 
Btituat, unam civilem, alteram agrca- 
tem, tertiam de vitis amborum, merito 
rideatur a Grammaticus omnibus, qui 
unam Grammaticam norunt omnium 
ejusdem linguae hominum commu- 
uem.” — E d.] 


5G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

III. 


some one. In point of fact, Logic, in its particular ap- 
plications, no longer remains logic, but becomes part 
and parcel of the art or science in which it is applied. 
Thus Logic, applied to the objects of geometry, is 
nothing else than Geometry, — Logic, applied to the ob- 
jects of physics, nothing else than Natural Philosophy. 
We have, indeed, certain treatises of Logic in refer- 
ence to different sciences, which may be viewed as 
something more than these sciences themselves. For 
example, we have treatises on Legal Logic, etc. But 
such treatises are only introductions, — only methodo- 
logies of the art or science to which they relate. For 
such special logics only exhibit the mode in which a 
determinate matter or object of science, the knowledge 
of which is presupposed, must be treated, the con- 
ditions which regulate the certainty of inferences in 
that matter, and the methods by which our knowledge 
of it may be constructed into a scientific whole. 
Special Logic is thus not a single discipline, not the 
science of the universal laws of thought, but a con- 
geries of disciplines, as numerous as there are spe- 
cial sciences in which it may be applied. Abstract 
or General Logic, on the contrary, in virtue of its 
universal character, can only and alone be one ; and 
can exclusively pretend to the dignity of an independ- 
ent science. This, therefore, likewise exclusively con- 


cerns us. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


Ot 


LECTURE IV. 

INTRODUCTION. 

LOGIC — IIT. ITS DIVISIONS — PURE AND MODIFIED. 

In my last Lecture, after terminating the considera- lf.ct. 

tion of the second introductory question, touching the 1_ 

Utilities of Logic, I proceeded to the third introduc- 
tory question, — What are the Divisions of Logic 1 
and stated to you the two most general classifications 
of this science. Of these, the first is the division of 
Logic into Objective and Subjective, or Systematic 
and Habitual ; the second is its division into General 
and Special, or Abstract and Concrete. 

To speak only of the latter, — Abstract or General 
Logic is logic viewed as treating of the formal laws 
of thought, without respect to any particular matter. 
Concrete or Special Logic is logic viewed as treating 
of these laws in relation to a certain matter, and in 
subordination to the end of some determinate science. 

The former of these is one, and belongs alone to philo- 
sophy, that is, to the science of the universal principles 
of knowledge ; the latter is as manifold as the sciences 
to which it is subservient, and of which it, in fact, 
constitutes a part, — viz. their Methodology. This 
division of logic is given, but in different terms, by 
the Greek Aristotelians and by the Latin schoolmen. 


 


58 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. The Greek division does not remount to Aristotle, 

1— but it is found in his earliest expositor, Alexander 

of Aphrodisias, and he was probably not the first by 
whom it was enounced. It is into x w P l<: 

irpayparuv, Logica rebus avulsa, that is, Logic merely 
formal, Logic apart from things, in other words, ab- 
stract from all particular matter ; and SiaXeicTucr) iv 
Xpgcra. /cal yvpvaaruf. upayparoiv, LiOgica rebus appli- 
cata, that is, Logic as used and exercised upon things, 
in other words, as applied to certain special objects. 

This distinction of Logic by the Greek Aristotelians 
seems altogether unknown to modern logicians. The 
division of Logic by the scholastic Aristotelians is the 
same with the preceding, but the terms in which it 
is expressed are less precise and unambiguous. This 
division is into the Logica docens and Logica utens. 
The Logica docens is explained as logic considered as 
an abstract theory, — as a preceptive system of rules, 
— “ quae tradit praecepta — the Logica utens, as logic 
considered as a concrete practice, as an application of 
these rules to use, — “quae utitur praeceptis.” 0 

The division This scholastic division of Logic into docens and 

of Logica ^ 0 

docens, and utens has, I see, been noticed by some of the more 

I^ogica J 

utcn., mi»- modem authors, but it has been altogether mistaken, 

token by n 

some mo- which it would not have been had these authors 

deni au- 

then. been aware of the meaning in which the terms were 
employed, and had they not been ignorant of the 
more explicit expression of it by the Greeks. Thus 
the terms docens and utens are employed by Wolf to 
mark a distinction not the same as that which they 
designate in the scholastic logic, and as the Wolfian 
distinction will not stand the test of criticism, the 
terms themselves have been repudiated by those who 

a Smiglecii Logica, Dinj>. ii. q. vi. In IV. Metaph lect. iv. ; Reotus, 
For Bcliolaatic authorities, see Aquinas, Super Vnir. Porphyrii, q. i. — E d. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


50 


were not aware, that there was an older and a more lect. 

* jy, 

valid division which they alone properly expressed.® 

Wolf makes the Logica docens, the mere knowledge 
of the rules : the Logica utens> the habit or dexterity 
of applying them. This distinction of General and 
Special logic, Wolf and the Wolfian logicians, likewise, 
denote by that of Theoretical and Practical Logic.^ 

These terms are in themselves by no means a bad 
expression of the distinction, but those by whom they 
were employed, unfortunately did not limit their 
Practical Logic to what I have defined as Special, for 
under Practical they included not only Special, but 
likewise Modified Logic, of which we are now to speak. 

Having explained, then, this primary division of 
Logic into General and Special, and stated that Gene- 
ral Logic, as alone a branch of philosophy, is alone 
the object of our consideration ; I proceed to give 
the division of General Logic into two great species 
or rather parts, — viz. into Pure or Abstract and Modi- 
fied or Concrete. 

IF VIII. In the third place, considered by reference Par. viil 
to the circumstances under which it can come into I JF i ^ d ‘ > vid * 
exercise by us, Logic, — Logic General or Abstract, ® nd Modi - 
is divided into Pure and Modified ; — a division, 
however, which is perhaps rather the distribution 
of a science into its parts than of a genus into 
its species. Pure Logic considers the laws of 
thought proper, as contained a priori in the 
nature of pure intelligence itself. Modified Logic, 

o [As Krug] [see his Logih,% 11, p. 30. p. 12; Sauter, Positioncs Logica, P. 

Compare Kant, Logilc, Einleitung, iL — I. and II., 1778 ; Inst it. Log., P. 

Ed.] I. and II., 1799; Pnulus Mako do 

/3 Wolf, Philosophies Rationalist, §§ Kerek-Gede, Comp. Log. Instit., P. 

8, 9, 10, 12. — Ed. [Cf. Stattler, Sau- I. and II., 4th edit., 1773 . — Ed.] 
ter, and Mako], [Stattler, Logica , § 18, 


GO 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

IV. 


Pure Logic 


Modified 

Logic. 


Nomencla- 
ture of 
Modified 
Logic. 


again, exhibits these laws as modified in their 
actual applications by certain general circum- 
stances external and internal, contingent in them- 
selves, but by which human thought is always 
more or less influenced in its manifestations.® 

Pure Logic considers Thought Proper simply and 
in itself, and apart from the various circumstances by 
which it may be affected in its actual application. 
Human thought, it is evident, is not exerted except 
by men and individual men. By men, thought is not 
exerted out of connection with the other constituents 
of their intellectual and moral character, and, in each 
individual, this character is variously modified by 
various contingent conditions of different original 
genius, and of different circumstances contributing to 
develop different faculties and habits. Now there 
may be conceived a science, which considers thought 
not merely as determined by its necessary and universal 
laws, but as contingently affected by the empirical 
conditions under which thought is actually exerted; — 
which shows what these conditions are, how they 
impede, and, in general, modify, the act of thinking, 
and how, in fine, their influence may be counteracted. 
This science is Modified or Concrete Logic. What I 
have called Modified Logic is identical with what 
Kant and other philosophers have denominated Ap- 
plied Logic. ( Angewandte Logik , Logica applicata .)? 

a For distinction of reason in abstrac - logics. Cf. Ploucquct, p. 236 [Samm- 
to and reason inconcreto, grounding the lung der Schriften trclche den Logischen 
distinction of an Abstract (or Pure), Calcul Hen'll Prof. Ploucquels fo- 
und a Concrete (or Modified) Logic, treffen, Tubingen, 1773 . — Ed.] 
see Boyle’s IForfo, iv. p. 164. See also £ Kant, Logik , Einleitung ii. ; HofF- 

Lambert [Nenes Organon, Dianoiolo- bauer, Anfangsgriindc dcr Logik , §§ 
gie, i. — E d.], § 444, who says that the 17, 406; Krug, Logik, Einleitung, § 11; 
sciences in general are only applied Fries, System der Logik, § 2. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


61 


This expression I think improper. For the term lf.ct. 

Applied Logic can only with propriety be used to — 

denote Special or Concrete Logic ; and is, in fact, a Applied 
brief and excellent translation of the terms by which c ' 
Special Logic was designated by the Greeks, as that £i> 

Xpycrei ical yv/xvacria npayfiaroiv. And so, in fact, by 
the Latin Logicians was the Greek expression ren- 
dered. Let us consider the meaning of the term 
applied. Logic, as applied, must be applied to some- 
thing, and that something can only be an object or 
matter. Now, Special Logic is necessarily an applied 
logic ; therefore the term applied, if given to what I 
would call Modified Logic, would not distinguish 
Modified from Special Logic. But further, the term 
applied as given to Modified Logic, considered in 
itself, is wrong ; for in Modified Logic thought is no 
more considered as actually applied to any particular 
matter than in Pure Logic. Modified Logic only 
considers the necessary in conjunction with the con- 
tingent conditions under which thought is actually 
exertible ; but. it does not consider it as applied to 
one class of objects more than to another, that is, it 
does not consider it as actually applied to any, but as 
potentially applicable to all. In every point of view, how pro- 
therefore, the term applied, as given to Modified 
Logic, is improper ; whereas, if used at all, it ought to 
be used as a synonym for special ; which I would 
positively have done, were it not that, having been 
unfortunately bestowed by high authority on what I 
have called Modified Logic, the employment of it to 
designate a totally different distinction might gene- 
rate confusion. I have, therefore, refrained from 
making use of the term. I find, indeed, that all logi- 
cians who, before Kant, ever employed the expression 


 



62 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Applied Logic, employed it as convertible with Spe- 

1— eial or Concrete Logic.® In fine, it is to be observed 

that the terms pure and applied, as usually employed 
in opposition in the Kantian philosophy, and in that of 
Germany in general, are not properly relative and cor- 
relative to each other. For pure has its proper cor- 
relative in modified or mixed; applied its proper 
relative in unapplied, that is, divorced from tilings, 
that is, abstract. 

Modified But passing from words to things, I may observe 
properly an that it can be questioned whether Modified or Con- 
'imrt" 'f a crete Logic be entitled to the dignity of an essential 
part of Logic in general, far less of a co-ordinate 
species as opposed to Pure or Abstract Logic. You 
are aware, from what I have preA r iously stated under 
the first introductory question, that Logic, as conver- 
sant about a certain class of mental phenomena, is 
only a part of the general philosophy of mind ; but 
that, as exclusively conversant about what is necessary 
in the phenomena of thought, that is, the laws of 
thinking, it is contradistinguished from Empirical 
Psychology, or that philosophy of mind which is 
merely observant and inductive of the mental pheno- 
mena as facts. But if Modified or Concrete Logic be 
considered either as a part or as a species of General 
Logic, this discrimination of Logic, as the Nomology 
of thought, from Psychology, as the Phenomenology of 
mind, will not hold. For Modified Logic, presupposing 
a knowledge of the general and the contingent phe- 
nomena of mind, will thus either comprise Psychology 
within its sphere, or be itself comprised within the 


a See Balforeus, [72. Balforei Com- junct&m et a rebus separatam ; aliam 
mentarius in Organum, q. v. § 2, p. 22. rebus applicatam et cum iis conjunc- 
“ Gneci . . . aliarn dicunt Logicamab- tam." — E d.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


63 


sphere of Psychology. But whichever alternative may lect. 

be preferred, the two sciences are no longer distinct. — 

It is on this ground that I hold, that, in reality, Modi- 
fied Logic is neither an essential part nor an indepen- . I 
dent species of General Logic, but that it is a mere 
mixture of Logic and Psychology, and may, therefore, 
be called either Logical Psychology or Psychological 
Logic.® There is thus in truth only one Logic, that is, 

Pure or Abstract Logic. But while this, I think, must 
be admitted in speculative rigour, still, as all sciences 
are only organised for human ends, and as a general 
consideration of the modifying circumstances which 
affect the abstract laws of thought in their actual 
manifestations, is of great practical utility, I trust 
that I shall not be regarded as deforming the simpli- 
city of the science, if I follow the example of most 
modern logicians, and add, (be it under protest), to 
Pure or Abstract Logic a part, or an appendix, under 
the name of Modified Logic. In distributing the 
science, therefore, into these two principal heads, you 
will always, I request, keep steadily in mind, that, in 
strict propriety. Pure Logic is the only science of 
Logic, Modified Logic being only a scientific acci- 
dent, ambiguously belonging either to Logic or to 
Psychology. 

This being understood, I now proceed to state to Con«pcct us 
you the distribution of the general science into itscLurwof 
parts ; and as it is of high importance that you now Loglc ' 
obtain a comprehensive view of the relation of these 
parts to each other and to the whole which they con- 
stitute, in order that you may clearly understand the 
point towards which we travel and every stage in our 

a [See Richter, p. 67 [Uber den Ge- § 17, Leipsic, 1825 . — Ed.] 
gcnstand v.nd den Umfang der Logit, 


64 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lf.ct. progress, — I shall comprise this whole statement in the 

— — 1 — following paragraph, which I shall endeavour to make 
sufficiently intelligible without much subsequent illus- 
tration. That illustration, however, I will give in my 
next Lecture. As this paragraph is intended to afford 
you a conspectus of the ensuing Course, in so far as 
it will be occupied with Logic, I need hardly say that 
you will find it somewhat long. It is, however, I 
believe, the only paragraph of any extent, which I 
shall hereafter be obliged to dictate. 

ix. If IX. General or Abstract Logic, we have 

Distribution , . 

of Logic seen, is divided into two parts, — into Pure and 

into its x 

porta. into Modified. Of these in their order. 

I. — Pure Logic may, I think, best be distributed upon 
the following principles. We may think ; and 
we may think well. On the one hand, the con- 
ditions of thinking do not involve the conditions 
of thinking well ; but the conditions of thinking 
well involve the conditions of thinking. Logic, 
therefore, as the science of thought, must neces- 
sarily consider the conditions of the possibility 
of thought. On the other hand, the end of 
thought is not merely to think, but to think well ; 
therefore, as the end of a science must be con- 
formed to the end of its object-matter, Logic, as 
the science of thought, must display not only the 
laws of possible, but the laws of perfect, thinking. 
Logic, therefore, naturally falls into two parts, 
the one of which investigates the formal condi- 
tions of mere thinking; the other, the formal con- 
ditions of thinking well. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. G5 

i. — In regard to the former : — The conditions of 
mere thinking are given in certain elementary . 
requisites ; and that part of Logic which analy- 
ses and considers these may be called its Stoiehei- 
ology, or Doctrine of Elements. These elements 
are either Laws or Products. 

ii. — In regard to the latter, as perfect thinking 
is an end, and as, the elementary means being 
supposed, the conditions of an end are the ways 
or methods by which it may be accomplished, 
that part of Logic which analyses and considers 
the methods of perfect thinking, may be called 
its Methodology, or Doctrine of Method. 

Thus Pure Logic is divided into two parts, — 
into Stoicheiology, or the Doctrine of Elements, 
and Methodology, or the Doctrine of Method. 
Of these in their order. 

Logical Stoicheiology, or the doctrine conver- 
sant about the elementary requisites of mere 
thought, I shall divide into two parts. The first 
of these treats of the Fundamental Laws of think- 
ing, in other words, of the universal conditions of 
the thinkable, — Noetic, — Nomology. The second 
treats of the laws of thinking, as governing the 
special functions, faculties, or products of thought, 
in its three gradations of Conception, — or, as it is 
otherwise called, Simple Apprehension, — Judg- 
ment, and Reasoning, — Dianoetic — Dynamic. 

This second part of Stoicheiology will, there- 
fore, fall into three subordinate divisions corre- 
sponding to these several degrees of Conception, 
Judgment, and Reasoning. — So much for the 
Doctrine of Elements. 

VOL. I. E 


LECT. 

IV. 


 


LECT. 

IV. 


G6 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

Logical Methodology, or the doctrine conver- 
sant about the regulated ways or methods in 
which the means of thinking are conducted to 
their end of thinking well, is divided into as 
many parts as there are methods, and there are 
as many methods as there are different qualities 
in the end to be differently accomplished. Now 
the perfection of thought consists of three vir- 
tues, — Clear Thinking, Distinct Thinking, and 
Connected Thinking; each of these virtues is 
accomplished by a distinct method ; and the 
three methods will consequently afford the divi- 
sion of Logical Methodology into three parts. 

The first part comprises the Method of Clear 
Thinking, or the doctrine of Illustration or Defi- 
nition. 

The second part comprises the Method of Dis- 
tinct Thinking, or the doctrine of Division. 

The third part comprises the Method of Con- 
catenated or Connected Thinking, or the doctrine 
of Proof. 

These three parts are only, however, three par- 
ticular applications of method ; they, therefore, 
constitute each only a Special Methodology. But 
such special methodology or union of methodo- 
logies supposes a previous consideration of Me- 
thod in general, in its notion, its species, and its 
conditions. Logical Methodology will, therefore, 
consist of two parts, of a General and of a Spe- 
cial, — the Special being subdivided, as above 
stated. So much for the distribution of Pure 
Logic. 

II. — Modified Logic falls naturally into Three Parts. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. G7 

The First Part treats of the nature of Truth 
and Error, and of the highest laws for their dis- . 
crimination, — Alethiology. 

The Second treats of the Impediments to think- 
ing, with the Means of their Removal. These 
impediments arise, 1°, From the Mind ; 2°, From 
the Body ; or, 3°, From External Circumstances. 
In relation to the Mind, these impediments 
originate in the Senses, in Self-consciousness, in 
Memory, in Association, in Imagination, in Rea- 
son, in the faculty of Language, in the Feelings, 
in the Desires, in the Will. In relation to the 
Body, they originate in Temperament, or in the 
state of Health. In relation to External Circum- 
stances, they originate in the diversities of Edu- 
cation, of Rank, of Age, of Climate, of Social In- 
tercourse, etc. 

The Third Part treats of the Aids or Subsidiaries 
of thinking ; and thinking is aided either, 1°, 
Through the Acquisition, or, 2°, Through the 
Communication, of Knowledge. 

The former of these subsidiaries, (the acquisi- 
tion of knowledge), consists, 1°, Of Experience, 
(and that either by ourselves or by others) ; 2°, 
Of Generalisation, (and this through Induction 
and Analogy) ; and, 3°, Of Testimony, (and this 
either Oral or Written). Under this last head 
falls to be considered the Credibility of Witnesses, 
the Authenticity and Integrity of Writings, the 
Rules of Criticism and of Interpretation. 

The latter of these subsidiaries, the Communi- 
cation of Knowledge, is either One-sided or Reci- 
procal The former consists of Instruction, cither 


LF.CT. 

IV. 


 



G8 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Oral or Written ; the latter of Conversation, 

Conference, Disputation. 

So much for the distribution of Modified 
Logic. 


Tabuinr The following is a general tabular view of the Divi- 

vicw of tko ° y 

Divisions of sious of Logic now given : — 

Logic. 0 ° 


< I. Pure. 


General 

or 

Abstract 

Logic. 


I 


Noetic, — 

Nomology. 

i. Stoichoiology. / , a Conception. 

1 2. Dianoetic, — f , _ , 

_ . \ It. Judgment. 

Dynamic. I _ 

lc. Reasoning. 


Ji. Methodology. 


'’Clear Thinking. — 1. Dofmition 
or Illustration. 

Distinct Thinking. — 2. Division. 
Connected Thinking. — 3. Proba- 
tion or Proving. 


II. Modified. 


i. Truth and Error — Certainty and 

Illusion - # f 1. Tho Mind. 

ii. Impediments to Thinking, with I 9 rpj je 

Remedies. These Impedi- j 3 , Cir . 

ments arise from . . [ cumstance& 

1 . Tho Acquisition of 
Knowledge. 

Thinking, — through 1 2. The Communication 
V of Knowledge, &c. 


iii. Aids or Subsidiaries to 




IV. The 
History of 
Logic. 
This ques- 
tion post- 
poned. 


The fourth and fifth questions of the Introduction 
would now fall to be considered, — viz. what is the His- 
tory, and what is the Bibliography, of Logic \ Were 
I writing a book, and not giving a course of Lectures 
upon Logic, I would certainly consider these questions 
in the introduction to the science, but I would do this 
with the admonition that beginners should pass these 
over, and make themselves first of all familiar with 
the doctrines of which the science is itself the comple- 
ment. For why 1 The history of a science is a narra- 
tive of the order in which its several parts have been 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


60 


developed, and of the contributions which have been lkct. 


iv. 


made to it by different cultivators ; but such a narra- 
tive necessarily supposes a previous knowledge of the 
contents of the science, — a knowledge which is identical 
with a knowledge of the science itself. It is, therefore, 
evident, that a history of Logic can only be proposed 
with advantage to those who are already in some degree 
familiar with Logic itself ; and as in a course like the 
present, I am bound to presume that you are not as 
yet conversant with the science, it follows that such a 
history cannot with any propriety be attempted in 
the commencement, but only towards the conclusion, 
of the Lectures. 

In regard to the fifth question, — What is the Biblio- v. The 
graphy or Literature of Logic 'l — the same is true, in ^,,h y of 
so far as a knowledge of the books written upon a 
science is correlative to a knowledge of its history. 

At the same time nothing could be more unprofitable, 
than for me to recite to you a long series of works to 
which you have not access, by authors of whom you 
probably never heard, often in languages which few 
of you understand. In the present stage of your 
studies, it is not requisite that you should know of 
many books, but that you should read attentively a few ; 

— non multa sed multum. — I shall, therefore, adjourn, 
at least, the consideration of the question, — What in 
general are the principal books on the science of 
Logic 'i — simply recommending to you a few not 
absolutely the best, but such as you can most easily 
procure, such as are in languages which most of you 
can read, and which are of such a character as may 
be studied with most general advantage. 

Of works in our own language, as those most acces- 
sible and most intelligible to all, there are unfortu- £^ c 8 ou 


 


70 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

IV. 


nately hardly any which I can recommend to you as 
exhibiting the doctrines of Logic, either in purity or 
completeness. The Logic of Watts, of Duncan, and 
others, are worth reading, as books, but not as books 
upon Logic. The Elements of Logic by Dr Whately 
is, upon the whole, the one best entitled to your atten- 
tion, though it is erroneous in various respects, and 
imperfect in more. The abridgment of this work by 
Hinds contains what of the original is most worthy of 
study, in the commencement of a logical education. 
In French, there are sundry works deserving of your 
attention, (Damiron, a Delariviere) ; P but the only one 
which I would at present earnestly recommend to 
your study, is the celebrated Port Royal Art of Think- 
ing, — L’ Art de Penser , — an anonymous work, but the 
authors of which were the two distinguished Jansen- 
ists, Arnauld and Nicole. It has been frequently 
reprinted ; and there is a recent stereotyped edition, 
by Hachette of Paris, which can easily be procured. 
There are more than one translation of the work into 
Latin, and at least two English versions, both bad . 7 

In Latin there is a very elegant compend of Logic 
by the late illustrious Daniel Wyttenbach of Leyden. 
Besides the Dutch editions, which are handsome, there 
is a cheap reprint published by Professor Maas of 
Halle, who has, however, ventured on the unwarrant- 
able liberty of silently altering the text, besides omit- 
ting what he did not consider as absolutely indispen- 
sable for a text-book. This work can be easily procured. 
There is also in Latin a system of Logic by Genovesi, 

a Court de Philosophic, fc. iv. ; Lo- Baynes, Edinburgh, 1850 ; 2d edition, 
ffiquc, Paris, 1837 . — Ed. 1851. In the Introduction to this 

/3 Jjoqique Clatsique, Paris, 1 829 . — Ed. version will be found an account of 

7 A third and far superior trausla- the various editions and translations 
tion has subsequently appeared by Mr of the work. — E d. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


71 


under the title, Genuensis Ars Logico-criticci. This 
work is, however, extremely rare even in Italy, and it 
was many years before I was able to procure a copy. 
There was an edition of this work published in Ger- 
many in 1760 at Augsburg, but the impression seems 
to have been small, for it also is out of print. The 
Italian Logic of Genovesi has, however, been repeat- 
edly reprinted, and this, with the valuable addition of 
Romagnosi, is easily obtained. Of the older writers 
on Logic in Latin, the one I w T ould principally recom- 
mend to you is Burgersdyk, — Burgersdicius. His 
Instituliones Logiccc is not a rare work, though, as 
there are no recent editions, it is not always without 
trouble to be obtained. 


LECT. 

IV. 


 


72 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECTURE V. 

PURE LOGIC. 

PART I. — STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION I. NOETIC. — ON THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF 
THOUGHT — THEIR CONTENTS AND HISTORY. 

lect. Having terminated our consideration of the various 

y. 

— — — questions of which the Introduction to Logic is com- 
logy. posed, we proceed to the doctrines which make up the 
science itself, and commence the First Great Division 
of Pure Logic — that which treats of its elementary or 
constituent processes, — Stoicheiology. But Stoicheio- 
logy was again divided into two parts, — into a part 
which considered the Fundamental Laws of Thought 
in general, and into a part which considered these laws 
as applied to and regulating the special function of 
Thought in its various gradations of Conception, Judg- 
ment, and Reasoning. The title, therefore, of the 
part of Logic on which we are about to enter is, — 
Pure Logic, Part I. Stoicheiology — Section I. Noetic. 
On the Fundamental Laics of Thought. 

The iharw. Before, however, descending to the consideration of 
Thmight in these laws, it is necessary to make one or two pre- 
genorai. ][ m i nar y statements touching the character of that 
thought of which they are the necessary conditions; 
and, on this point, I give, in the first place, the follow- 
ing paragraph : — 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


73 


IT X. Logic considers Thought, not as the oper- lect. 

ation of thinking, but as its product ; it does not — 

treat of Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning, Par ‘ x * 
but of Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings. 


I have already endeavoured to give you a general 
knowledge of what is meant by thought. You are 
aware that this term is, in relation to Logic, employed 
in its strictest and most limited signification, — viz. as 
the act or product of the Discursive Faculty, or Fa- 
culty of Relations ; but it is now proper to consider, 
somewhat more closely, the determinate nature of this 
process, and the special point of view in which it is 
regarded by the logician. 

In an act of thinking, there are three things which 
we can discriminate in consciousness, — 1°, There is the 
thinking subject, that is, the mind or ego, which 
exerts or manifests the thought ; 2°, There is the 
object about which we think, which is called the 
matter of thought ; and, 3°, There is a relation be- 
tween subject and object of which we are conscious, — 
a relation always manifested in some determinate 
mode or manner, — this is the form of thought. Now 
of these three, Logic does not consider either the first 
or the second. It takes no account, at least no direct 
account, of the real subject, or of the real object, of 
thought, but is limited exclusively to the form of 
thought. This has been already stated. But, again, 
this form of thought is considered by Logic only in a 
certain aspect. The form of thought may be viewed 
on two sides or in two relations. It holds, as has been 
said, a relation both to its subject and to its object, 
and it may accordingly be viewed either in the one of 
these relations or in the other. In so far as the form 


Thought as 
the object 
of Logic. 


The subject, 
form, and 
matter of 
thought. 


Thought as 
the object 
respectively 
of Psycho- 
log)’ ami of 
Logic. 


 


74 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. of thought is considered in reference to the thinking 

1 — mind, — to the mind by which it is exerted, — it is 

considered as an act, or operation, or energy ; and in 
this relation it belongs to Phenomenal Psychology. 
Whereas, in so far as this form is considered in refer- 
ence to what thought is about, it is considered as the 
product of such an act, and, in this relation, it be- 
longs to Logic. Thus Phenomenal Psychology treats 
of thought proper as conception, judgment, reasoning ; 
Logic, or the Nomology of the Understanding, treats 
of thought proper as a concept, as a judgment, as a 
reasoning. Whately, I have already shown you, 
among other errors in his determination of the object- 
matter of Logic, confounds or reverses this ; for he 
proposes to Logic, not thought considered as a product, 
but reasoning alone ; and that, too, considered as a 
producing operation. He thus confounds Logic with 
Phrenomenal Psychology. 

Be it, therefore, observed, that Logic, in treating of 
the formal laws of thought, treats of these in reference 
to thought considered as a product ; that is, as a con- 
cept, a judgment, a reasoning ; whereas Psychology, 
as the Phenomenology of mind, considers thought as 
the producing act, that is, as conception, judgment, 
reasoning. (You here see, by the way, the utility of 
distinguishing concept and conception. It is unfor- 
tunate that we cannot also distinguish more precisely 
judgment and reasoning as producing acts, from a 
judgment and a reasoning as products.) 

Par. xi. 1 XI. Thought, as the knowledge of one thing 

mediate mid in relation to another, is a mediate and complex 

complex . . 

cognition. COgUltlOn. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


The distinctive peculiarity of thinking in general lect. 

is, that it involves the cognition of one thing by the — 

cognition of another. All thinking is, therefore, a t b£ l,ca 
mediate cognition ; and is thus distinguished from 
our knowledge in perception, external and internal, 
and in imagination : in both of which acts we are 
immediately cognitive of the object, external or in- 
ternal, presented in the one, and of the object, external 
or internal, represented in the other. In the Presenta- 
tive and Representative Faculties, our knowledge is of 
something considered directly and in itself ; in thought, 
on the contrary, we know one object only through the 
knowledge of another. Thus in perception, of either 
kind, and in imagination, the object known is always 
a single determinate object ; whereas in thought, — 
in thought proper, — as one object is only known 
through another, there must always be a plurality of 
objects in every single thought. Let us take an 
example of this, in regard to the simplest act of 
thought. When I see an individual, — say Bucephalus 
or Highflyer,— or when I represent him in imagination, 

I have a direct and immediate apprehension of a 
certain object in and through itself, without reference 
to aught else. But when I pronounce the term Horse , 

I am unable either to perceive in nature, or to repre- 
sent in imagination, any one determinate object cor- 
responding to the word. I obtain the notion corre- 
sponding to this word, only as the result of a com- 
parison of many perceptions or imaginations of 
Bucephalus, Highflyer, Dobbin, and other indivi- 
dual horses ; it, therefore, contains many represen- 
tations under it, has reference to many objects, out 
of relation to which it cannot possibly be realised in 
thought ; and it is in consequence of this necessity of 
representing, (potentially at least), a plurality of in- 


76 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. dividual objects under the notion horse, that it obtains 
— 1 — the denomination concept , that is, something taken up 
or apprehended in connection with something else. 
This, however, requires a further explication. When 
we perform an act of thought, of positive thought, 
this is done by thinking something, and we can think 
anything only by thinking it as existing ; while, 
again, we cannot think a thing to exist except in 
certain determinate modes of existence. On the other 
hand, when we perform an act of negative thought, 
this is done by thinking something as not existing in 
this or that determinate mode, and when we think it 
as existing in no determinate mode, we cease to think 
it at all ; it becomes a nothing, a logical nonentity, 
(non-ens logicum). 

It being thus understood, that thought can only be 
realised by thinking something ; it being further 
understood, that this something, as it is thought, must 
be thought as existing ; and it being still further 
understood, that we can think a thing as existing only 
by thinking it as existing in this, that, and the other 
determinate manner of existence, and that whenever 
we cease to think something, something existing, some- 
thing existing in a determinate manner of existence, 
we cease to think at all ; this, I say, being under- 
stood, it is here proper to make you, once for all, 
acquainted with the various terms by which logicians 
designate the modes or manners of com table existence. 

O O 

I shall, therefore, comprise these in the following para- 
graph : — 


Par. XII. 
The various 
terms by 
which the 
tiKNics of 
cogitable 
existence 


If XII. When we think a thing, this is done by 
conceiving it as possessed of certain modes of 
being, or qualities, and the sum of these qualities 
constitutes its concept or notion, (vorjpa, zvvoia. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


77 


brlvoia, conceptum, conceptus, notio). As these lf.ct. 

qualities or modes, qualitalcs, modi), 1 — 

are only identified with the thing by a mental 
attribution, they are called attributes, (Karrjyo- 
povpeva, attnbuta) ; as it is only in or through 
them that we say or enounce aught of a 
thing, they are called predicates, predicables, and 
predicaments, or categories, these words being 
here used in their more extensive signification, 

(key opera irepi, KarrjyopiaL, KaTrjyoprjpaTa, narr)- 
yopovpeva, prcedicata, prcedicabilia, prcedica- 
menta) ; as it is only in and through them that 
we recognise a thing for what it is, they are 
called notes, signs, marks, characters, (notes, signa, 
characteres, discrimina) ; finally, as it is only in 
and through them that we become aware that a 
thing is possessed of a peculiar and determinate 
existence, they are called properties, differences, 
determinations, ( proprietates , determinationes). 

As consequent on, or resulting from, the exist- 
ence of a thing, they have likewise obtained the 
name of consequents, (enopeva, consequentia, &c.) 

What in reality has no qualities, has no existence 
in thought, — it is a logical nonentity ; hence, 
e converso, the scholastic aphorism, — non-entis 
nulla sunt prcedicata. What, again, has no 
qualities attributed to it, though attributable, is 
said to be indetermined, (aBioptarov, indeter- 
minatum) ; it is only a possible object of 
thought, 0 

This paragraph, which I have dictated that you Ex P ii»- 
might be made once for all acquainted with the wut i» 

a [Schulz©, Logik , § 13. Rosling, p. Ulro, 1826. Cf. Krug, Logik, § 16. — 

63.] [DU Lfhrtn drr reinen Logik, El).] 


 



78 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. relative terms in use among logicians, requires but 

1 — little explanation. I may state, however, that the 

thinking n mi lid only thinks an object by separating it from 
objca others, that is, by marking it out or characterising it ; 
and in so far as it does this, it encloses it within 
certain fixed limits, that is, determines it. But if 
this discriminative act be expressed in words, I pre- 
dicate the marks, notes, characters, or determinations 
of the thing ; and if, again, these be comprehended 
in one total thought, they constitute its concept or 
notion. If, for example, I think of Socrates as son 
of Sophroniscus, as Athenian, as philosopher, as pug- 
nosed, these are only so many characters, limitations, 
or determinations, which I predicate of Socrates, which 
distinguish him from all other men, and together 
make up my notion or concept of him. 

The attri- But as thought, in all its gradations of conception, 
voived in judgment, and reasoning, is only realised by the 
repiTatod attribution of certain qualities or characters to the 
by i»»«- 0 pj ec t 3 or about, which we think, so this attribu- 
tion is regulated by laws, which render a great part 
what is 0 f this process absolutely necessary. But when I 

meant by * * J 

a law as speak of laws and of their absolute necessity in rela- 

applicable x J 

tcHisence ^ on thought, you must not suppose that these 
laws and that necessity are the same in the world of 
mind as in the world of matter. For free intelligences, 
a law is an ideal necessity given in the form of a 
precept, which we ought to follow, but which we may 
also violate if we please ; whereas, for the existences 
which constitute the universe of nature, a law is only 
another name for those causes which operate blindly 
and universally in producing certain inevitable results. 
By law of thought, or by logical necessity, we do not, 
therefore, mean a physical law, such as the law of 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


79 


gravitation, but a general precept which we are able lect. 

certainly to violate, but which if we do not obey, our 

whole process of thinking is suicidal or absolutely 
null. These laws are, consequently, the primary con- 
ditions of the possibility of valid thought, and as the 
whole of Pure Logic is only an articulate development 
of the various modes in which they are applied, their 
consideration in general constitutes the first chapter 
in an orderly system of the science. Now, in ex- order of 
plaining to you this subject, the method I shall pur- SST of the 
sue is the following : — I shall, first of all, state in [Sw^IIf 
general the number and significance of the laws as thought * 
commonly received ; I shall then more particularly 
consider each of these by itself and in relation to 
the others ; then detail to you their history ; and, 
finally, state to you my own views in regard to their 
deduction, number, and arrangement. 


IF XIII. The Fundamental Laws of Thought or Par. xm. 
the conditions of the thinkable, as commonly tal Laws of 
received, are four: — 1. The Law of Identity; 2. Thought * 
The Law of Contradiction ; 3. The Law of Exclu- 
sion or of Excluded Middle ; and, 4. The Law of 
Reason and Consequent, or of Sufficient Reason. 


Of these in their order. 


IF XIV. The principle of Identity ( principium Par. xiv. 
Identitatis) expresses the relation of total sameness identity, 
in which a concept stands to all, and the relation of 
partial sameness in which it stands to each, of its 
constituent characters. In other words, it de- 
clares the impossibility of thinking the concept 
and its characters as reciprocally unlike. It is 


80 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.C'T. 

V. 


Explica- 

tion. 


Iti logical 
importance 
—The prin 
ciple of all 
logical affir- 
mation and 
definition. 

This illus- 
trated. 


expressed in tlie formula A is A, or A— A ; and 
by A is denoted every logical thing, every pro- 
duct of our thinking faculty, — concept, judgment, 
reasoning, &c.° 

The principle of Identity is an application of the 
principle of the absolute equivalence of a whole and 
of all its parts taken together, to the thinking of a 
thing by the attribution of constituent qualities or 
characters. The concept of the thing is a whole, the 
characters are the parts of that whole/ This law r may, 
therefore, be also thus enounced, — Everything is equal 
to itself, — for in a logical relation the thing and its 
concept coincide ; as, in Logic, we abstract altogether 
from the reality of the thing which the concept re- 
presents. It is, therefore, the same whether we say 
that the concept is equal to all its characters, or that 
the thing is equal to itself. 7 

The law has, likewise, been expressed by the for- 
mula, — In the predicate, the whole is contained ex- 
plicitly, which in the subject is contained implicitly. 
It is also involved in the axiom, — Nota notes est nota 
rei ipsius .* 

The logical importance of the law of Identity lies 
- in this, — that it is the principle of all logical affirma- 
tion and definition. An example or two may be given 
to illustrate this. 

1. In a concept, which we may call Z, the characters 
a, b, and c are thought as its constituents ; conse- 
quently, the concept, as a unity, is equal to the cha- 
racters taken together, — Z = (a + l + c). If the former 

a [Schulze, Logik, § 17. Gerlach, & See Schulze, Logik, p. 32-3 Ed. 

Logik, g 37-] Cf. Krug, Logik, § 17. y See Krug, Logit , p. 40. — En. 

— Ed. 5 See Kant, Logik, p. 40. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


81 


be affirmed, so also is the latter ; therefore, Z being lf.ct. 

(a + b + c) is a, is b, is c. To take a concrete example, ' — 

- — The concept man is a complement made up of the 
characters, 1°, substance, 2°, material, 3°, organised, 

4°, animated, 5°, rationed, 6°, of this earth ; in other 
words, man is substance, is material, is organised, is 
animated, is rational. Being, as entering into every 
attribution, may be discharged as affording no distinc- 
tion. 

2. Again, suppose that, in the example given, the 
character a is made up of the characters l, m, n, it 
follows, by the same law of Identity, that Z=a= 

(l, 77?, n) is l, is m, is 7». The concept man contains 
in it the character animal, and the character animal 
contains in it the characters corporeal, organised, 
living, &c. 

The second law is the principle of Contradiction or 
Non-contradiction, in relation to which I shall dictate 
the following paragraph : — 

IT XV. When an object is determined by the p»r. xv. 
affirmation of a certain character, this object indicium, 
cannot be thought to be the same when such 
character is denied of it. The impossibility of 
this is enounced in what is called the principle 
of Contradiction, ( principium Contradictionis 
seu Repugnantice). Assertions concerning a thing 
are mutually contradictory, when the one asserts 
that the thing possesses the character which 
the other asserts that it does not. This law is 
logically expressed in the formula, — What is 
contradictory is unthinkable. A— not A— 0, or 
A — A—0. 

VOL. i. F 


 



82 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Now, in the first place, in regard to the name of 

1 this law, it may be observed that, as it enjoins the 

name. 0I>er absence of contradiction as the indispensable condi- 
tion of thought, it ought to be called, not the Law of 
Contradiction, but the Law of Non-contradiction, or 
of non-repugnantia. a 

How This law has frequently been enounced in the for- 

enounced. mu j a ^ — jj. - s i m p 0SS ikl e that the same thing can at 

once be and not be ; but this is exposed to sundry 
objections. It is vague and, therefore, useless. It 
does not indicate whether a real or a notional existence 
is meant ; and if it mean the former, then is it not 
a logical but a metaphysical axiom. But even as a 
metaphysical axiom it is imperfect, for to the expres- 
sion at once (simul) must be added, — in the same place , 
in the same respect , kef 

This law has likewise been expressed by the for- 
mula, — Contradictory attributes cannot be united in 
one act of consciousness. But this is also obnoxious 
to objection. For a judgment expresses as good a 
unity of consciousness as a concept. But when I. 
judge that round and square are contradictory attri- 
butes, there are found in this judgment contradictory 
attributes, but yet a unity of consciousness. The 
formula is, therefore, vaguely and inaccurately ex- 
pressed. 

Tho prm-^ The logical import of this law lies in its being the 
logical nega- principle of all logical negation and distinction, 
distinction. The law of Identity and the law of Contradiction 
are co-ordinate and reciprocally relative, and neither 
can be educed as second from the other as first ; for 
in every such attempt at derivation, the supposed 


a Compare Krug, Logik, § 18. — Ed. Kritikd. r. V., p. 134, ed. Roaenkrauz. 
$ Compare the criticism of Kant, — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


83 


secondary law is, in fact, always necessarily presup- 
posed.® These are, in fact, one and the same law, — 
differing only by a positive and negative expression. 

In relation to the third law, take the following 
paragraph : — 


LECT. 

v. 


1 XVI. The principle of Excluded Third orpar.xvi. 
Middle — viz. between two contradictories, (princi- Excluded 
pium Exclusi Meclii vel Tertii), enounces that con- 1 e ' 
dition of thought, which compels us, of tw T o repug- 
nant notions, which cannot both coexist, to think 
either the one or the other as existing. Hence 
arises the general axiom, — Of contradictory at- 
tributions, we can only affirm one of a thing ; 
and if one be explicitly affirmed, the other is 
implicitly denied. A either is or is not. A 
either is or is not BP 


By the laws of Identity and Contradiction, I am Logical 
warranted to conclude from the truth of one contra- offhfsTw 0 
dictory proposition to the falsehood of the other, and 
by the law of Excluded Middle, I am warranted to 
conclude from the falsehood of one contradictory pro- 
position to the truth of the other. And in this lies 
the peculiar force and import of this last principle. 

For the logical significance of the law of Excluded 
Middle consists in this, that it limits or shuts in the 
sphere of the thinkable in relation to affirmation ; for 
it determines, that, of the two forms given in the laws 
of Identity and Contradiction, and by these laws 
affirmed as those exclusively possible, the one or the 
other must be affirmed as necessary. 

a This is shown more in detail by § 23 . — Ed. 

Hoffbauer, Anfangggriindc der Logik, j8 See Schulze, Logik, § 19. — Ed. 


8t 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. The law of Excluded Middle is the principle or 

Disjunctive Judgments, that is, of judgments in which 

™T D n “* a plurality of judgments are contained, and which 
J ju(i^ncnt». stand in such a reciprocal relation that the affirmation 
of one is the denial of the other. 

I now go on to the fourth law. 


Par. XVII. 
Law of 
Sufficient 
Reason, or 
of Reason 
and Conse- 
quent. 


IF XVII. The thinking of an object, as actually 
characterised by positive or by negative attributes, 
is not left to the caprice of Understanding, — the 
Faculty of Thought ; but that faculty must be 
necessitated to this or that determinate act of 
thinking by a knowledge of something different 
from, and independent of, the process of thinking 
itself. This condition of our understanding is 
expressed by the law, as it is called, of Sufficient 
Reason, ( principium Ration is Svfficientis) ; but it 
is more properly denominated the law of Reason 
and Consequent, {principium Rationis el Conse- 
cutionis). That knowledge by which the mind 
is necessitated to affirm or posit something else, 
is called the logical reason, ground, or antecedent ; 
that something else which the mind is necessi- 
tated to affirm or posit, is called the logical con- 
sequent ; and the relation between the reason and 
consequent, is called the logical connection , or 
consequence . This law is expressed in the for- 
mula, — Infer nothing without a ground or reason. a 


Relations 
between 
Reason and 
Consequent. 


The relations between Reason and Consequent, when 
comprehended in a pure thought, are the following : — • 
1. When a reason is explicitly or implicitly given, 
then there must exist a consequent ; and, vice versa , 


u See Schulze, Logilt , § 19, and Krug, Logik, § 20.— Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


85 


when a consequent is given, there must also exist a lect. 
reason. . 


2. Where there is no reason, there can be no conse- 
quent; and, vice versa, where there is no consequent, 

(either implicitly or explicitly), there can be no reason. 

That is, the concepts of reason and of consequent, as 
reciprocally relative, involve and suppose each other. 

The logical significance of the law of Reason and Logical »; c . 
Consequent lies in this, — That in virtue of it, thought thi. law. ° 
is constituted into a series of acts all indissolubly con- 
nected ; each necessarily inferring the other. Thus it 
is that the distinction and opposition of possible, actual, 
and necessary matter, which has been introduced into 
Logic, is a doctrine wholly extraneous to this science. 

I may observe that “ Reason is something different Rcafton and 
from Cause, and Consequent something different from and Causa 
Effect ; though cause and effect, in so far as they are “ d Effcct ' 
conceived in thought, stand to each other in the rela- 
tion of reason and consequent. Cause is thus thought 
of as a real object, which affords the reason of the exist- 
ence of another real object, the effect ; and effect is 
thought of as a real object, which is the consequent of 
another real object, the cause. Accordingly, every 
cause is recognised in thought as a reason, and eveiy 
effect is recognised in thought as a consequent ; but 
the converse is not true, that every reason is really 
considered a cause, and every consequent really con- 
sidered an effect. We must, therefore, carefully dis- 
tinguish mere reason and mere consequent, that is, 
ideal or logical reason and consequent, from the rea- 
son which is a cause and the consequent which is an 
effect, that is, real or metaphysical reason and 


consequent. 

rni • 7 • 7 7 r Logical and 

“ I he expression logical reason ana consequent refers M«u P hy«i- 


Digitized by Coogle 


86 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

V. 


cal Reason 
and Conse- 
quent. 


Generality 
of the terms 
Condition 
and Con- 
ditioned. 


History of 
the develop- 
ment of the 
fundamen- 
tal Laws of 
Thought. 


\ 


to the mere synthesis of thoughts ; whereas the ex- 
pression metaphysical reason and consequent denotes 
the real connection of existences. Hence the axiom 
of Causality, as a metaphysical principle, is essentially 
different from the axiom of Reason and Consequent, as 
a logical principle. Both, however, are frequently 
confounded with each other ; and the law of Reason 
and Consequent, indeed, formerly found its place in 
the systems of Metaphysic, while it was not, at least 
explicitly, considered in those of Logic. The two 
terms condition and conditioned happily express at 
once the relations both of reason and consequent, and 
of cause and effect. A condition is a thing which de- 
termines, [negatively at least,] the existence of another ; 
the conditioned is a thing whose existence is deter- 
mined in and by another. If used in an ideal or logi- 
cal signification, condition and conditioned import 
only the reason in conjunction with its consequent ; 
if used in a real or metaphysical sense, they express 
the cause in connection with its effect.” a 

I have now, in the prosecution of our inquiry into 
the fundamental laws of logical thinking, to say a 
few words in regard to their History, — their history 
being the narration of the order in which, and of the 
philosophers by whom, they were articulately de- 
veloped. 


a Krug, Loffilc, pp. 62, 63. This ex- 
position of the law of Reason and 
Consequent does not represent the 
Author's latest view. In a note 
to the Ducussions, p. 160, (where a 
similar doctrine had been maintained 
in the article as originally published), 
he says : M The logical relation of 
Reason and Consequent, as more than 
a mere corollary of the law of Non- 
contradiction in its three phases, is, I 
am confident of proving, erroneous." 


And again, in the same work, p. 603 : 
“ The principle of Sufficient Reason 
should be excluded from Logic. For, 
in as much as this principle is not ma- 
terial, it is only a derivation of the 
three formal laws ; and in as much as 
it is material, it coincides with the 
principle of Causality, and is extra- 
logical.” The Laws of Thought, pro- 
perly ho called, are thus reduced to 
three, — those of Identity , Contradic- 
tion, and Excluded Middle. — Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


87 


Of the first three laws, which, from their intimate lect. 

y 

cognation, may not unreasonably be regarded as only 1 — 

the three sides or phases of a single law, the law of ijm!” “ f 
Identity, which stands first in the order of nature, 
was indeed that last developed in the order of time ; “ f 
the axioms of Contradiction and of Excluded Middle 
having been long enounced, ere that of Identity had 
been discriminated and raised to the rank of a co-ordi- 
nate principle. I shall not, therefore, now follow the 
order in which I detailed to you these laws, but the 
order in which they were chronologically generalised. 

The principles of Contradiction and of Excluded The P rin- 
Middle can both be traced back to Plato, by whom coMn^ic- 
they were enounced and frequently applied ; though Excluded 
it was not till long after, that either of them obtained 
a distinctive appellation. To take the principle ofputo. 
Contradiction first. This law Plato frequently em- 
ploys, but the most remarkable passages are found in 
the Phcsdo, in the Sophista, and in the fourth and 
seventh books of the Republic .“ 

This law was, however, more distinctively and em- l»» of 
phatically enounced by Aristotle. In one place/ he tion cm P b*- 
says : “ It is manifest that no one can conceive to enounced by 

. , .. . - Ariitotle. 

himself that the same thing can at once be and not 
be, for thus he would hold repugnant opinions, and 
subvert the reality of truth. Wherefore, all who 
attempt to demonstrate, reduce everything to this as 
the ultimate doctrine ; for this is by nature the prin- 
ciple of all other axioms.” And in several passages 
of his Metaphysics, y in his Prior Analytics , 8 and in 
his Posterior Analytics ,* he observes that “ some had 

a See Phccdo, p. 103 ; Sophitla, p. P Mclaph , 1. iii. (it.) c. 3. 

252 ; Republic, ir. p. 436 ; riL p. 525. y L. iii e. 4. 

— Ed. * L. ii. c. 2. < L. i. c. 2. 


 



88 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

V. 


With the 
Peripatetics 
the highest 
principle of 
Knowledge. 
Obtained its 
name from 
the Greek 
Aristotel- 
ians. 


Tlic School- 
men, — Sua- 
rez. 


attempted to demonstrate this principle, — an attempt 
which betrayed an ignorance of those things whereof 
we ought to require a demonstration, and of those 
things whereof we ought not : for it is impossible to 
demonstrate everything ; as in this case, we must re- 
gress and regress to infinity, and all demonstration 
would, on that supposition, be impossible.” 

Following Aristotle, the Peripatetics established this 
law as the highest principle of knowledge. From the 
Greek Aristotelians it obtaiued the name by which it 
has subsequently been denominated, the principle , or 
law, or axiom, of contradiction, (d^ioiixa rrjs dvri^daeo)^). 
This name, at least, is found in the Commentaries of 
Ammonius and Philoponus, where it is said to be 
“ the criterion which divides truth from falsehood 
throughout the universe of existence.” “ The School- 
men, in general, taught the same doctrine; and Suarez 
even says, that the law of contradiction holds the 
same supremacy among the principles of knowledge 
which the Deity does among the principles of exist- 
ence/ 

After the decline of the Aristotelian philosophy, 
many controversies arose touching the truth, and still 
more touching the primitive or axiomatic character, of 
this law. Some maintained that it was indemon- 


a For the name, see Ammonius, In 
De Interpret ., Comment., p. 153 b, 
ed. Aid. Venet. 1546. rhiloponus, 
In A nal. Pr., p. 13 b, 38 b, ed. Venet. 
1536. In Anal. Post., p. 30 b, ed. Aid. 
Venet. 1534. The language quoted in 
the text is nearly a translation of Am- 
monius In Cuter/., p. 140 a. 'H ply yap 
Kararpams /cat airdtpa/ris Ofl lirl ndyru'y 
t uv uvrwy kcu pi ) bvrwv biatpu rb &A 77 - 
6(s real rb \j/(v5os. Ammonius is fol- 
lowed by Philoponus, who says,— Tb 
tj)j ayrupderews a£iwpa Ini ¦ndyrwy 


ply ray uvruv Kal pi) uyrwy Siaipe? rb 
\p(0dor /cal tV a\i)6day. In Anal. 
Post., 1. i. c. xi. f. 30 b. — E d. [Cf. 
Augustinus Niphus Suessanus, In 
Anal. Post., p. 88 , ed. Paris, 1540.] 
0 See[Al 8 todius, A rtium Liberalium 
Si/stema ( 3 vo), p. 174. “ Cognitio a 

priori est principiorum : inter quae 
agtnen ducit hoc, impombile est idem 
esse et non esse. . . . Consule Metaph., 
Suarezii : — ‘ Hoc, inquam, tenet pri- 
matum inter principia cognoscendi, 
sicut Deus inter principia essendi.’ ”] 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


89 


strable ; others that it could be proved, but proved lect. 

only indirectly by a reductio ad absurdum; while 1 — ; 

others again held that this could be directly done, 
and that, consequently, the law of Contradiction was !«hli 
not entitled to the dignity of a first principle. 0 In il'iTuw.' ° f 
like manner, its employment was made a further mat- 
ter of controversy. Finally, it was disputed whether 
it were an immediate, native, or a priori datum of in- 
telligence ; or whether it were an a posteriori and ad- 
ventitious generalisation from experience. The latter 
alternative, that it was only an induction, was main- L«ko. 
tained by Locke. 0 This opinion was, however, validly 
refuted by Leibnitz ; who showed that it is admitted Lcibnit*. 
the moment the terms of its enunciation are under- 
stood, and that wo implicitly follow it even when we 
arc not explicitly conscious of its dictate. 7 Leibnitz, 
in some parts of his works, seems to identify the prin- 
ciples of Identity and Contradiction ; in others, he dis- 
tinguishes them, but educes the law of Identity out 
of the law of Contradiction. 8 It is needless to pur- 
sue the subsequent history of this principle, which in n» troth 
latter times has found none to gainsay the necessity 
and universality of its truth, except among those 
philosophers who, in Germany, have dreamt that man 
is competent to a cognition of the Absolute : and as a 
cognition of the absolute can only be established 
through positions repugnant, and, therefore, on logical 
principles, mutually exclusive, they have found it ne- 
cessary to start with a denial of the fundamental laws 
of thought ; and so, in their effort to soar to a philo- 

a Cf. Suarez, Dinputationes Meta- 7 No urea ux Egsais, B. i. ch. i. § 4. 
physicee, Disp. iii. § 3 . — Ed. [Alsto- — Ed. 

dins, Encyclopaedia, 1. iii., Archeloffia, S Compare Th&odic&e, § 44, Monado* 
c. vii p. 80 ] logie, § 31, with Noureaux Essaii, 1. i. 

0 E$tay, B. i. ch. il § 4.— Ed. ch. i. § 10 ; 1. iv. ch. ii. § 1.— Ed. 


 



00 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. sophy above logic and intelligence, they have sub- 

— verted the conditions of human philosophy altogether. 

Thus Schelling and Hegel prudently repudiated the 
principles of Contradiction and Excluded Middle as 
having any application to the absolute ; a while again 
those philosophers, (as Cousin), who attempt a cognition 
of the absolute without a preliminary repudiation of 
the laws of Logic, at once involve themselves in contra- 
dictions, the cogency of which they do not deny, and 
from which they are wholly unable to extricate them- 
selves. P But this by the way, and on a subject which 
at present you cannot all be supposed to understand. 
Law of The law of Excluded Middle between two contra- 
Middic!' dictories remounts, as I have said, also to Plato, 
though the Second Alcibiades , the dialogue in which 
it is most clearly expressed, must be admitted to be 
spurious. 7 It is also in the fragments of Pseudo- 
Expiicitiy Arcliytas, to be found in Stobaeus. 8 It is explicitly and 
TZT y emphatically enounced by Aristotle in many passages 
both of his Metaphysics , (1. iii. (iv.) c. 7.), and of his 


a See Schelling, Vom Jch als Prin- 
cip der Philosophic, § 10 ; Hegel, 
Logik, b. ii. c. 2 ; Encyklopddie, § 115, 
1 1 9. Schelling endeavours to abro- 
gate the principle of Contradiction in 
relation to the higher philosophy, by 
assuming that of Identity ; the empiri- 
cal antagonism between ego and non- 
ego being merged in the identity of 
the absolute ego. Hegel regards both 
principles alike as valid only for the 
finite Understanding, and as inappli- 
cable to the higher processes of the 
Reason. This difference between the 
two philosophers is pointed out by the 
latter in his Oeschichtc der Philo- 
sophic, ( Werke , xv. p. 598.) — Ed. 
[On rejection of the Logical Laws, by 
Schelling, Hegel, Ac., see Baclimann, 
Uber die Philosophie mciner Zcit, p. 
218, ed. Jena, 1816. Bolzano, U r i**en~ 


schaftslehre, iv., Logik, § 718. Sigwart, 
Logik, § 58, p. 42, ed. 1835. Herbart, 
I)e Principio Logico Excl usi MecUi inter 
Contradictoria non negligen do, Getting. 
1833. Hartenstein, De Methodo Philo- 
tophi ce Lof/icm Legibus adstringenda, 
finibus non terminanda, Lipsisc, 1835. 
On the logical and metaphysical signi- 
ficance of the principle of Contradic- 
tion, see Platner, Phil. Aph., I. § 673, 
and Kant, Kritik d. reinen Vernunft, 
p. 191, ed. 1790.] 

/3 See the Author's criticism of 
Cousin, Discussions, p. 1 et seq . — Ed. 

y Second Alcibiades, p. 139. See 
also Sophista, p. 250. — Ed. 

8 Eel ogee , 1. ii. c. 2, p. 158, ed. Ant- 
werp, 1575; Part ii. tom. 1, p. 22, 
ed. Heeren. Cf. Simplicius, In Ariel. 
Catcg., pp. 97, 103, ed. Basil, 1551. — 
Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


91 


Analytics , both Prior (1. i. c. 2) and Posterior , (1. i. c. 4). lect. 
In the first of these he says : “It is impossible that v 
there should exist any medium between contradictory 
opposites, but it is necessary either to affirm or to 
deny everything of everything.” And his expressions 
are similar in the other books. Cicero says “ that the Cicero, 
foundation of Dialectic is, that whatever is enounced 
is either true or false ” This is from his Academics , 

(1. ii. c. xxix.), and there are parallel passages in his 
Topics, (c. xiv.), and his De Oratore, (1. ii. c. xxx.) 

This law, though universally recognised as a principle 
in the Greek Peripatetic school and in the schools of 
the middle ages, only received the distinctive appella- 
tion by which it is now known at a comparatively 
modem date.® I do not recollect having met with Baum- 
the term prindpium exclusi medii in any author 
older than the Leibnitzian Baumgarten/ though Wolf 7 
speaks of the exclusio medii inter contradictona. 

The law of Identity, I stated, was not explicated Law of 
as a co-ordinate principle till a comparatively recent Ident,t3, 
period. The earliest author in whom I have found Antonia 
this done, is Antonius Andreas, a scholar of Scotus, who “ 
flourished at the end of the thirteenth and beginning 
of the fourteenth century. This schoolman, in the fourth 
book of his Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics , 5 
— a commentary which is full of the most ingenious 
and original views, — not only asserts to the law of 
Identity a co-ordinate dignity with the law of Con- 


a Lex eon trad ictori arum, prin ri pi um 
contradiceniium (bc. propositionum), 
as used in the schools, included the 
law of Contradiction and the law of 
Excluded Middle. See Molinacus, 
Elementa Logica , 1. ii. c. 14, [p. 172, 
ed. 1603. “ Con tradiccn than us us 

explicatur uno axiomate : — Contradi- 


centia non possunt de eodem simul 
esse vera ; et necessariuin est contra- 
dicentium alterum cuilibet rei con- 
venire, alterum non convenire.” — E d.] 

/3 Metaphysical 10. — Ed. 

7 Ontologia, §§ 52, 53. 

8 Quaestio v. p. 21a, ed. Venet., 
1513.— Ed. . 


92 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

V. 


Leibnitz. 

Wolf. 

Baum- 

garten. 


Fichte and 
Scliclling. 

Hegel. 


tradiction, but, against Aristotle, be maintains, that 
the principle of Identity, and not the principle of 
Contradiction, is the one absolutely first. The for- 
mula in which Andreas expressed it was, Ens est ens. 
Subsequently to this author, the question concerning 
the relative priority of the two laws of Identity and 
of Contradiction became one much agitated in the 
schools ; though there were also found some who 
asserted to the law of Excluded Middle this supreme 
rank. a Leibnitz, as I have said, did not always dis- 
tinguish the principles of Identity and of Contradic- 
tion. By Wolf the former was styled the principle 
of Certainty, {principium Certitudinis) but he, no 
more than Leibnitz himself, sufficiently discriminated 
between it and the law of Contradiction. This was, 
however, done by Baumgarten, another distinguished 
follower of Leibnitz , 7 and from him it received the 
name of the principle of Position, that is, of Affirma- 
tion or Identity, ( principium Positionis sive Identi- 
tatis ), — the name by which it is now universally known. 
This principle has found greater favour in the eyes of 
the absolutist philosophers, than those of Contradiction 
and Excluded Middle. By Fichte and Schelling it 
has been placed as the primary principle of all philo- 
sophy . 5 Hegel alone subjects it, along with the 
other laws of thought, to a rigid but fallacious criti- 
cism ; and rejects it along with them, as belonging to 
that lower sphere of knowledge, which is conversant 
only with the relative and finite . 6 

a [Alex, tie Ales, In A rist. Mctapk ., quo vis ajfKrmatio rel negatio . — Ed. 

iv. t. 9.] Compare Suarez, Disp. Me - /3 Ontologia, § 55, 2S8. — Ed. 

taph ., Disp. iii. § 3. Alexander pro- y Metaphysica, § 11.- — Ed. 

f esses to agree with Aristotle in giv- 5 See Fichte, Grundlage der ge- 

ing the first place to the principle of sammten Wissenschaftslehre, § 1. 

Contradiction, but, in fact, he identifies Schelling, Yom Ich, § 7. — Ed. 
it with that of Excluded Middle, dc * See above, p. 90 note a. — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


93 

The fourth law, that of Reason and Consequent, lf.ct. 

which stands apart by itself from the other three, was, 

like the laws of Contradiction and Excluded Middle, 
recognised by Plato. a He lays it down as a postu- (v,n * c ' lueot - 
late of reason, to admit nothing without a cause ; and b y d F Jjj£ 
the same is frequently done by his scholar Aristotle/ k>h«- 
Both, however, in reference to this principle, employ the 
ambiguous term cause, (atria, afriov). Aristotle, indeed, 
distinguishes the law of Reason, as the ideal principle riit 
of knowledge, (apxv y vworews, principium cognos- > “xhr^t 

cendi), from the real principle of Production, (dpyy rr}<; 
yeve<rea><;, principium fiendi, — principium essendi). y 
By Cicero the axiom of reason and consequent was, ci«ro. 
in like manner, comprehended under the formula, 
nihil sine causa, 5 — a formula adopted by the school- Th«- Sew- 
men ; although they, after Aristotle, distinguished 
under it the ratio essendi, and the ratio cognoscendi. 

In modern times, the attention of philosophers was Loihniu 
called to this law by Leibnitz, who, on the two prin - tion to Law 
ciples of Reason and of Contradiction, founded the R«‘n" 
whole edifice of his philosophy.' Under the latter 
law, as I have mentioned, he comprehended, however, 
the principle of Identity ; and in the former he did 
not sufficiently discriminate, in terms, the law of Cau- 
sality, as a real principle, from the law of Reason, pro- 
perly so called, as a formal or ideal principle. To 
this axiom he gave various denominations, — now call- 
ing it the principle of Determining Reason, now the 
principle of Sufficient Reason, and now the principle 
of Convenience or Agreement, ( convenientia ) ; making 
it, in its real relation, the ground of all existence, in 

a Philebut, p. 26 . — Ed. y Metaph., iv. (v.) 1 . — Ed. 

0 E. g., Anal. Pott., ii. 16; Phyt., S De Divination', ii. c. 28 . — Ed. 

ii. 3 ; Metaph , i. 1,3; Met., ii. 23.— « See Thiodic/e, § 44. Monadoloyie, 

Ed. §§31,32.— Ed. 


 



94 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

V. 


Wolf. 


Discussion 
rctfardinK 
the Lcib- 
nitzian 
doctrine of 
the law of 
Sufficient 
Reason. 


its ideal, the ground of all positive knowledge. On 
this subject there was a celebrated controversy be- 
tween Leibnitz and Dr Samuel Clarke, — a controversy 
on this, as on other points, eminently worthy of your 
study. The documents in which this controversy is 
contained, were published in the English edition under 
the title, A collection of Papers which passed between 
the late learned Mr Leibnitz and Dr Clarice, in the 
years 1715 and 1716, relating to the Principles of 
Natural Philosophy and Religion, London, 1717.“ 

Wolf, the most distinguished follower of Leibnitz, 
employs the formula, — “ Nothing is without a suffi- 
cient reason why it is, rather than why it is not ; 
that is, if anything is supposed to be, ( ponitur esse), 
something also must be supposed, whence it may be 
understood why the same is rather than is not.”* 3 He 
blames the schoolmen for confusing reason, (ratio), with 
cause, ( cavsa ) : but his censure equally applies to his 
master Leibnitz as to them and Aristotle ; for all of 
these philosophers, though they did not confound the 
two principles, employed ambiguous terms to denote 
them. 

The Leibnitzian doctrine of the universality of the 
law of Sufficient Reason, both as a principle of exist- 
ence and of thought, excited much discussion among 
the philosophers, more particularly of Germany. In 
the earlier half of the last century, some controverted 
the validity of the principle, others attempted to re- 
strict it. 7 Among other arguments, it was alleged, by 

a See especially, Leibnitz's Second /3 See Fischer’s Logik , [§ 59, p. 38, 
Letter, p. 20, in which the principle ed. 1838. Compare Wolf, Ontologies 
of Contradiction or Identity is assumed §§ 70, 71 . — Ed.] 
as the foundation of all mathematics y As Feuerlin and Daries. See 
and that of Sufficient Reason as the Bachmann, Logik, p. 56, Leipsig, 1828 ; 
foundation of natural philosophy. — Cf. Degerando, Hist. Comp, det Syst. 
Ed. de Phil., t. ii. p. 145, ed. 1004 . — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


95 


the advocates of the former opinion, if the principle 
be admitted, that everything must have a sufficient 
reason why it is, rather than why it is not, — on this 
hypothesis, error itself will have such a reason, and, 
therefore, must cease forthwith to be error." 

Many philosophers, as Wolf and Baumgarten, 
endeavoured to demonstrate this principle by the 
principle of Contradiction ; while others, with better 
success, showed that all such demonstrations were 
illogical.^ 

In the more recent systems of philosophy, the uni- 
versality and necessity of the axiom of Beason has, 
with other logical laws, been controverted and rejected 
by speculators on the absolute . 7 

a See Bachmann, Logik, p. 56. y [On principle of Double Negation 
With the foregoing history of the as another law of Thought, see Fries, 
laws of Thought, compare the same Logik, % 41, p. 190; Calker, Denklehre 
author, Logik, § 18-81. — Ed. Oder Logik und Dialektik, § 165, p. 

/3 [Kiesewetter, Allgemeine Logik , 453; Beneke, Lehrbuch der Logik, 
P. i. p. 57] ; compare Lecture * on Meta - § 64, p. 41.] 

¦phyrici, ii. pp. 396, 897, notes. — E d. 


LECT. 

V. 


 



96 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


LECTURE VI. 

STOICHE IOLOG Y. 

SECTION I. — NOETIC. 

THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THOUGHT — THEIR 
CLASSIFICATION AND IMPORT. 

l ^ct. Having concluded tbe Introductory Questions, we 

— entered, in our last Lecture, upon our science itself. 

Rcca I ,.t u| a g rg j. p ar f. Q f p ure Logic is the Doctrine of Ele- 
ments, or that which considers the conditions of mere 
or possible thinking. These elements are of two kinds, 

• — they are either the fundamental laws of thought as 
regulating its necessary products, or they are the pro- 
ducts themselves as regulated by those laws. The 
fundamental laws are four in number, — the law of 
Identity, the law of Contradiction, the law of Ex- 
cluded Middle, the law of Reason and Consequent. 0 
The products of thought are three, — 1°, Concepts or 
Notions ; 2°, Judgments ; and, 3°, Reasonings. In our 
last Lecture, we considered the first of these two 
parts of the doctrine of elements, and I went through 
the general explanation of the contents and import of 
the four laws, and their history. Without recapitu- 
lating what was then stated, I shall now proceed to 
certain general observations, which may be suggested 
in relation to the four laws. 

observations And, first of all, I may remark, that they naturally 
Lithe* f”u" fall into two classes. The first of these classes con- 

a See, however, above, p. 8G, note o. — Ko. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


97 


sists of the three principles of Identity, Contradiction, lf.ct. 

and Excluded Middle ; the second comprehends the — 

principle of Reason and Consequent alone. This clas- un^«"f 
sification is founded both on the different reciprocal 
connection of the laws, and on the different nature of 
their results. 

In the first place, in regard to the difference of con- This cu«- 
nection between the laws themselves, it is at once founded, 1% 
evident that the first three stand in a far more proxi- reU of 
mate relation to each other than to the fourth. The first between the 
three are, indeed, so intimately connected, that though mkU. em ’ 
it has not even been attempted to carry them up into 
a higher principle, and though the various and con- 
tradictory endeavours that have been made to elevate 
one or other into an antecedent, and to degrade others 
into consequents, have only shown, by their failure, the 
impossibility of reducing the three to one ; still so 
intimate is their connection, that each in fact sup- 
poses the others. They are like the three sides of a 
triangle ; not the same, not reducible to unity, each 
pretending with equal right to a prior consideration, 
and each, if considered first, giving in its own exist- 
ence the existence of the other two. This intimacy 
of relation does not subsist between the principle of 
Reason and Consequent and the three other laws ; 
they do not, in the same necessary manner, suggest 
each other in thought. The explanation of this is 
found in the different nature of their results ; and 
this is the second subject of our consideration.® 

In the second place, then, the distinction of the four 2 % On the 
laws into two classes is not only warranted by the .',r tL «>•! 
difference of their mutual dependence in thought, but, two classes 

a For a later development of the tinction here indicated, see Discus- 
Author’s philosophy as regards the dia- si on*, p. 602 et seq . — Ed. 

VOL. I. O 


 



98 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. likewise, by the difference of the end which the two 

— classes severally accomplish. For the first three laws 

n °t only stand apart by themselves, (forming, as it were, 
a single principle viewed in three different aspects), 
but they necessitate a result veiy different, both in 
kind and in degree, from that determined by the law 
of Reason and Consequent. The difference in their 
result consists in this, — Whatever violates the laws, 
whether of Identity, of Contradiction, or of Excluded 
Middle, we feel to be absolutely impossible, not only 
in thought but in existence. Thus we cannot attri- 
bute even to Omnipotence the power of making a 
thing different from itself, of making a thing at once 
to be and not to be, of making a thing neither to be 
nor not to be. These three laws thus determine to 
us the sphere of possibility and of impossibility ; and 
this not merely in thought but in reality, not only 
logically but metaphysically. Very different is the 
result of the law of Reason and Consequent. This 
principle merely excludes from the sphere of positive 
thought what we cannot comprehend ; for whatever 
we comprehend, that through which we comprehend 
it is its reason. What, therefore, violates the law of 
Reason and Consequent merely, in virtue of this law 
becomes a logical zero ; that is, we are compelled to 
think it as unthinkable, but not to think it, though 
actually non-existent subjectively or in thought, as 
therefore necessarily non-existent objectively or in 
reality. And why, it may be asked, does the law of 
Reason and Consequent not equally determine the 
sphere of general possibility, as the laws of Identity, 
Contradiction, and Excluded Middle 'i Why are we 
to view the unthinkable in the one case not to be 
equally impossible in reality, as the unthinkable in the 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


09 


other? Some philosophers have, on the one hand, lect. 
asserted to the Deity the power of reconciling contra- L .- 


dictions ; a while, on the other, a greater number have 


opinions 

made the conceivable in human thought the gauge of 
the possible in existence. What warrants us, it may 
be asked, to condemn these opposite procedures as 
equally unphilosophical ? In answer to this, though 
the matter belongs more properly to Metaphysic than 
to Logic, I may say a few words, which, however, I 
am aware, cannot, by many of you, be as yet ade- 
quately understood. 

To deny the universal application of the first three ti . 0 rcspcc- 
laws, is, in fact, to subvert the reality of thought J of the two 
and as this subversion is itself an act of thought, it in the laws of 
fact annihilates itself. fineftd^ 

When, for example, I say that A is, and then say To deny the 
that A is not, by the second assertion I sublate or take a^Stion 
away what, by the first assertion, I posited or laid u»toi!w£ 
down ; thought, in the one case, undoing by negation u^reiity* 
what, in the other, it had by affirmation done. But ol thouKl,t * 
when it is asserted, that A existing and A non-existing 
are at once true, what does this imply ? It implies 
that negation and affirmation correspond to nothing 
out of the mind, — that there is no agreement, no dis- 
agreement between thought and its objects ; and this 
is tantamount to saying that truth and falsehood are 
merely empty sounds. For if we only think by affir- 
mation and negation, and if these are only as they 
are exclusive of each other, it follows, that unless 
existence and non-existence be opposed objectively in 
the same manner as affirmation and negation are 
opposed subjectively, all our thought is a mere illu- 
sion. Thus it is, that those who would assert the 

a Compare Le Clerc, Logica , p. ii. c. 3. — Ed. 


 


100 


LECTURES OX LOGIC. 


lect. possibility of contradictions being at once true, in fact 
_ — — annihilate the possibility of truth itself, and the whole 
significance of thought. 

But this is But this is not the case when we deny the universal, 
inthede- the absolute, application of the law of Reason and 
universal Consequent. When I say that a thing may be, of 
of the law of which I cannot conceive the possibility, (that is, by 

Reason and .... . •, , r . . \ 

Consequent, conceiving it as the consequent ot a certain reason), 
I only say that thought is limited ; but, within its 
limits, I do not deny, I do not subvert, its truth. But 
how, it may be asked, is it shown that thought is thus 
limited ? How is it shown that the inconceivable is 
not an index of the impossible, and that those philo- 
sophers who have employed it as the criterion of the 
absurd, are themselves guilty of absurdity ? This is a 
matter which will come under our consideration at 
This law another time and in its proper place ; at present it 
general not will be sufficient to state in general, that the hypothe- 
measure of sis which makes the thinkable the measure of the pos- 
polSiity. sible brings the principle of Reason and Consequent at 
once into collision with the three higher laws, and this 
hypothesis itself is thus reduced at once to contradic- 
tion and absurdity. For if we take a comprehensive 
view of the phenomena of thought, we shall find that 
all that we can positively think, that is, all that is 
within the jurisdiction of the law of Reason and Con- 
sequent, lies between two opposite poles of thought, 
which, as exclusive of each other, cannot, on the prin- 
ciples of Identity and Contradiction, both be true, but 
of which, on the principle of Excluded Middle, the one 
or the other must. Let us take, for example, any of 
the general objects of our knowledge. Let us take 
body, or rather, since body as extended is included 
under extension, let us take extension itself, or space. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


101 


Now extension alone will exhibit to us two pairs of lect. 

1 yj. 

contradictory inconceivables, that is, in all, four incom- 1 — 

prehensibles, but of which, though all are equally un- 
thinkable, and, on the hypothesis in question, all, 
therefore, equally impossible, we are compelled, by 
the law of Excluded Middle, to admit some two as 
true and necessary. 

Extension, then, may be viewed either as a whole By refcr- 

^ , cuce to Ex- 

or as a part ; and, in each aspect, it affords us two tension, i% 

. . 1 _ J ’. An a W hole. 

incogitable contradictories. 1°, Taking it as a whole : 

— space, it is evident, must either be limited, that is, 
have an end, a circumference ; or unlimited, that is, 
have no end, no circumference. These are contradic- 
tory suppositions ; both, therefore, cannot, but one 
must, be true. Now let us try positively to compre- 
hend, positively to conceive, the possibility of either of 
these two mutually exclusive alternatives. Can we 
represent or realise in thought extension as absolutely 
limited ? in other words, can we mentally hedge round 
the whole of space, conceive it absolutely bounded, that 
is, so that beyond its boundary there is no outlying, Space or 
no surrounding, space 'i This is impossible. What- absolutely 

n . . t • bounded uu- 

ever compass ot space we may enclose by any liraita - thinkable, 
tion of thought, we shall find that we have no dif- 
ficulty in transcending these limits. Nay, we shall 
find that we cannot but transcend them ; for we are 
unable to think any extent of space except as within 
a still ulterior space, of which, let us think till the 
powers of thinking fail, we can never reach the cir- 
cumference. It is thus impossible for us to think 
space as a totality, that is, as absolutely bounded, but 
all-containing. We may, therefore, lay down this first 
extreme as inconceivable. We cannot think space as 
limited. 


 


102 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VI. 


Space un- 
limited in- 
conceivable, 
a* contra- 
dictory. 


Objection 
from the 
name and 
notion of 
the Infinite 
obviated. 


Distinction 
of positive 
ana negative 
thought and 
notion. 


Let us now consider its contradictory ; can we 
comprehend the possibility of infinite or unlimited 
space 1 To suppose this is a direct contradiction in 
¦terms; it is to comprehend the incomprehensible. We 
think, we conceive, we comprehend, a thing, only as 
we think it as within or under something else ; but to 
do this of the infinite is to think the infinite as finite, 
which is contradictory and absurd. 

Now here it may be asked, how have we then the 
word infinite ? How have we the notion which this 
word expresses ? The answer to this question is con- 
tained in the distinction of positive and negative 
thought. We have a positive concept of a thing, when 
we think it by the qualities of which it is the comple- 
ment. But as the attribution of qualities is an affir- 
mation, as affirmation and negation are relatives, and 
as relatives are known only in and through each other, 
we cannot, therefore, have a consciousness of the affir- 
mation of any quality, without having at the same 
time the correlative consciousness of its negation. 
Now, the one consciousness is a positive, the other 
consciousness is a negative notion. But, in point of 
fact, a negative notion is only the negation of a 
notion ; we think only by the attribution of certain 
qualities, and the negation of these qualities and of 
this attribution, is simply, in so far, a denial of our 
thinking at all. As affirmation always suggests nega- 
tion, eveiy positive notion must likewise suggest a 
negative notion ; and as language is the reflex of 
thought, the positive and negative notions are ex- 
pressed by positive and negative uames. Thus it is 
with the infinite. The finite is the only object of real 
or positive thought ; it is that alone w'hich we think 
by the attribution of determinate characters ; the 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


103 


infinite, on the contrary, is conceived only by the lect. 
thinking away of every character by which the finite VL 
was conceived ; in other words, we conceive it only as 
inconceivable. This relation of the infinite to the 
finite is shown, indeed, in the terms by which it is 
expressed in every language. Thus in Latin, infinitum ; 
in Greek, antipov ; in German, unendlich ; in all of 
which original tongues the word expressive of the 
infinite is only a negative expression of the finite or 
limited. Thus the very objection from the existence 
of a name and notion of the infinite, when analysed, 
only proves more clearly that the infinite is no object 
of thought ; that we conceive it, not in itself, but only 
in correlation and contrast to the finite. 

The indefinite is, however, sometimes confounded The indc- 


with the infinite ; though there are hardly two notions 
which, without being contradictory, differ more widely. 
The indefinite has a subjective, the infinite an objec- 
tive relation. The one i3 merely the negation of the 
actual apprehension of limits, the other the negation 
of the possible existence of limits. 

But to return whence we have been carried, it is 
manifest that we can no more realise the thought or 
conception of infinite, unbounded, or unlimited space, 
than we can realise the conception of a finite or ab- 
solutely bounded space. But these two inconceivables 
are reciprocal contradictories, and if we are unable to 
comprehend the possibility of either, while, however, 
on the principle of Excluded Middle one or other must 
be admitted, the hypothesis is manifestly false, that 
proposes the subjective or formal law of Reason and 
Consequent as the criterion of real or objective possi- 
bility. 

It is needless to show that the same result is given 


finite and 
Infinite,— 
how distin- 
guished. 


Space as 
bounded and 
space as un- 
bounded 
being two 
inconceiv- 
able contra- 
dictories, 
the law of 
Reason and 
Consequent 
cannot, 
therefore, 
form the 
criterion of 
object i vo 
possibility. 


This further 


 


104 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VI. 


shown by 
reference to 
Extension, 
2°, As a 
Part. 


3°, By refer- 
ence to the 
Law of 
Reason and 
Consequent 
itself. 


The laws of 
Reason and 
Consequent, 
&c. redu- 
cible to a 
higher prin- 
ciple. 


by the experiment made on extension considered as 
a part, as divisible. Here, if we attempt to divide 
extension in thought, we shall neither, on the one 
hand, succeed in conceiving the possibility of an 
absolute minimum of space, that is, a minimum ex 
hypothesi extended, but which cannot be conceived as 
divisible into parts, nor, on the other, of carrying on 
this division to infinity. But as these are contradic- 
tory opposites, they again afford a similar refutation 
of the hypothesis in question. 

But the same conclusion is reached by simply con- 
sidering the law of Beason and Consequent in itself. 
This law enjoins, — Think nothing without a reason 
why we must think it, that is, think nothing except 
as contained in, as evolved out of, something else 
which we already know. Now this reason, — this 
something else, — in obedience to this very law, must, 
as itself known, be itself a consequent of some other 
antecedent ; and this antecedent be again the conse- 
quent of some anterior or higher reason ; and so on, 
ad infinitum. But the human mind is not possessed 
of infinite powers, or of an infinite series of reasons 
and consequents ; on the contrary, its faculties are 
very limited, and its stock of knowledge is very small. 
To erect this law, therefore, into a standard of exist- 
ence, is, in fact, to bring down the infinitude of the 
universe to the finitude of man, — a proceeding than 
which nothing can be imagined more absurd. The 
fact is, that the law of Reason and Consequent can, 
with the law of Cause and Effect, the law of Sub- 
stance and Phenomenon, &c., be, if I am not mis- 
taken, all reduced to one higher principle ; a principle 
which explains from the very limitation of the human 
mind, from the very imbecility of its powers, a great 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


105 


variety of phenomena, which, from the liberality of lect. 

philosophers, have obtained for their solution a num- 1 — 

her of positive and special principles. This, however, 
is a discussion which would here be out of place.® 

What, however, has been said may suffice to show, Summary 
that, while the first three laws of thought are of an the spheres 
absolute and universal cogency, the fourth is only of of thought! 
a cogency relative and particular ; that, while the 
former determine the possibility, not only of all 
thought but of all real knowledge, the latter only 
regulates the validity of mediate or reflective thought. 

The laws of Identity, Contradiction, and Excluded 
Middle are, therefore, not only logical but metaphysi- 
cal principles, the law of Reason and Consequent a 
logical principle alone ; a doctrine which is, however, 
the converse of what is generally taught. 

I proceed, now, to say a few words on the general The general 

. 1 9 J ° influence 

influence which these laws exert upon the operations which the 

. . 1 _ foregoing 

of thinking. These operations, however various and exert 

- , _ . . ou the 

multiform they may seem, are so governed in all their operations 

Til 1 ! of thinking. 

manifestations by the preceding laws, that no thought 
can pretend to validity and truth which is not in 
consonance with, which is not governed by, them. 

For man can recognise that alone as real and assured, 
which the laws of his understanding sanction ; and 
he cannot but regard that as false and unreal, which 
these laws condemn. From this, however, it by no 
means follows that what is thought in conformity 
to these laws is, therefore, true ; for the sphere of 
thought is far wider than the sphere of reality, and 
no inference is valid from the correctest thinking of 
an object to its actual existence. While these laws, 
therefore, are the highest criterion of the non-reality 

a See Discussion* , p. 609 . — Ed. 


 


10G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VI. 


The true 
relations of 
Logic over- 
looked in 
two ways : — 
1. Logic 
erroneously 
held to bo 
the positive 
standard of 
truth. 

The division 
of truth into 
logical and 
metaphysi- 
cal, — criti- 
cised. 


of an object, they are no criterion at all of its reality; 
and they thus stand to existence in a negative and 
not in a positive relation. And what I now say of 
the fundamental principles of thought in general, 
holds equally of all their proximate and special appli- 
cations, that is, of the whole of Logic. Logic, as I 
have already explained, considering the form alone of 
thought to the exclusion of its matter, can draw no 
conclusion from the correctness of the manner of 
thinking an object to the reality of the object itself. 
Yet among modern, nay recent, philosophers, two 
opposite doctrines have sprung up, which, on opposite 
sides, have overlooked the true relations of Logic. 
“One party of philosophers defining truth in general, — 
the absolute harmony of our thoughts and cognitions, 
— divide truth into a formal or logical, and into a 
material or metaphysical, according as that harmony 
is in consonance with the laws of formal thought, or, 
over and above, with the laws of real knowledge.® 
The criterion of formal truth they place in the prin- 
ciples of Contradiction and of Sufficient Reason, 
enouncing that what is non-contradictory and conse- 
quent is formally true. This criterion, which is posi- 
tive and immediate of formal truth, (inasmuch as what 
is non-contradictory and consequent can always be 
thought as possible), they style a negative and medi- 
ate criterion of material truth : as what is self-con- 
tradictory and logically inconsequent is in reality 
impossible ; at the same time, what is not self-con- 
tradictory and not logically inconsequent, is not, how- 
ever, to be regarded as having an actual existence. 
But here the foundation is treacherous ; the notion of 
truth is false. When we speak of truth, we are not 

o See Kant, Logik , Einleitung, vii.; Krug, Logxk, § 22 ; Fries, Loyik, § 42.— Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


107 


satisfied with knowing that a thought harmonises lect. 

with a certain system of thoughts and cognitions ; but, — 

over and above, we require to be assured that what I™ 1 , 1 *’ - 
we think is real, and is as we think it to be. Are we 
satisfied on this point, we then regard our thoughts 
as true ; whereas if we are not satisfied of this, we 
deem them false, how well soever they may quadrate 
with any theory or system. It is not, therefore, in 
any absolute harmony of mere thought that truth con- 
sists, but solely in the correspondence of our thoughts 
with their objects. The distinction of formal and 
material truth is thus not only unsound in itself, but 
opposed to the notion of truth universally held, and 
embodied in all languages. But if this distinction be 
inept, the title of Logic, as a positive standard of 
truth, must be denied ; it can only be a negative 
criterion, being conversant with thoughts and not 
with things, with the possibility and not with the 
actuality of existence.” ° 

The preceding inaccuracy is, however, of little mo- a The Ab- 

t t i i n i i -soIutisUpro- 

ment compared with the heresy ot another class ot cccd on a 
philosophers, to whose observations on this point Ioftbeiogi. 
can, however, only allude. Some of you may, per- 
haps, find a difficulty in believing the statement, that 
there is a considerable party of philosophers, illus- 
trious for the highest speculative talent, and whose 
systems, if not at present, were, a few years ago, the 
most celebrated, if not the most universally accredited, 
in Europe, who establish their metaphysical theories 
on the subversion of all logical truth/ 1 refer to 
those philosophers who hold that man is capable of 
more than a relative notion of existence, — that he 
is competent to a knowledge of absolute or infinite 

a Easer, Logit, p. 65-6 .— Ed. 8 See above, p. 90, note Er>. 


 



108 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

VI. 


Mistake of 
Reid in 
regard to 
Conception. 


being, (for these terms they use convertibly), in an 
identity of knowledge and existence, of himself and 
the Divinity. This doctrine, which I shall not now 
attempt to make you understand, is developed in very 
various schemes, that is, the different philosophers 
attempt, by very different and contradictory methods, 
to arrive at the same end ; all these systems, how- 
ever, agree in this, — they are all at variance with the 
four logical laws. Some, indeed, are established on 
the express denial of the validity of these laws ; and 
others, without daring overtly to reject their autho- 
rity, are still built in violation of their precept. In 
fact, if contradiction remain a criterion of falsehood, 
if Logic and the laws of thought be not viewed as 
an illusion, the philosophy of the absolute, in all its 
forms, admits of the most direct and easy refutation. 
But on this matter I only now touch, in order that 
you may not be ignorant, that there are philosophers, 
and philosophers of the highest name, who, in pursuit 
of the phantom of absolute knowledge, are content 
to repudiate relative knowledge, logic, and the laws 
of thought. This hallucination is, however, upon the 
wane, and as each of these theorists contradicts his 
brother, Logic and Common Sense will at length re- 
fute them all. 

Before leaving the consideration of this subject, it 
is necessary to notice a mistake of Dr Reid, which it 
is not more remarkable that he should have com- 
mitted, than that others have been found to follow and 
applaud it, as the correction of a general error. In 
the fourth Essay on the Intellectual Poivers, and in 
the third chapter, entitled Mistakes concerning Con- 
ception, “ there is the following passage, which at once 

a Collected H'orto, p. 376-8 .— Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


109 


exhibits not only his own opinion, but the universality lf.ct. 
of the doctrine to which it is opposed : — — 

“ There remains,” he says, “ another mistake con- Reid 
ceming conception, which deserves to be noticed. It qu °' w1 ' 
is, that our conception of things is a test of their 
possibility, so that, what we can distinctly conceive, 
we may conclude to be possible ; and of what is im- 
possible, we can have no conception. 

“ This opinion has been held by philosophers for 
more than a hundred years, without contradiction or 
dissent, as far I know ; and, if it be an error, it 
may be of some use to inquire into its origin, and 
the causes that it has been so generally received 
as a maxim whose truth could not be brought into 
doubt.” 

I may here observe that this limitation of the pre- 
valence of the opinion in question to a very modern 
period is altogether incorrect ; it was equally pre- 
valent in ancient times, and as many passages could 
easily be quoted from the Greek logicians alone as 
Dr Reid has quoted from the philosophers of the cen- 
tury prior to himself. Dr Reid goes on : — 

“ One of the fruitless questions agitated among the 
scholastic philosophers in the dark ages was, — What 
is the criterion of truth ? As if men could have any 
other way to distinguish truth from error, but by the 
right use of that power of judgment which God has 
given them. 

“ Descartes endeavoured to put an end to this con- 
troversy, by making it a fundamental principle in his 
system, that whatever we clearly and distinctly per- 
ceive, is true. 

“ To understand this principle of Descartes, it must 
be observed that he gave the name of perception to 


 



no 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VI. 


every power of the human understanding ; and in 
explaining this very maxim, he tells us that sense, 
imagination, and pure intellection, are only different 
modes of perceiving, and so the maxim was under- 
stood by all his followers. 

“The learned Dr Cud worth seems also to have 
adopted this principle. ‘ The criterion of true know- 
ledge/ he says, ‘ is only to be looked for in our know- 
ledge and conceptions themselves : for the entity of 
all theoretical truth is nothing else but clear intel- 
ligibility, and whatever is clearly conceived is an 
entity and a truth ; but that which is false, Divine 
power itself cannot make it to be clearly and dis- 
tinctly understood. A falsehood can never be clearly 
conceived or apprehended to be true/ ( Eternal and 
Immutable Morality , p. 172, &e.) 

“ This Cartesian maxim seem3 to me to have led 
the way to that now under consideration, which seems 
to have been adopted as the proper correction of the 
former. When the authority of Descartes declined, 
men began to see that we may clearly and distinctly 
conceive what is not true, but thought that our con- 
ception, though not in all cases a test of truth, might 
be a test of possibility. 

“ This indeed seems to be a necessary consequence 
of the received doctrine of ideas ; it being evident 
that there can be no distinct image, either in the mind 
or anywhere else, of that which is impossible. The 
ambiguity of the word conceive, which we observed, 
Essay i. chap, i., and the common phraseology of 
saying, we cannot conceive such a thing , when we would 
signify that we think it impossible, might likewise 
contribute to the reception of this doctrine. 

“ But whatever was the origin of this opinion, it 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. Ill 

seems to prevail universally, and to be received as a 
maxim. 

“ ‘ The bare having an idea of the proposition 
proves the thing not to be impossible ; for of an im- 
possible proposition there can be no idea.’ — Dr Samuel 
Clarke. 

“ ‘ Of that which neither does nor can exist we can 
have no idea.’ — Lord Bolingbroke. 

“ ‘ The measure of impossibility to us is inconceiv- 
ableness, that of which we can have no idea, but that 
reflecting upon it, it appears to be nothing, we pro- 
nounce to be impossible.’ — Abernethy. 

“ ‘ In every idea is implied the possibility of the 
existence of its object, nothing being clearer than that 
there can be no idea of an impossibility, or conception 
of what cannot exist.’ — Dr Price. 

“ ‘ Impossibile est cujus nullam notionem formare 
possumus ; possibile e contra, cui aliqua respondet 
notio.’ — Wolfii Ontolog. 

“ ‘ It is an established maxim in metaphysics, that 
whatever the mind conceives, includes the idea of 
possible existence, or, in other words, that nothing we 
imagine is absolutely impossible.’ — D. Hume. 

“ It were easy to muster up many other respectable 
authorities for this maxim, and I have never found 
one that called it in question. 

“If the maxim be true in the extent which the 
famous Wolfius has given it in the passage above 
quoted, we shall have a short road to the determina- 
tion of every question about the possibility or impos- 
sibility of things. We need only look into our own 
breast, and that, like the Urim and Thummim, will 
give an infallible answer. If we can conceive the 
thing, it is possible ; if not, it is impossible. And 


LECT. 

VI. 


 



112 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. surely every man may know whether he can conceive 
— what is affirmed, or not. 

“ Other philosophers have been satisfied with one 
half of the maxim of Wolfius. They say, that what- 
ever we can conceive is possible ; but they do not 
say, that whatever we cannot conceive is impossible.” 

On this I may remark, that Dr Keid s criticism of 
Wolf must be admitted in so far as that philosopher 
maintains our inability to conceive a thing as possible, 
to be the rule on which we are entitled to pronounce 
it impossible. But Dr Iteid now advances a doctrine 
which I cannot but regard as radically erroneous. 

“ I cannot help thinking even this to be a mis- 
take which philosophers have been unwarily led into, 
from the causes before mentioned. My reasons are 
these : — 

“ 1. AVhatever is said to be possible or impossible 
is expressed by a proposition. Now, what is it to 
conceive a proposition ? I think it is no more than 
to understand distinctly its meaning. I know no 
more that can be meant by simple apprehension, or 
conception, when applied to a proposition. The 
axiom, therefore, amounts to this : — Every proposition, 
of which you understand the meaning distinctly, is 
possible. I am persuaded that I understand as dis- 
tinctly the meaning of this proposition, Any two sides 
of a triangle are together equal to the third , as of this, 
Any two sides of a triangle are together greater than 
the third ; yet the first of these is impossible.” 
criticised. Now this is a singular misunderstanding of the 
sense in which it has been always held by philoso- 
phers, that what is contradictory is conceived as 
inconceivable and impossible.® No philosopher, I 

a See the Author’s notes, Ileid's Worto, p. 377 . — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


113 


make bold to say, ever dreamt of denying that we 
can distinctly understand the meaning of the pro- 
position, the terms of which we recognise to be con- 
tradictory, and, as contradictory, to annihilate each 
other. When we enounce the proposition, A is not 
A, we clearly comprehend the separate meaning of the 
terms A and not A , and also the import of the asser- 
tion of their identity. But this very understanding 
consists in the consciousness that the two terms are 
contradictories, and that as such it is impossible to 
unite them in a mental judgment, though they stand 
united in a verbal proposition. If we attempt this, 
the two mutually exclusive terms not only cannot be 
thought as one, but in fact annihilate each other ; 
and thus the result, in place of a positive judgment, is 
a negation of thought. So far Dr Reid is wrong. 
But he is not guilty of the absurdity attributed 
to him by Dr Gleig ; he does not say, as by that 
writer he is made to say, that “any two sides of 
a triangle may be conceived to be equal to the third, 
as distinctly as any two sides of a triangle may be 
conceived to be greater than the third.” a These are 
not Dr Reid’s words, and nothing he says warrants the 
attribution of such expressions to him, in the sense in 
which they are attributed. He is made to hold, not 
merely that we can understand two terms as contra- 
dictory, but that we are able to combine them in the 
unity of thought. After the passage already quoted, 
Reid goes on to illustrate, in various points of view, 
the supposed error of the philosophers ; but as all he 
says on this head originates in the misconception 
already shown of the opinion he controverts, it is 

o Art. “ Metaphysics,” Encyclopedia Britannica, 7th edit., p. 020 . — Ed. 

VOL. I. II 


LECT. 

VI. 


 


114 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. needless to take any further notice of his argu- 
— ' 1 ments. 

Postuiau.-* We have thus considered the conditions of Logic, in 
tf L ° s ‘ c- so far as certain laws or principles are prescribed ; we 
have now to consider its conditions, in so far as cer- 
tain postulates are demanded. Of these there are 
more than one : but one alone it is here requisite to 
signalise ; for although it be necessarily supposed in 
the science, strange to say, it has, by logical writers, 
not only been always passed over in silence, but 
frequently and inconsistently violated. This postu- 
late I comprise in the following paragraph : — 

Par. xviii. IT XVIII. The only postulate of Logic which re- 
ikimuImo ™ 1 quires an articulate enouncement is the demand, 
that before dealing with a judgment or reasoning 
expressed in language, the import of its terms 
should be fully understood ; in other words, Lo- 
gic postulates to be allowed to state explicitly in 
language all that is implicitly contained in the 
thought. 

Tiii* po*t a - This postulate cannot be refused. In point of fact, 
L refawL as I have said, Logic has always proceeded on it, in 
overtly expressing all the steps of the mental process 
in reasoning, — all the propositions of a syllogism ; 
whereas, in common parlance, one at least of these 
steps or propositions is usually left unexpressed. 
This postulate, as we shall have occasion to observe 
in the sequel, though a fundamental condition of 
Logic, has not been consistently acted on by logicians 
in their development of the science ; and from this 
omission have arisen much confusion and deficiency 
and error in our present system of Logic. The illus- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


115 


tration of this postulate will appropriately find its lect. 
place on occasion of its applications. I now articu- 1_ 


lately state it, because it immediately follows in order 
the general axioms of the science ; and, at present, I 
only beg that you will bear it in mind. I may, how- Thi> pwtu- 
ever, before leaving the subject, observe, (what has in tii'JX!- 
already, I believe, been mentioned), that Aristotle iogi™[ «• 
states of syllogistic, and, of course, his statement ATilun’ii? 
applies to Logic in general, that the doctrine of syllo- 
gism deals, not with the external expression of rea- 
soning, in ordinary language, but w r ith the internal 
reasoning of the mind itself . 01 But of this again and 
more fully, in the proper places. 

In like manner, we might here, as is done in 
Mathematics, premise certain definitions ; but these 
it will be more convenient to state as they occur in 
the progress of our development. I, therefore, pass 
on to the Second Section of the Doctrine of Elements, 
which is occupied with the Products of Thought ; in 
other words, with the processes regulated by the pre- 
vious conditions. 

a Anal. Post. i. 10 . — Ed. 


 



LECT. 

VII. 


The Pro- 
ducts of 
Thought, 
Concepts, 
Judgments 
And Reason • 
ings. 


116 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECTURE VII. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

I. ENNOEMATIO — OF CONCEPTS OR NOTIONS. 

A. OF CONCEPTS IN GENERAL. 

I concluded, in my last Lecture, all that I think it 
necessary to say in regard to the Fundamental Laws of 
Thought, or the necessary conditions of the thinkable. 
The discussion, I am aware, must have been found 
somewhat dry, and even abstruse ; not that there is the 
smallest difficulty in regard to the apprehension of 
the laws themselves, for these are all self-evident pro- 
positions, but because, though it is necessary in a 
systematic view of Logic to commence with the 
elementary principles of thought, it is impossible, in 
speaking of these and their application, not to employ 
expressions of the most abstract generality, and even 
not to suppose a certain acquaintance with words and 
things, which, however, only find their explanation in 
the subsequent development of the science. 

Having considered, therefore, the four Laws of 
Thought, with the one Postulate of Logic, which con- 
stituted the First Section of the Doctrine of Lo- 
gical Elements, I now proceed to the Second, — that 
which is conversant about Logical Products. These 

O 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


117 


products, though identical in kind, are of three differ- lect. 
ent degrees ; for while Concepts, Judgments, and vu ‘ 


Reasonings, are all equally the products of the same 
Faculty of Comparison, they still fall into three classes, ^ 
as the act, and, consequently, the result of the act, is 
of a greater or a less simplicity. These three degrees mcnt ’ 
are all in fact, strictly, only modifications of the 
second, as both concepts and reasonings may be 
reduced to judgments ; for the act of judging, that is, 
the act of affirming or denying one thing of another 
in thought, is that in which the Understanding or 
Faculty of Comparison is essentially expressed. By 
anticipation : — A concept is a judgment ; for, on the 
one hand, it is nothing but the result of a foregone 
judgment, or series of judgments, fixed and recorded 
in a word, — a sign, and it is only amplified by the 
annexation of a new attribute, through a continuance 
of the same process. On the other hand, as a concept 
is thus the synthesis or complexion, and the record, I 
may add, of one or more prior acts of judgment, it 
can, it is evident, be analysed into these again ; every 
concept is, in fact, a judgment or a fasciculus of judg- 
ments, — these judgments only not explicitly developed 
in thought, and not formally expressed in terms. 

Again, a reasoning is a judgment ; for a reasoning 
is only the affirmation of the connection of two things 
with a third, and, through that third, with each other. 

It is thus only the same function of thought, which is 
at work in Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning ; and 
these express no real, no essential, distinction of opera- 
tion, but denote only the different relations in which 
we may regard the indivisible act of thought. Thus, 
the consideration of concepts cannot be effected out of 
all relation to, and without even some anticipation of, 
the doctrine of judgments. This being premised, I 


 



118 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. now proceed to the consideration of the Products 
M1, of Thought, viewed in the three relations or the 
three degrees, of Concepts, Judgments, and Reason- 
ings. 0 

Under the Second Section of Stoicheiology, Concepts 
or Notions form the first chapter, 
i. of Con- Now in treating of Concepts, the order I shall fol- 
Notfon«,— low is this, — I shall, in the first place, treat of them 
discussion, in general ; in the second, treat of them in special. 
Under the former, or general, head, will be considered, 
1°, What they are ; 2°, How they are produced. 
Under the latter, or special, head, they will be con- 
sidered under their various relations. And here, 
I may observe, that as you obtain no information 
from Dr Whately in regard to the primary laws of 
whatdys thought, — these laws being in fact apparently un- 

omission of * t\ «. • i -l •• i ^ 

the doctrine known to every .British logician old or new, — so you 
of Concept*. ^ ^ or no f rom his Elements towards 

an understanding of the doctrine of concepts. His 
omission, in this respect, cannot be excused by his 
error in regard to the object-matter of Logic ; that 
object, you will recollect, being on his view, or rather 
one of his views, not thought in general or the pro- 
ducts of the comparative faculty in their three degrees, 
but reasoning or argumentation alone ; for even on 
the hypothesis, that Logic is thus limited, still as the 
doctrine of reasoning can only be scientifically evolved 
out of the doctrine of concepts, the consideration of 
the latter forms the indispensable condition of a satis- 
factory treatment of the former. But not only is 
Whately ’s doctrine of concepts, or, in his language, of 

a [Hume, Treatise of Human A a- apprehension is impossible without 
ture t Bk. i. part iii., § 7. Jac. Tho- judgment. Comi»are also Krug, Lo- 
masius, Physica, p. 295] [c. xlix. § gik, § 23, Anm. iL p. 70 . — Ed.] 

112, where he holds that simple 


LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


110 


“ the process of simple apprehension,” meagre and lkct. 

imperfect, it is even necessary to forewarn you, that it . 

leads to confusion and error. There is a fundamental wh«tey 
distinction of what is called the Extension and the employs the 
Comprehension of notions, — a distinction which, in tension awl 
fact, as you will find, forms the very cardinal point on sion as cou- 
which the whole theory of Logic turns. But not only 
is this distinction not explained, it is not even arti- 
culately stated, nay, the very words which logicians 
have employed for the expression of this contrast, are 
absolutely used as synonymous and convertible. In- 
stead, therefore, of referring you for information in 
regard to our present object of consideration to Dr 
Whately, I am sorry to be compelled to caution you 
against putting confidence in his guidance. But to 
return. The following I dictate as the title of the first 
head to be considered. 


A. Of Concepts or Notions in General : 
they \ 


What are A. Of Con- 
cepts or 
Notious in 
general. — 
What they 


In answering this question, let us, first, consider the nrt 
meaning of the expressions ; and, secondly, the nature 
of the thing expressed. 


H XIX. Concept or notion , (ivvoia, iworjii a, p ar . xix. 
vorjfxa, eVu'oia,® conceptio , notio), are terms em- a 


a In Greek, the terms I yvoia {ivvoi)- 
t ik6s), lyyorjpa {ivvoigiaTiuis), Iviyota 
(tinyoriTiKis), v6i)pa, to say nothing of 
ixiySrifxa (iTcivoTgxariKis), are all more or 
less objectionable, as all more or less 
ambiguously used for the object or pro- 
duct of thought, in an act of Conception, 
or, as it has been usually called by the 
logicians, Simple Apprehension. See 
Blemmidas, Epitome Logica [c. V. Ilcpl 


'Eiriyolas, p. 31, ed. 1605 . — Ed.] ; 
Eugenios, Logica [Ao-yoclj, c. ii. p. 
170, Leipsic, 1766 . — Ed.] Stephanus, 
Thesaurus, v. Novs ; Hticker, Claris 
Phil. Arist. t v. Norjfxara, p. 227 Ctseq. ; 
Micraelius, Lexicon Pkilosqphicwn, v. 
N($Tj/aa,p. 890, and p. 80 [r. Alarfrhpara. 
Cf. p. 310, t». Conceptus ;p. 633, v. In- 
tent io Ed.] On vo^para, see Aristotle, 

De lntcrpr., 0 . i , and Waitz, Comment- 


 


120 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


I.ECT. 

VII. 

ing of the 
terras. 


ployed as convertible, but, while they denote the 
same thing, they denote it in a different point of 
view. Conception, , the act of which concept is 
the result, expresses the act of comprehending or 
grasping up into unity the various qualities by 
which an object is characterised ; Notion y ( notio) y 
again, signifies either the act of apprehending, 
signalising, that is, the remarking or taking note 
of, the various notes, marks, or characters of an 
object, which its qualities afford ; or the result of 
that act. 


Illustrated 
— employ- 
ment of the 
terms animo 
tv/ mente 
concipere, 
and animi 
conceptus. 


Of conci- 
jtere, con- 
ceplus , and 
concept io , 
without ad- 
junct. 


In Latin, the word concipere , in its many various 
applications, always expresses, as the etymology would 
indicate, the process of embracing or comprehending 
the many into the one , as could be shown by an 
articulate analysis of the phrases in which the term 
occurs. It was, accordingly, under this general signi- 
fication, that this word and its derivatives were analo- 
gically applied to the operation of mind. Animo 
vel mente concipere , as used by Cicero, Pliny, Seneca, 
and other Roman writers, means to comprehend or 
understand , that is, to embrace a multitude of differ- 
ent objects by their common qualities in one act of 
thought ; and animi conceptus was, in like manner, 
applied by the ancient writers to denote this operation, 
or its result. The employment of concipere , conceptus 
and conception as technical terms, in the Philosophy of 
Mind, without the explanatory adjunct, was of a later 
introduction, — was, indeed, only possible after they 
had been long familiarly used in a psychological rela- 
tion. But when so introduced, they continued to be 

arius p. 327. In Aristotle, De Anima , t wv v6r\<ns iv tovtois, irep\ & oitK ton 
1. iii. cc. 6,(7) 7, (8) 8, (9), etc., vo'fipara rb xf/cvSos Iv ots 5< nal rb \f/(0Sos koI 
are clearly equivalent to concepts in our rb a\T)0ts, ouvdecrls ns f>brj voTjparuy 
meaning ; [c. G, 'H piv oZv rwv bbu upt- uoirtp tv vvtwv • k. t.A. — Ed.J 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


121 


employed by philosophers in general in their proper lect. 

signification as convertible with thought or comprehen- — 

sion, and as opposed to the mere apprehension of 
Sense or Imagination. Not, indeed, that examples 
enough may not be adduced of their abusive applica- 
tion to our immediate cognitions of individual objects, 
long before Mr Stewart formally applied the term 
conception to a certain accidental form of representa- 
tion, — to the simple reproduction or repetition of an 
act of perception in imagination . 0 In using the terms 
conception and concept in the sense which I have ex- 
plained, I, therefore, employ them not only in strict 
conformity to their grammatical meaning, but to the 
meaning which they have generally obtained among 
philosophers. 

The term notion, like conception, expresses both an The term 
act and its product. I shall, however, as has com- how em- 
monly been done, use it only in this latter relation. !he Author. 
This word has, like conception, been sometimes abus- 
ively applied to denote not only our knowledge of 
things by their common characters, but, likewise, to 
include the mere presentations of Sense and represen- 
tations of Phantasy. This abusive employment has, 
however, not been so frequent in reference to this 
term as to the term conception ; but it must be ac- 
knowledged, that nothing can be imagined more vague 
and vacillating than the meaning attached to notion 
in the writings of all British philosophers, without 
exception. So much for the expressions concept and 
notion. I now go on to that which they express. 

IT XX fi — In our Consciousness, — apprehension, p„. xx. 
of an individual object, there maybe distinguished CMlc * pta,— 

a See Lteluret on Hetaphyiics, vot j8 On this and three following pa- 
il. p. 261.— Ed. ragraphs apply Leibnitz’s distinction 


 



122 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIL 


b. Nature of 
the thing. 


Concepts, — 
their nature 
illustrated 
by reference 
to the his- 
tory of our 
knowledge. 

Objects arc 
originally 
presented in 
confused 
and imper- 
fect percep- 
tions. 


Offices of 
Comparison 


the two following cognitions : — 1°, The immediate 
and irrespective knowledge we have of the indi- 
vidual object, as a complement of certain qualities 
or characters, considered simply as belonging to 
itself. 2°, The mediate and relative knowledge 
we have of this object, as comprising qualities or 
characters common to it with other objects. 

The former of these cognitions is that contained 
in the Presentations of Sense, external and inter- 
nal, and Representations of Imagination. They 
are only of the individual or singular. The latter 
is that contained in the Concepts of the Under- 
standing, and is a knowledge of the common, 
general, or universal. 

The conceiving an object is, therefore, its re- 
cognition mediately through a concept ; and a 
Concept is the cognition or idea of the general 
character or characters, point or points, in which 
a plurality of objects coincide. 

This requires some illustration, and it will be best 
afforded by considering the history of our knowledge. 
Our mental activity is not first exerted in an appre- 
hension of the general, common, properties of things. 
On the contrary, objects are originally presented to 
us in confused and imperfect perceptions. The rude 
materials furnished by Sense, retained in Memory, 
reproduced by Reminiscence, and represented in Ima- 
gination, the Understanding elaborates into a higher 
knowledge, simply by means of Comparison and Ab- 
straction. The primary act of Comparison is exerted 
upon the individual objects of Perception and Imagin- 

of Intuitive and Symbolical Know- [Meditationes de Cognitione, Veritate , 
ledge, ace Opera II. i p. 14 et teq et Jde\$. — Ed] 


Digitized by GoogI 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


123 


ation alone. In the multitude and complexity of these lect. 

objects, certain attributes are found to produce similar, — 

others to produce dissimilar, impressions. The obser- or 
vation of this fact determines a reflective consider- aUc “ tl0n - 
ation of their properties. Objects are intentionally 
compared together for the purpose of discovering their 
similarities and differences. When things are found to 
agree or to disagree in certain respects, the conscious- 
ness is, by an act of volition, concentrated upon the 
objects which thus partially agree, and, in them, upon 
those qualities in or through which they agree ; and 
by this concentration, — which constitutes the act 
called Attention, — what is effected ? On the objects 
and qualities, thus attentively considered, a strong 
light is shed ; but precisely in proportion as these arc 
illuminated in consciousness, the others, to which we 
do not attend, are thrown into obscurity. 

The result of Attention, by concentrating the mind PrMci»ion, 

. ...... . . _ _ Attention, 

upon certain qualities, is thus to withdraw or abstract »»<iAb»tr»c 
it from all else. In technical language, we are said to relative 
prescind the phaenomena which we exclusively con- tiic «uno 
sider. To prescind, to attend, and to abstract are P * 
merely different but correlative names for the same 
process ; and the first two are nearly convertible. 

When we are said to prescind a quality, we are merely 
supposed to attend to that quality exclusively ; and 
when we abstract, we are properly said to abstract 
from, that is, to throw other attributes out of account. 

I may observe that the term abstraction is very often 
abusively employed. By Abstraction we are frequently 
said to attend exclusively to certain phenomena, — 
those, to wit, which we abstract ; whereas, the term 
abstraction is properly applied to the qualities which 
we abstract from, and by abstracting from some, we 


 



121 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

VIL 


The reduc- 
tion of ob- 
ject* from 
multitude 
to unity, — 
explained 
and illus- 
trated. 

Thought ia 
one and the 
same, while 
it* content* 
are identi- 
cal. 


Object* arc 
to u* the 
same when 
we are un- 
able to dis- 
tinguish 
their cogni- 
tion*. 


are enabled to consider others more attentively. At- 
tention and Abstraction are only the same process 
viewed in different relations. They are, as it were, the 
positive and negative poles of the same act. 

By Comparison, the points of resemblance among 
things being thus discovered, and by Attention consti- 
tuted into exclusive objects ; by the same act they 
are also reduced in consciousness from multitude to 
unity. What is meant by this will be apparent from 
the following considerations. 

We are conscious to ourselves that we can repeat 
our acts of consciousness, — that we can think the 
same thought over and over. This act, or this 
thought, is always in reality the same, though mani- 
fested at different times : for no one can imagine that 
in the repetition of one and the same thought, he has 
a plurality of thoughts ; for he is conscious, that it is 
one and the same thought which is repeated, so long 
as its contents remain identical. 

Now this relation of absolute similarity which sub- 
sists between the repetitions of the same thought, is 
found to hold between our representations of the 
resembling qualities of objects. Two objects have 
similar qualities only as these qualities afford a similar 
presentation in sense or a similar representation in 
imagination, and qualities are to us completely simi- 
lar, when we are unable to distinguish their cognitions. 
But what we cannot distinguish, is, to us, the same ; 
therefore, objects which determine undistinguishable 
impressions upon us, are perceived and represented in 
the same mental modification, and are subjectively to 
us precisely as if they were objectively identical. 

o See Lecture* on Mctaphytic*, vol. Logit, § 49. — Ed. [Schulze, Logit , , § 
ii. p. 292, and Bachmann, Logit, % 44. 28; Drobiach, Logit, § 14, p. 11 cl 
Compare Kant, Logit, § 6 ; Krug, *eq.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


125 


But the consciousness of identity is not merely the 
result of the indiscernible similarity of total objects, 
it is equally the result of the similarity of any of their 
parts, — partial characters. For by abstracting observa- 
tion from the qualities, points, in which objects differ, 
and limiting it to those in which they agree, we are 
able to consider them as identical in certain respects, 
however diverse they may appear to be in others, 
which, for the moment, we throw out of view. For 
example, let B, C, and D represent a series of indivi- 
dual objects, which all agree in possessing the resem- 
bling attributes of y> y , y , and severally differ in each 
respectively possessing the non-resembling attributes 
i y Oy u. Now, in so far as we exclusively attend to 
the resembling qualities, we, in the first place, ob- 
scure or remove out of view their non-resembling 
characters i, o, w, while we remain exclusively con- 
scious of their resembling qualities y, y, y. But 
in the second place, the qualities expressed by 
y y y t y , determine in us cognitive energies which we 
are unable to distinguish, and which we, therefore, 
consider as the same. We, therefore, view the three 
similar qualities in the three different objects as also 
identical ; we consider the y in this, the y in that, 
and the y in the third object, as one, and in so far as 
the three objects participate in this oneness or iden- 
tity, we regard them also as the same. In other 
words, we classify B, C, and D under y ; y is the 
genus, B, C, and D are its individuals or species, seve- 
rally distinguished from each other by the non-resem- 
bling properties, i, o, u. Now it is the points of simi- 
larity thus discovered and identified in the unity of 
consciousness, which constitute Concepts or Notions. 

It is evident that the same process of Comparison 


LECT. 

VII. 

The con- 
sciousness 
of identity is 
equally the 
result of tho 
similarity of 
any of the 
partial cha- 
racters of 
objects. 


f.. 


LECT. 

VII. 


(Toneral Na- 
tion. 


Concepts 01 
notions su- 
perfluously 
styled gene- 
ral. 


Idea % — 
reason 
why not 
regularly 
employed, 
and sense 
in which it 
is occasion- 
ally used, 
by the 
Author. 


12C LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

and Abstraction may be again performed on the con- 
cepts thus formed. They are, in like manner, com- 
pared together, and their points of resemblance noted, 
exclusively considered, and reduced to one in the 
synthesis of thought. This process is called General- 
isation ; that is, the process of evolving the general 
or one, out of the individual and manifold. Notions 
and concepts are also sometimes designated by the 
style of general notions, — general conceptions. This 
is superfluous, for, in propriety of speech, notions and 
concepts are, in their very nature, general ; while the 
other cognitive modifications to which they are op- 
posed, — perceptions and imaginations, — have, in like 
manner, their essence in their individuality. 

By the way, you may have noticed that I never use 
the term idea. The reason of my non-employment 
of that word is this : — There is no possible diversity 
of meaning in which that term has not been usurped, 
and it would only confuse you, were I to attempt to 
enumerate and explain them. I may, however, occa- 
sionally not eschew the word, but if you ever hear it 
from me, I beg you to observe, that I apply it, in a 
loose and general signification, to comprehend the pre- 
sentations of Sense, the representations of Phantasy, 
and the concepts or notions of the Understanding. 
We are in want of a generic term to express these ; 
and the word representation , ( representatio ), which, 
since the time of Leibnitz, has been commonly used 
by the philosophers of the Continent, I have restricted 
to denote what, it only can in propriety express, the 
immediate object or product of Imagination. We 
are, likewise, in want of a general term to express 
what is common to the presentations of Perception, 
and the representations of Phantasy, that is, their in- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


127 


dividuality and immediacy. The Germans express lect. 
this by the term Anschauung , which can only be — lL . 
translated by intuition , (as it is in Latin by Germans,) 
which literally means a looking at. This expression 
has, however, been preoccupied in English to denote 
the apprehension we have of self-evident truths, and 
its application in a different signification would, there- 
fore, be, to a certain extent, liable to ambiguity. I 
shall, therefore, continue, for the present at least, to 
struggle on without such a common term, though the 
necessity thus imposed of always opposing presenta- 
tion and representation to concept is both tedious and 
perplexing. 

IT XXI. — A Concept or Notion thus involves — General 
1°, The representation of a part only of the various of Concepts, 
attributes or characters of which an individual 
object is the sum ; and, consequently, affords only jJJjJ 
a one-sided and inadequate knowledge of thejj^ kn&w * 
things which are thought under it. 

This is too simple to require any commentary. It Explication, 
is evident that when we think Socrates by any of the 
concepts, — Athenian , Greek , European , man, biped , 
animal ', being, — we throw out of view the far greater 
number of characters of which Socrates is the com- 
plement, and those, likewise, which more proximately 
determine or constitute his individuality. It is, like- 
wise, evident, that in proportion as we think him by a 
more general concept, we shall represent him by a 
smaller bundle of attributes, and, consequently, repre- 
sent him in a more partial and one-sided manner. 

Thus, if we think him as Athenian , we shall think 
him by a greater number of qualities than if we think 


128 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VII. 


Par. XXII. 
b. A Con- 
cept afford* 
no absolute 
object of 
knowledge. 


This para- 
graph con- 
tains a key 
to the mys- 
tery of (Ge- 
neralisation 
and Gene- 
ral Terms. 


him by Greek ; and, in like manner, our representation 
•will be less and less adequate, as we think him by 
every higher concept in the series, — European, man, 
biped, an imal, being. 

! XXII. — 2°, A concept or notion, as the result 
of a comparison, necessarily expresses a relation. 
It is, therefore, not cognisable in itself, that is, 
it affords no absolute or irrespective object of 
knowledge, but can only be realised in conscious- 
ness by applying it, as a term of relation, to one 
or more of the objects, which agree in the point 
or points of resemblance which it expresses. 

In this paragraph, (if I may allude to what you may 
not all be aware of), is contained a key to the whole 
mystery of Generalisation and General Terms ; for the 
whole disputes between the Conceptualists and No- 
minalists, (to say nothing of the Realists), have only 
arisen from concepts having been regarded as afford- 
ing an irrespective and independent object of thought. 11 
This illusion has arisen from a very simple circum- 
stance. Objects compared together are found to pos- 
sess certain attributes, which, as producing indiscern- 
ible modifications in us, are to us absolutely similar. 
They are, therefore, considered the same. The relation 
of similarity is thus converted into identity, and the 
real plurality of resembling qualities in nature is 
factitiously reduced to a unity in thought ; and this 
unity obtains a name in which its relativity, not being 
expressed, is still further removed from observation. 

But the moment we attempt to represent to our- 

a For a full account of this dispute, p. 296 el eeq. — Ed. 
boo Lent u ret on Mclaphytics, vol. it 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


129 


selves any of these concepts, any of these abstract 
generalities, as absolute objects, by themselves, and 
out of relation to any concrete or individual realities, 
their relative nature at once reappears ; for we find it 
altogether impossible to represent any of the qualities 
expressed by a concept, except as attached to some 
individual and determinate object ; and their whole 
generality consists in this, — that though we must 
realise them in thought under some singular of the 
class, we may do it under any. Thus, for example, 
we cannot actually represent the bundle of attributes 
contained in the concept man , as an absolute object, 
by itself, and apart from all that reduces it from a 
general cognition to an individual representation. 
We cannot figure in imagination any object adequate 
to the general notion or term man ; for the man to be 
here imagined must be neither tall nor short, neither 
fat nor lean, neither black nor white, neither man nor 
woman, neither young nor old, but all and yet none 
of these at once. The relativity of our concepts is 
thus shown in the contradiction and absurdity of the 
opposite hypothesis. 


VOL. i. 


I 


LECT. 

VII. 


Wherein 
consists the 
generality of 
a concept. 


 


130 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIIL 


Recapitula- 
tion, with 
further ex- 
planation 
ami illustrft 
tion. 


LECTURE VIII. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECT. II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

I. — ENNOEMATIC. 

A. OF CONCEPTS IN GENERAL; B. IN SPECIAL — I. THEIR 
OBJECTIVE RELATION— QUANTITY. 

In our last Lecture, we began the Second Section of 
Stoicheiology, — the consideration of the Products of 
Thought. The product of thought may be considered 
as Concepts, as Judgments, and as Reasonings ; these, 
however, are not to be viewed as the results of dif- 
ferent faculties, far less as processes independent of 
each other, for they are all only the product of the 
Bame energy in different degrees, or rather in sim- 
pler or more complex application to its objects. 

Id treating of Concepts, which form the subject of 
the First Chapter of this Second Section, I stated that 
I should first consider them in general, and then con- 
sider them in special ; and, in my last Lecture, I had 
nearly concluded all that I deem it requisite under 
the former head to state, in regard to their peculiar 
character, their origin, and their general accidents. 
I, first of all, explained the meaning of the two terms, 
concept and notion, words convertible with each other, 
but still severally denoting a different aspect of the 
simple operation, which they equally express. Notion 
being relative to and expressing the apprehension, — 
the remarking, — the taking note of, the resembling 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


131 


attributes in objects ; concept , the grasping up or 
synthesis of these in the unity of thought. 

Having shown what was properly expressed by the 
terms notion and concept or conception , I went on to 
a more articulate explanation of that which they were 
employed to denote. And here I again stated what 
a Concept or Notion is in itself, and in contrast to a 
Presentation of Perception, or Eepresentation of Phan- 
tasy. Our knowledge through either of the latter, is 
a direct, immediate, irrespective, determinate, indivi- 
dual, and adequate cognition ; that is, a singular or 
individual object is known in itself, by itself, through 
all its attributes, and without reference to aught but 
itself. A concept, on the contrary, is an indirect, 
mediate, relative, indeterminate, and partial cognition 
of any one of a number of objects, but not an actual 
representation either of them all, or of the whole 
attributes of any one object. 

Though it be not strictly within the province of 
Logic to explain the origin and formation of our 
notions, the logician assuming, as data, the laws and 
products of thought, as the mathematician assumes, 
as data, extension and number and the axioms by 
which their relation is determined, both leaving to 
the metaphysician the inquiry into their grounds ; — 
this notwithstanding, I deemed it not improper to 
give you a very brief statement of the mode and cir- 
cumstances in which our concepts are elaborated out 
of the presentations and representations of the sub- 
sidiary faculties. Different objects are complements 
partly of similar, partly of different, attributes. Simi- 
lar qualities are those which stand in similar relation 
to our organs and faculties, and where the similarity 
is complete, the effects which they determine in us 
are, by us, indiscernible. To us they are, therefore, 


LECT. 

VIII. 


 


LECT. 

VIII. 


132 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

virtually the same, and the same we, accordingly, con- 
sider them to be, though in different objects ; pre- 
cisely as we consider the thought of the same object 
to be itself the same, when repeated at intervals, — at 
different times, — in consciousness. This, by way of 
preface, being understood, I showed that, in the for- 
mation of a concept or notion, the process may be 
analysed into four momenta. In the first place, we 
must have a plurality of objects presented or repre- 
sented by the subsidiary faculties. These faculties 
must furnish the rude material for elaboration. In 
the second place, the objects thus supplied are, by an 
act of the Understanding, compared together, and their 
several qualities judged to be similar or dissimilar. 
In the third place, an act of volition, called Attention, 
concentrates consciousness on the qualities thus re- 
cognised as similar ; and that concentration, by atten- 
tion on them, involves an abstraction of consciousness 
from those which have been recognised and thrown 
aside as dissimilar; for the power of consciousness 
is limited, and it is clear or vivid precisely in propor- 
tion to the simplicity or oneness of its object. Atten- 
tion and Abstraction are the two poles of the same 
act of thought ; they are like the opposite scales in a 
balance, the one must go up as the other goes down. 
In the fourth place, the qualities, which by compari- 
son are judged similar and by attention are consti- 
tuted into an exclusive object of thought, — these are 
already, by this process, identified in consciousness ; 
for they are only judged similar, inasmuch as they 
produce in us indiscernible effects. Their synthesis 
in consciousness may, however, for precisions sake, be 
stated as a fourth step in the process ; but it must be 
remembered, that at least the three latter steps are 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


133 


not, in reality, distinct and independent acts, but are 
only so distinguished and stated, in order to enable 
us to comprehend and speak about the indivisible 
operation, in the different aspects in which we may 
consider it. In the same way, you are not to sup- 
pose that the mental sentence which must be analysed 
in order to be expressed in language, has as many 
parts in consciousness, as it has words, or clauses, 
in speech ; for it forms, in reality, one organic and 
indivisible whole. To repeat an illustration I have 
already given, — the parts of an act of thought stand 
in the same relation to each other as the parts of a 
triangle, — a figure which we cannot resolve into any 
simpler figure, but whose sides and angles we may 
consider apart, and, therefore, as parts ; though these 
are, in reality, inseparable, being the necessary condi- 
tions of each other. — But this by the way. 

The qualities of different individual things, thus 
identified in thought, and constituting concepts, under 
which, as classes, these individual things themselves 
are ranged ; — these primary concepts may themselves 
be subjected to the same process, by which they were 
elaborated from the concrete realities given in Per- 
ception and Imagination. We may, again, compare 
different concepts together, again find in the plurality 
of attributes which they comprehend, some like, some 
unlike ; we may again attend only to the similar, and 
again identify these in the synthesis of consciousness ; 
and this process of evolving concepts out of concepts 
we may go on performing, until the generalisation is 
arrested in that ultimate or primary concept, the 
basis itself of all attributes, — the concept of Being or 
Existence. 

Having thus endeavoured to give you a general 


LECT. 

VIII. 


134 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lf.ct. view of what concepts are, and by what process they 

1- are formed, I stated, by way of corollary, some of their 

general characteristics. The first of these I mentioned 
is their partiality or inadequacy, — that is, they com- 
prehend only a larger or smaller portion of the whole 
attributes belonging to the things classified or con- 
tained under them. 

Relativity The second is their relativity. Formed by compari- 

of Concept*. gon , eX p ress only a relation. They cannot, there- 
fore, be held up as an absolute object to consciousness, 
— they cannot be represented, as universals, in ima- 
gination. They can only be thought of in relation to 
some one of the individual objects they classify, and 
when viewed in relation to it, they can be represented 
in imagination ; but then, as so actually represented, 
they no longer constitute general attributions, they fall 
back into mere special determinations of the individual 
object in which they are represented. Thus it is, that 
the generality or universality of concepts is potential, 
not actual. They are only generals, inasmuch as they 
may be applied to any of the various objects they 
contain ; but while they cannot be actually elicited 
into consciousness, except in application to some one 
or other of these, so, they cannot be so applied with- 
out losing, pro tanto, their universality. Take, for 
example, the concept horse. In so far as by horse we 
merely think of the word, that is, of the combination 
formed by the letters h, o, r, s, e , — this is not a con- 
cept at all, as it is a mere representation of certain 
individual objects. This 1 only state and eliminate, 
in order that no possible ambiguity should be allowed 
to lurk. By horse, then, meaning not merely a re- 
presentation of the word, but a concept relative to 
certain objects classed under it ; — the concept horse. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


135 


I say, cannot, if it remain a concept, that is, a uni- 
versal attribution, be represented in imagination ; 
but, except it be represented in imagination, it cannot 
be applied to any object, and, except it be so applied, 
it cannot be realised in thought at all. You may try 
to escape the horns of the dilemma, but you cannot. 
You cannot realise in thought an absolute or irre- 
spective concept, corresponding in universality to the 
application of the word ; for the supposition of this 
involves numerous contradictions. An existent horse 
is not a relation, but an extended object possessed of 
a determinate figure, colour, size, etc. ; horse, in 
general, cannot, therefore, be represented, except by 
an image of something extended, and of a determinate 
figure, colour, size, etc. Here now emerges the con- 
tradiction. If, on the one hand, you do not represent 
something extended and of a determinate figure, 
colour, and size, you have no representation of any 
horse. There is, therefore, on this alternative, nothing 
which can be called the actual concept or image of a 
horse at all. If, on the other hand, you do represent 
something extended and of a determinate figure, 
colour, and size, then you have, indeed, the image of 
an individual horse, but not a universal concept co- 
adequate with horse in general. For how is it pos- 
sible to have an actual representation of a figure, 
which is not a determinate figure 1 but if of a deter- 
minate figure, it must be that of some one of the 
many different figures under which horses appear ; 
but then, if it be only of one of these, it cannot be the 
general concept of the others, which it does not repre- 
sent. In like manner, how is it possible to have the 
actual representation of a thing coloured, which is 
not the representation of a determinate colour, that is, 


LECT. 

VIII. 


Concepts 
have a po- 
tential, not 
an actual, 
universality. 


 



13G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIII. 


But con- 
cepts arc 
not, there- 
fore, incro 
word?. 


either white, or black, or grey, or brown, etc. \ but if it 
be any one of these, it can only represent a horse of 
this or that particular colour, and cannot be the 
general concept of horses of every colour. The same 
result is given by the other attributes ; and what I 
originally stated is thus manifest, — that concepts have 
only a potential, not an actual, universality, that is, 
they are only universal, inasmuch as they may be 
applied to any of a certain class of objects, but as 
actually applied, they are no longer general attribu- 
tions, but only special attributes. 

But it does not from this follow that concepts are 
mere words, and that there is nothing general in 
thought itself. This is not indeed held in reality by 
any philosopher ; for no philosopher has ever denied 
that we are capable of apprehending relations, and in 
particular the relation of similarity and difference ; so 
that the whole controversy between the conceptualist 
and nominalist originates in the ambiguous employ- 
ment of the same terms to express the representations 
of Imagination and the notions or concepts of the 
Understanding. This is significantly shown by the 
absolute non-existence of the dispute among the philo- 
sophers of the most metaphysical country in Europe. 
In Germany, the question of nominalism and concep- 
tualism has not been agitated, and why ? Simply be- 
cause the German language supplies terms by which 
concepts, (or notions of thought proper), have been 
contradistinguished from the presentations and repre- 
sentations of the subsidiary faculties.® But this is 
not a subject on which I ought at present to have 
touched, as it is, in truth, foreign to the domain of 

a See tho Author’s note, field's physics, vol. ii. p. 290 ct scq. — Ed. 
Works, p. 412 ; and Lectures on Meta- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


137 


Logic ; and I have only been led now to recur to it lect. 
at all, in consequence of some difficulties expressed to U1L 
me by members of the class. — All that I wish you 
now to understand is, — that concepts, as the result of 
comparison, that is, of the apprehension and affirma- 
tion of a relation, are, necessarily, in their nature re- 
lative, and, consequently, not capable of representa- 
tion as absolute attributes. I shall terminate the 
consideration of concepts in general by the following 
paragraph, in which is stated, besides their inadequacy 
and relativity, their dependence on language : — 

ir XXIII. The concept thusformed by an abstrac- Par. xxiii* 
tion of the resembling from the non-resembling 
qualities of objects, would again hill back into on ui! nc ° 
the confusion and infinitude from which it has guagc ' 
been called out, were it not rendered permanent 
for consciousness, by being fixed and ratified in 
a verbal sign. Considered in general, thought 
and language are reciprocally dependent ; each 
bears all the imperfections and perfections of the 
other ; but without language there could be no 
knowledge realised of the essential properties of 
things, and of the connection of their accidental 
states. 


This also is not a subject of which the considera- Tho relation 
tion properly belongs to Logic, but a few words may to Thought, 
not be inexpedient to make you aware, in general, of influenco 


which it 


the intimate connections of thought and its expression ) exerts 
and of the powerful influence which language exerts operSiois! 
upon our mental operations. Man, in fact, only ob- 
tains the use of his faculties in obtaining the use of 
speech, for language is the indispensable mean of the 


 


138 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. development of his natural powers, whether intellec- 
I— tual or moral. 

Language For Perception, indeed, for the mere consciousness 
in certain of the similarities and dissimilarities in the objects 
operations, perceived, for the apprehension of the causal connec- 
tion of certain things, and for the application of this 
knowledge to the attainment of certain ends, no lan- 
guage is necessary ; and it is only the exaggeration 
of a truth into an error, when philosophers maintain 
that language is the indispensable condition of even 
the simpler energies of knowledge. Language is the 
attribution of signs to our cognitions of things. But 
as a cognition must have been already there, before it 
could receive a sign ; consequently, that knowledge 
which is denoted by the formation and application of 
a word, must have preceded the symbol which denotes 
it. Speech is thus not the mother, but the godmother, 
of knowledge. But though, in general, we must hold 
that language, as the product and correlative of 
thought, must be viewed as posterior to the act 
of thinking itself ; on the other hand, it must be 
admitted, that we could never have risen above the 
very lowest degrees in the scale of thought, without 
the aid of signs. A sign is- necessary, to give stability 
to our intellectual progress, — to establish each step in 
our advance as a new starting-point for our advance 
to another beyond. 

A country may be overrun by an armed host, but 
it is only conquered by the establishment of fortresses. 
hHiZJU. Words are the fortresses of thought. They enable us 

8ablc t iiU'l i • -I * • i i 

it« relation to realise our dominion over what we have already 

overrun in thought ; to make every intellectual con- 
quest the basis of operations for others still beyond. — 
Or another illustration : — You have all heard of the 


Mental 
operations 
to which 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


139 


process of tunnelling, of tunnelling through a sand- 
bank. In this operation it is impossible to succeed, 
unless every foot, nay almost every inch in our pro- 
gress, be secured by an arch of masonry, before we 
attempt the excavation of another. Now, language is 
to the mind precisely what the arch is to the tunnel. 
The power of thinking and the power of excavation 
are not dependent on the word in the one case, on the 
mason-work in the other ; but without these subsi- 
diaries, neither process could be carried on beyond its 
rudimentary commencement. Though, therefore, we 
allow that every movement forward in language must 
be determined by an antecedent movement forward in 
thought ; still, unless thought be accompanied at each 
point of its evolution, by a corresponding evolution of 
language, its further development is arrested. Thus 
it is, that the higher exertions of the higher faculty of 
Understanding, — the classification of the objects pre- 
sented and represented by the subsidiary powers in 
the formation of a hierarchy of notions, the connection 
of these notions into judgments, the inference of one 
judgment from another, and, in general, all our con- 
sciousness of the relations of the universal to the par- 
ticular, consequently all science strictly so denomin- 
ated, and every inductive knowledge of the past and 
future from the laws of nature : — not only these, but 
all ascent from the sphere of sense to the sphere 
of moral and religious intelligence, are, as experience 
proves, if not altogether impossible without a language, 
at least possible to a very low degree. 

Admitting even that the mind is capable of certain 
elementary concepts without the fixation and signa- 
ture of language, still these are but sparks which would 
twinkle only to expire, and it requires words to give 


LECT. 

via. 


 



LECT. 

VIII. 


B, Of Con- 
cept* or 
Notions in 
special. 


Par. XXIV. 
Quantity of 
Concepts of 


HO LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

them prominence, and, by enabling us to collect and 
elaborate them into new concepts, to raise out of what 
would otherwise be only scattered and transitory scin- 
tillations a vivid and enduring light. 

I here terminate the General and proceed to the 
Special consideration of Concepts — that is, to view 
them in their several Relations. Now, in a logical 
point of view, there are, it seems to me, only three 
possible relations in which concepts can be considered ; 
for the only relations they hold are to their objects, to 
their subject, or to each other. In relation to their 
objects, — they are considered as inclusive of a greater 
or smaller number of attributes, that is, as applicable 
to a greater or smaller number of objects ; this is tech- 
nically styled their Quantity. In relation to their 
subject, that is, to the mind itself, they are considered 
as standing in a higher or a lower degree of conscious- 
ness, — they are more or less clear, more or less distinct ; 
this, in like manner, is called their Quality. In rela- 
tion to each other, they are considered as the same or 
different, co-ordinated or subordinated to each other ; 
this is their Relation, strictly so called.® Under these 
three heads I now, therefore, proceed to treat them ; 
and, first, of their Quantity. 


IF XXIV. As a concept, or notion, is a thought 
in which an indefinite plurality of characters is 


a On their relation to their origin 
as direct or indirect, see Esser, [Syafem 
der Lof/ik, § 49, p. 96 . — Ed.] 

Mem. — N.B. Notions may be thus 
better divided (?) : — 

1°, By relation to themselves they 
have the quantity of comprehension. 
2°, By relation to their objects they 


have the quantity of extension. These 
two thus quantity in general. 

3°, By relation to each other they 
have relation strictly so adled. 

4°, By relation to their subject 
they have clearness and distinctness. 

(This last had better be relegated 
to Methodology.) — Memoranda. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


141 


bound up into a unity of consciousness, and ap- lect. 

plicable to an indefinite plurality of objects, a L_ 

concept is, therefore, necessarily a quantity, and 
a quantity varying in amount according to the Kltou 
greater or smaller numbers of characters of 
which it is the complement, and the greater or 
smaller number of things of which it may be 
said. This quantity is thus of two kinds ; as it 
is either an Intensive or an Extensive. The In- 
ternal or Intensive Quantity of a concept is de- 
termined by the greater or smaller number of 
constituent characters contained in it. The Ex- 
ternal or Extensive Quantity of a concept is 
determined by the greater or smaller number of 
classified concepts or realities contained under it. 

The former (the Intensive Quantity) is called by 
some latter Greek logicians the depth, (fiados), 
by the Latin logical writers the comprehension, 

( comprehensio , quantitas comprehension is, corn- 
plexus, or quantitas complexus). The latter (the 
Extensive Quantity) is called by the same latter 
Greek Logicians, the breadth, (7 rXctros) ; by Aris- 
totle, r) Trept.O'xp, to nepUyeiv, to TTtpie-^eaOat 
by the logical writers of the western or Latin 
world, the extension or circuit, ( extensio , quantitas 
extcnsionis, ambitus, quantitas ambitus) ; and like- 
wise the domain or sphere of a notion, ( regio , 
sphoera)? 


a See Ltd art s on Metaphysics, vol. 
it. p. 290 n. Aristotle does not use 
irfpioxb as a substantive, though the 
verb, both active and passive, is em- 
ployed in this signification, e.g. Anal. 
Prior, i. 27 ; Rhet. iii. 5. — Ed. 

/3 [Cf. Porphyrii , Isagoge, cc. i. ii. 
viii. ; Cujetan, In Porphyrii Pro:- 


dieabilia, cc. L ii. [p. 37 ed. 1579; 
prefixed to his Commentary on the 
Categoric s, first published in 1496. 
“ Ad hoc breviter dicitur, quod 
esse magi s collectivum multorum 
potest intelligi dupliciter : uno modo 
intensive , et sic species mag is eat 
collectiva, quia magis unit adunata ; 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

VIII. 


General 

Explica* 

tion. 


M2 


The Internal Quantity of a notion, — its Intension 
or Comprehension, is made up of those different attri- 
butes of which the concept is the conceived sum ; 
that is, the various characters connected by the con- 
cept itself into a single whole in thought. The 
External Quantity of a notion or its Extension is, on 
the other hand, made up of the number of objects 
which are thought mediately through a concept. For 
example, the attributes rational, sensible, moral, etc., 
go to constitute the intension or internal quantity of 
the concept man ; whereas the attributes European, 
American, philosopher, tailor, etc., go to make up a 
concept of this or that individual man. These two 
quantities are not convertible. On the contrary, they 
are in the inverse ratio of each other ; the greater the 
depth or comprehension of a notion the less its breadth 
or extension, and vice versd. You will observe, like- 
wise, a distinction which has been taken by the best 
logicians. Both quantities are said to contain ; but 
the quantity of extension is said to contain under it ; 
the quantity of comprehension is said to contain in it. 

By the intension, comprehension, or depth of a 
notion, we think the most qualities of the fewest ob- 
jects ; whereas by the extension or breadth of a con- 
cept, we think the fewest qualities of the most objects. 


alio modo ext entire , et sic genus eat 
magis collectivum, quia multo plura 
sub Him adunatione cadunt, quam sub 
speciei ambitu. Unde species et genus 
eehabent sicut duo duces, quorum alter 
habet exercitum parvum, «ed valdo 
unanimem, alter exercitum magnum, 
ned diversarum faction um. I lie enim 
magia colligit intensive, hie extensive. 
Porpliyriu8 auteni loquebatur hie de 
extensiva collectiono, ideo dixit, genus 
esse magia collectivum.” Quoted by 
Staid, ReguUc Philotnphictr, tit. xii., 


reg. 5, p. 381. Cf. r eg. C, ed. London, 
1 658. — Ed ] [ Port-Royal Logic, P. i. c. 
6, p. 74, ed. 1718. Boethius, hi trod actio 
ad Syllogiamot, Opera t p. 562; In Topica 
Ciceroni a Commentarii , lib. i., Opera , 
p. 765, ed. Baailea*, 1570. Reuschius, 
Syxtana Logicum, pp. 11, 92 ; Baum- 
garten, A Croatia Logica, §§ 56, 57, e<L 
Hal® Magdeburg®, 1773. Krug, 
Logik, § 26 ; Schulze, Logik , § 30 ; 
Esaer, Logik, § 34 cf aeq. ; Eugenios, 
p. 194 cf acq. [AoyiK^i, c. iv., IT«pi 
'Evvoiuiv Bd9ovs re icol nA^rov*. — E d.J 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


H3 


In other words, by the former, we say the most of the lect. 

J J VIII 

least ; by the latter, the least of the most. 1_ 

Again ; you will observe the two following distinc- 
tions : the first, — the exposition of the Comprehen- 
sion of a notion is called its Definition ; (a simple 
notion cannot, therefore, be defined) ; the second, — 
the exposition of the Extension of a notion is called its 
Division ; (an individual notion cannot be divided.) 

What follows is in further illustration of the para- serial 
graph. Notions or concepts stand in a necessary rela- ofTw'° n 
tion to certain objects, thought through them ; for with- concept i» ft 
out something to think of, there could exist no thought, qi “““' ly ‘ 
no notion, no concept. But in so far as we think an 
object through a concept, we think it as part of, or 
as contained under, that concept : and in so far as we 
think a concept of its object or objects, we think it as 
a unity containing, actually or potentially, in it a 
plurality of attributions. Out of the relation of a 
concept to its object it necessarily results, that a 
concept is a quantum or quantity; for that which con- 
tains one or more units by which it may be measured, 
is a quantity. 

But the quantity of a concept is of two, and two ra« ^ 
opposite, kinds. Considered internally, that is, as a L'in.i. -,-i 
unity which may, and generally does, contain in it a 
plurality of parts or component attributes, a concept 
has a certain quantity, which may be called its internal 
or intensive quantity. This is generally called its 
comprehension, sometimes its depth, fiados, and its 
quantilas complexus. Here, the parts, that is, the 
several attributes or characters, which go to constitute 
the total concept, are said to be contained in it. For 
example, the concept man is composed of two con- 
stituent parts or attributes, that is, of two partial 


uan- 

tvro 


 



144. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

VIII. 


concepts, — rational and animal ; for the characters 
rational and animal are only an analytical expression 
of the synthetic unity of the concept man . But each 
of these partial concepts, which together make up the 
comprehension of the total concept man, are them- 
selves wholes, in like manner made up of parts. To 
take only the concept animal ; — this comprehends in 
it, as parts, living and sensitive and organised , for a 
living and sentient organism may be considered as an 
analytical development of the constituents of the syn- 
thetic unity animal. But each of these, again, is a con- 
cept, comprehending and made up of parts ; and these 
parts, again, are relative wholes, divisible into other 
constituent concepts ; nor need we stop in our analy- 
sis till we reach attributes which, as simple, stand as 
a primary or ultimate element, into which the series 
can be resolved. Now, you will observe, that as the 
parts of the parts are parts of the w r hole, the concept 
man , as immediately comprehending the concepts 
rational and animal, mediately comprehends their 
parts, and the parts of their parts, to the end of the 
evolution. Thus, we can say, not only, that man is 
an animal, but that he is a living being, a sentient 
being, etc. The logical axiom, Nota notce est not a rei 
ipsius, or, as otherwise expressed, Prcedicatum prce- 
dicati est prcedicatum subjecti, a — is only a special 
enunciation of the general principle, that the part of a 
part is a part of the whole. You will, hereafter, see 
that the Comprehension of notions affords one of the 
two great branches of reasoning, which, though mar- 
vellously overlooked by logicians, is at least of equal 


a A translation of Aristotle’s first irdvra Kal Karii rod xnroKfi/xivov faM)- 
antipredicamental rule, Cater/, iii. 1, atrai. — Ed. 

"O era Hard rod KarTjyopov/JL(vov Ktyerai 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


145 


importance with that which they have exclusively 
developed, and which is founded on the other kind of 
quantity exhibited by concepts, and to which I now 
proceed. 

But a concept may also be considered externally, 
that is, as a unity which contains under it a plurality 
of classifying attributes or subordinate concepts, and, 
in this respect, it has another quantity which may be 
called its ext&'ncd or extensive quantity. This is 
commonly called its extension ; sometimes its sphere 
or domain , splicer a, regio , quantitas ambitus; and, 
by the Greek Logicians, its breadth or latitude , 7rXa- 
To?. a Here the parts which the total concept contains, 
are said to be contained under it, because, holding 
the relation to it of the particular to the general, they 
are subordinated or ranged tmder it. For example, 
the concepts man , horse , dog, &c., are contained 
under the more general concept animal , — the con- 
cepts triangle , square , circle , rhombus , rhomboid , &c., 
are contained under the more general concept figure ; 
inasmuch as the subordinate concepts can each or 
any be thought through the higher or more general. 
But as each of these subordinate concepts is itself a 
whole or general, which contains under it parts or 
more particular concepts, it follows, again, on the 
axiom or self-evident truth, that a part of a part is a 
part of the whole, — an axiom which, you will here- 
after see, constitutes the one principle of all Deductive 
reasoning, — it follows, on this axiom, that whatever 
is contained under the partial or more particular con- 
cept is contained under the total or more general 
concept. Thus, for example, triangle is contained 
under figure ; all, therefore, that is contained under 

a See abovo, p. 141, notes o, 0. — Ed. 

VOL. I. K 


LEcrr. 

VIII. 


Extcn- 

ro. 


 


146 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. triangle , as rectangled triangle , equilateral triangle , &e., 
VIIL will, likewise, be contained under figure , by which we 
may, accordingly, think and describe them. 

Such, in general, is what is meant by the two 
Quantities of concepts, — their Comprehension and 
Extension. 

intensive But these quantities are not only different, they are 
4^“’ opposed, and so opposed, that though each supposes 
opposSTto the other as the condition of its own existence, still, 
each other. however, w irtd n the limits of conjunct, of correlative 

existence, they stand in an inverse ratio to each other, 
— the maximum of the one being necessarily the 
minimum of the other. On this I give you the fol- 
lowing paragraph : — 


Par. XXV. 
Law regu- 
lating the 
mutual re- 
lations of 
Extension 
and Com- 
prehension. 


XXV. A notion is intensively great in pro- 
portion to the greater number, and intensively 
small in proportion to the smaller number, of 
determinations or attributes contained in it. Is 
the Comprehension of a concept a minimum, 
that is, is the concept one in which a plurality 
of attributes can no longer be distinguished, it 
is called simple ; whereas, inasmuch as its attri- 
butes still admit of discrimination, it is called 
complex or compound. a 

A notion is extensively great in proportion to 
the greater number, and extensively small in 
proportion to the smaller number, of determina- 
tions or attributes it contains under it. When 
the Extension of a concept becomes a minimum, 
that is, when it contains no other notions under 
it, it is called an individual 

These two quantities stand always in an inverse 

a Krug, Loyik, § 28. — Ed. /3 Krug, ibid., § 29. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


147 


ratio to each other : For the greater the Com pro- lect. 
hension of a concept the less is its Extension, V111, 
and the greater its Extension the less its Compre- 
hension . 0 


To illustrate this : — When I take out of a concept, lustration, 
that is, abstract from one or more of its attributes, I 
diminish its comprehension. Thus, when from the 
concept man, equivalent to rational animal, I abstract 
from the attribute or determination rational, I lessen 
its internal quantity. But by this diminution of its 
comprehension I give it a wider extension, for what 
remains is the concept animal, and the concept animal 
embraces under it a far greater number of objects than 
the concept man. 

Before, however, proceeding further in illustrating 
the foregoing paragraph, it may be proper to give you 
also the following : — 


U XXVI. Of the logical processes by which these p«. xxvr. 


counter quantities of concepts are amplified, — bywind" 


the one which amplifies the Comprehension isp^h™*?™ 
called Determination, and sometimes called Con- sion of 
crelion, the other which amplifies the Extension are ampli- 
is called Abstraction or Generalisation. Defini-^i, 
tion and Division are severally the resolution of 
the Comprehension and of the Extension of 
notions, into their parts. A Simple notion can- 
not be defined ; an Individual notion cannot be 
divided/ 


a Krug, Lopik,§27. — Ed. ; [Schulze, 
Logik, § 33. Cf. Porphyry, Jsagogc, c. 
viii. §§ 9, 10.] [ , 'Eti ri/xiv yivi) xAco- 
rdfa rp twv inr' airrii tiZ<2r wepioxj)' 
rh, ethrj r&y yevwv rAtoydfti reus 
oIk flats StatpopaTs. *En oCre t& ethos 
yivotr &y yevuetkraroy' otir* rh yivos 
elhiKtinarov. — Ed.] 


/3 [Synonyms of Abstraction: — 1, 
Analysis (of Comprehension) ; 2, Syn- 
thesis ; 3, Generification ; 4, Induc- 
tion ; 5, Amplification. 

Synonyms of Determination or Con- 
cretion : — 1, Analysis (of Extension) ; 
2, Synthesis ; 3, Specification ; 4, llc- 
striction ; 5, Individuation.] 


.  


148 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIII. 


Illustration 
of the two 
foregoing 
paragraphs. 


Comprehen- 
sion and 
Extension 
are opposed 
in an in- 
verse ratio 
to each 
other. 


The reason ot this opposition of the two quantities 
is manifest in a moment, from the consideration of 
their several natures. The comprehension of a con- 
cept is nothing more than a sum or complement 
of the distinguishing characters, attributes, of which 
the concept is made up ; and the extension of a 
concept is nothing more than the sum or complement 
of the objects themselves, whose resembling characters 
were abstracted to constitute the concept. Now, it 
is evident, that the more distinctive characters the 
concept contains, the more minutely it will distinguish 
and determine, and that if it contain a plenum of 
distinctive characters, it must contain the distinctive, 
— the determining, characters of some individual ob- 
ject. How do the two quantities now stand ? In 
regard to the comprehension or depth, it is evident, 
that it is here at its maximum, the concept being a 
complement of the whole attributes of an individual 
object, which, by these attributes, it thinks and dis- 
criminates from every other. On the contrary, the 
extension or breadth of the concept is here at its 
minimum ; for, as the extension is great in propor- 
tion to the number of objects to which the concept 
can be applied, and as the object is here only an indi- 
vidual one, it is evident that it could not be less, 
without ceasing to exist at all. Again, to reverse 
the process ; — throwing out of the comprehension of 
the concept, that is, abstracting from those attri- 
butes, which belonging exclusively to, exclusively 
distinguish, the individual, — we at once diminish 
the comprehension, by reducing the sum of its at- 
tributes, and amplify the extension of the concept, 
by bringing within its sphere all the objects, which 
the characteristics, now thrown out of the comprehen- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


H9 

sion, had previously excluded from the extension, lect. 
Continuing the process, by abstraction we throw out ' U1 ' 
of the sum of qualities constituting the comprehension, 
other discriminating attributes, and forthwith the 
extension is proportionally amplified, by the entrance 
into its sphere of all those objects which had pre- 
viously been debarred by the determining character- 
istics last discarded. Thus proceeding, and at each 
step ejecting from the comprehension those characters 
which are found the proximate impediments to the 
amplification of the extension of the concept, we at 
each step diminish the former quantity precisely as 
we increase the latter ; till, at last, we arrive at that 
concept which is the necessary constituent of every 
other, — at that concept which all comprehension and 
all extension must equally contain, but in which com- 
prehension is at its minimum, extension at its maxi- 
mum, — I mean the concept of Being or Existence 

We have thus seen, that the maximum of compre- Definition 
hension and the minimum of extension are found in sion, — are 
the concept of an individual, — that the maximum of ex- ceww by 

• o i i*i which Com- 

tension and the minimum oi comprehension are round prehension 
in the concept of the absolutely simple, that is, in the sion of Con- 
concept of existence. Now comprehension and exten- 
sion, as quantities, are wholes ; for wholes are only 
the complement of all their parts, and as wholes are 
only by us clearly comprehended as we distinctly 
comprehend their parts, it follows : — 1°, That com- 
prehension and extension may each be analysed into 
its parts ; and, 2°, That this analysis will afford the 
mean by which each of these quantities can be clearly 
and distinctly understood. But as the two quantities 

a This, like other logical relations, [See below, p. 1 52. — Ed.] 
may bo typified by a sensible figure. 


 


150 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIII. 


Definition 

illustrated. 


are of an opposite nature, it is manifest, that the two 
processes of analysis will, likewise, be opposed. The 
analysis of the intensive or comprehensive quantity 
of concepts, that is, their depth, is accomplished by 
Definition ; that of their extensive quantity or breadth, 
by Division. On Definition and Division I at present 
touch, not to consider them in themselves or on their 
own account, that is, as the methods of clear and of dis- 
tinct thinking, for this will form the matter of a special 
discussion in the Second Part of Logic or Methodology, 
but simply in so far as it is requisite to speak of them 
in illustration of the general nature of our concepts. 

The expository or explanatory analysis of a concept, 
considered as an intensive whole or quantum, if pro- 
perly effected, is done by its resolution into two con- 
cepts of which it is proximately compounded, that is, 
into the higher concept under which it immediately 
stands, and into the concept w r hich affords the char- 
acter by which it is distinguished from the other co- 
ordinate concepts under that higher concept. This is 
its Definition ; that is, in logical language, its expo- 
sition by an analysis into its Genus and Differential 
Quality ; — the genus being the higher concept, under 
which it stands ; the differential quality the lower 
concept, by which it is distinguished from the other 
concepts subordinate to the genus, and on a level or 
co-ordinate with itself, and which, in logical language, 
are called Species. For example, if we attempt an 
expository or explanatory analysis of the concept 
marly considered as an intensive quantity or corn- 
plexus of attributes, we analyse it into animal, this 
being the higher concept or genus, under which it 
stands ; — and into rational, the attribute of reason 
being the characteristic or differential quality by 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


151 


which man is distinguished from the other concepts lect. 

or species which stand co-ordinated with itself, under U1 ' 

the genus animal, — that is, irrational animal or brute. 

Here you will observe, that though the analysis be 
of the comprehension, yet it is regulated by the exten- 
sion ; the extension regulating the order in which the 
comprehension is resolved into its parts. 

The expository analysis of a concept, an extensive Divi«ion. 
whole or quantum, is directly opposed to the preceding, 
to which it is correlative. It takes the higher con- 
cept, and, if conducted aright, resolves it into its proxi- 
mately lower concepts, by adding attributes which 
afford their distinguishing characters or differences. 

This is division : — Thus, for example, taking the high- 
est concept, that of ens or existence, by adding to it the 
differential concepts per se or substantial, and non per 
se or accidental, we have substantial existence or exist- 
ence per se, equivalent to substance, and accidental 
existence or existence non per se, equivalent to acci- 
dent. We may then divide substance by simple and 
not-simple, equivalent to compound, and again simple 
by material and non-material, equivalent to imma- 
terial, equivalent to spiritual ; — and matter or material 
substance by organised and not-organised, equivalent 
to brute matter. Organised matter we may divide by 
sentient or animal, and non- sentient or vegetable. 
Animal we may divide by rational and irrational, and 
so on, till we reach a concept which, as that of an 
individual object, is, in fact, not a general concept, 
but only in propriety a singular representation. 

Thus, it is manifest, that, as Definition is the analysis The in.io- 
of a complex concept into its component parts or attri- iXLbk-. 
butes, if a concept be simple, that is, if it contain in 
it only a single attribute, it must be indefinable ; and 


 


152 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIII. 


again, that as Division is the analysis of a higher or 
more general concept into others lower and less gen- 
eral, if a concept be an individual, that is, only a 
bundle of individual qualities, it is indivisible, is, in 
fact, not a proper or abstract concept at all, but only 
a concrete representation of Imagination. 


Diagram “The following Diagram represents Breadth and 
Extension Depth, with the relations of Affirmation and Negation 

ami Com- . . i , • . • 

prehension to these quantities. 

of Concepts. 


Schemes of the Two Quantities. 

Line of Breadth. Aff. Neg. 









Expiana- In the preceding Table there are represented : — by 
A, A, &c., the highest genus or widest attribute ; by 
Y, the lowest species or narrowest attribute ; whilst 
the other four horizontal series of vowels typify the 
subaltern genera and species, or the intermediate 
attributes. The vowels are reserved exclusively for 
classes, or common qualities ; whereas the consonants 
z, z', z", (and which to render the contrast more ob- 
trusive are not capitals,) represent individuals or sin- 


a Tlio Diagram and relative text to Editors from the Author’s Discussions, 
cud of Lecture arc extracted by the p. 699-701 . — Ed. 


\ 

\ 

\ 

« 

LECTURES ON LOGIC. 153 

gplars. Every higher class or more common attribute 
is supposed (in conformity with logical precision) to 
be dichotomised, — to be divided into two by a lower 
class or attribute, and its contradictory or negative. 
This contradictory, of which only the commencement 
appears, is marked by an italic vowel, preceded by a 
perpendicular line ( | ) signifying not or non , and 
analogous to the minus (— ) of the mathematicians. 
This being understood, the Table at once exhibits the 
real identity and rational differences of Breadth and 
Depth, which, though denominated quantities , are, in 
reality, one and the same quantity, viewed in counter 
relations and from opposite ends. Nothing is the 
one, which is not, pro tanto , the other. 

In Breadth : the supreme genus (A, A, &c.) is, as 
it appeal’s, absolutely the greatest whole ; an indivi- 
dual (z) absolutely the smallest part ; whereas the 
intermediate classes are each of them a relative part 
or species, by reference to the class and classes above 
it ; a relative whole or genus, by reference to the class 
or classes below it. — In Depth : the individual is ab- 
solutely the greatest whole, the highest genus is abso- 
lutely the smallest part ; whilst every relatively lower 
class or species, is relatively a greater whole than the 
class, classes, or genera, above it. — The two quantities 
are thus, as the diagram represents, precisely the in- 
verse of each other. The greater the Breadth, the 
less the Depth ; the greater the Depth, the less the 
Breadth ; and each, within itself, affording the corre- 
lative differences of whole and part, each, therefore, in 
opposite respects, contains and is contained- . But, for 
distinction’s sake, it is here convenient to employ a 
difference, not altogether arbitrary, of expression. 
We should say : — “containing and contained under” 


LF.CT. 

VIII. 


 


154- 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIII. 


for Breadth ; — “ containing and contained in,” for 
Depth. This distinction, which has been taken by 
some modern logicians, though unknown to many 
of them, was not observed by Aristotle. "We find 
him, (to say nothing of other ancient logicians), using 
the expression iv o\co etuai or vna px eLV > for either 
whole. Though different in the order of thought, 
( ratione ), the two quantities are identical in the 
nature of things, (re). Each supposes the other ; and 
Breadth is not more to be distinguished from Depth, 
than the relations of the sides, from the relations of 
the angles, of a triangle. In effect it is precisely the 
same reasoning, whether we argue in Depth, — “ z is, 
(i.e. as subject, contains in it the inherent attribute), 
some Y ; all Y is some U ; all U is some 0 ; all 0 
is some I ; all I is some E ; all E is some A ; — there- 
fore, z is some A or whether we argue in Breadth, — 
“ Some A is, (i.e. as class, contains under it the subject 
part), all E ; some E is all I ; some I is all 0 ; some 0 
is all U ; some U is all Y ; some Y is z ; — therefore, 
some A is z'.” The two reasonings, internally identi- 
cal, are externally the converse of each other ; the 
premise and term, which in Breadth is major, in 
Depth is minor. In syllogisms also, where the con- 
trast of the two quantities is abolished, there, with 
the difference of figure, the differences of major and 
minor premise and term fall likewise. In truth, how- 
ever, common language in its enouncement of pro- 
positions, is here perhaps more correct and philoso- 
phical than the technical language of logic itself. 
For as it is only an equation — only an affiliation of 
identity or its negation , which is, in either quantity, 
proposed ; therefore the substantive verb, (is, is not), 
used in both cases, speaks more accurately, than the 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


155 


expressions, contained, (or not contained), in of the 
one, contained, (or not contained), under of the other. 
In fact, the two quantities and the two quantifications 
have by logicians been neglected together. 

This Table, (the principle of which becomes more 
palpably demonstrative, when the parts of the table 
are turned into the parts of a circular machine 0 ), 
exhibits all the mutual relations of the counter quan- 
tities. — 1°, lb represents the classes, as a series of 
resemblances thought as one, (by a repetition of the 
same letter in the same series), but as really distinct, 
(by separating lines). Thus, A is only A, not A, A, A, 
&c . ; some Animal is not some Animal ; one class of 
Animals is not all, every, or any other ; this Animal 
is not that ; Socrates is not Plato ; z is not z'. On 
the other hand, E is E A ; and Y is YUOIEA; 
every lower and higher letter in the series coalescing 
uninterruptedly into a series of reciprocal subjects and 
predicates, as shown by the absence of all discrim- 
inating lines. Thus, Socrates (z), is Athenian (Y), 
Greek (U), European (0), Man (I), Mammal (E), Ani- 
mal (A). Of course the series must be in gram- 
matical and logical harmony. We must not collate 
notions abstract and notions concrete. — 2°, The Table 
shows the inverse correlation of the two quantities in 
respect of amount. For example : A, ( i.e . A, A, &c.), 
the highest genus represented as having six times the 
Breadth of Y ; whilst Y, (i.e. Y — A), the lowest species, 
has six times the Depth of A. — 3°, The Table mani- 
fests all the classes, as in themselves unreal, subjective, 
ideal ; for these are merely fictions or artifices of the 
mind, for the convenience of thinking. Universals 

a A machine of this kind was con- the class-room to illustrate the doc- 
structed by the Author, and used in trine of the text. — E d. 


LECT. 

VIII. 


 



15 G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

VIII. 


only exist in nature, as they cease to be universal in 
thought ; that is, as they are reduced from general 
and abstract attributes to individual and concrete 
qualities. A — Y are only truly objective as distri- 
buted through z, z', z", &c. ; and in that case they 
are not universals. As Boethius expresses it : — 
“ Omne quod est, eo quod est, singulare est.” — 4°, The 
opposition of class to class, through contradictory 
attributes, is distinguished by lines different from 
those marking the separation of one part of the same 
class from another. Thus, Animal, or Sentiently- 
organised (A), is contrasted with Not-animal, or Not- 
sentiently- organised, ( | A), by lines thicker than 
those which merely discriminate one animal (A), from 
another (A). a 


a Seo further in Discussions, p. 701 ct seq. — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


157 


LECTURE IX. 


STOICHEIOLOGY. 


SECT. II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

I. — ENNOEMATIC. 

B. OF CONCEPTS IN SPECIAL. — II. THEIR SUBJECTIVE 

RELATION — QUALITY. 


Having concluded the consideration of the relation lect. 

ix. 

of concepts to their objects, — the relation in which 


their Quantity is given, I now proceed to consider co!i?cpu°tL 
their relation to their conceiving subject — the relation jcct. 
in which is given their Quality. This consideration 
of the quality of concepts does not, in my opinion, 
belong to the Doctrine of Elements, and ought, in 
scientific rigour, to be adjourned altogether to the 
Methodology, as a virtue or perfection of thought. 

As logicians, however, have generally treated of it 
likewise under the former doctrine, I shall do so too, 
and commence with the following paragraph. 


IT XXVII. A concept or notion is the unity inp ar .xxvn. 
consciousness of a certain plurality of attributes, of Concepts 

1 • . i*i , i p ,i • i consists in 

and it, consequently, supposes the power of think- its logical 
ing these, both separately and together. But as or im^r" 
there are many gradations m the consciousness 
with which the characters of a concept can be 
thought severally and in conjunction, there will 
consequently be many gradations in the actual 


 


158 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Perfection or Imperfection of a notion. It is this 

. ' V. perfection or imperfection which constitutes the 

logical Quality of a concept.® 

It is thus the greater or smaller degree of conscious- 
ness which accompanies the concept and its object, 
that determines its quality, and according to which it 
is called logically perfect or logically imperfect. Now 
there may be distinguished two degrees of this logical 
perfection, the nature of which is summarily expressed 
in the following paragraph. 


Par. XXVIII. 
The two 
degrees of 
the logical 
Perfection 
and Imper- 
fection of 
Concepts, — 
their Clear- 
ness and 
Distinct- 
ness, and 
their Ob- 
scurity and 
Indistinct- 
ness. 


IF XXVIII. There are two degrees of the logical 
perfection of concepts, — viz. their Clearness and 
their Distinctness , and, consequently, two opposite 
degrees of their corresponding imperfection, — viz. 
their Obscurity and their Indistinctness. These 
four qualities express the perfection and imper- 
fection of concepts in extremes ; but between 
these extremes, there lie an indefinite number of 
intermediate degrees. 

A concept is said to be clear , (clara), when 
the degree of consciousness is such as enables 
us to distinguish it as a whole from others ; 
and obscure , ( obscura ), when the degree of con- 
sciousness is insufficient to accomplish this. A 
concept is said to be distinct , ( distincta , per- 
spicua), when the degree of consciousness is such, 
as enables us to discriminate from each other the 
several characters, or constituent parts of which 
the concept is the sum ; and indistinct or con- 
fused, ( indistincta , confusa , imperspicua ), when 
the amount of consciousness requisite for this is 

a Krug, Loyik, § 30- Cf. Enser, LoyiJc , §45 cl seq. — Ed. 


LECTDEES ON LOGIC. 


159 


wanting. Confused, ( confusa ), may be employed leot. 
aa the genus including obscure and indistinct .« — 1— 

The expressions clearness and obscurity, and dis- Ori^nai 
tinctness and indistinctness, as applied to concepts, Tiii" «- 
originally denote certain modifications of vision ; from cltarnc-Ui 
vision they were analogically extended to the other &c. ' ’ 

senses, to imagination, and finally to thought. It 
may, therefore, enable us the better to comprehend 
their secondary application, to consider their primitive. 

To Leibnitz^ we owe the precise distinction of con- 
cepts into clear and distinct, and from him I borrow 
the following illustration. In darkness, — the complete illustrated 
obscurity of night, — we see nothing, — there is no per- to vision, 
ception, — no discrimination of objects. As the light 
dawns, the obscurity diminishes, the deep and uniform 
sensation of darkness is modified, — we are conscious 
of a change, — we see something, but are still unable 
to distinguish its features, — we know not what it is. 

As the light increases, the outlines of wholes begin to 
appear, but still not with a distinctness sufficient to 
allow us to perceive them completely ; but when this 
is rendered possible, by the rising intensity of the 
light, we are then said to see clearly. We then recog- 
nise mountains, plains, houses, trees, animals, &c., 
that is, we discriminate these objects as wholes, as 
unities, from each other. But their parts, — the mani- 
fold of which these unities are the sum, — their parts 
still lose themselves in each other, they are still but 
indistinctly visible. At length when the daylight has 

a Compare Krug, Logik, 31 et teq. — p. 79), Nvureaux Ettait, L. iL, ch. 

Ed. [Buffier, Logiqut, § 345 et teq. xxix. The illustration, however, does 
Kant, Kr. d. r. Vemunft, B. ii. Tran* not occur in eiUier of these passages. 

Dial., art. i, p. 414, 3d ed., 1790.] It was probably borrowed from Krug, 

0 Seohis Meditationee de Cognitione, Logik, § 31, nud attributed to Leibnitz 
Veritate et Ideie, ( Opera, od. Erdmann, by an oversight. — E d* 


 



160 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

IX. 


Clearness 
and ob- 
scurity as 
in Concepts 


fully sprung, we are enabled likewise to discriminate 
their parts ; we now see distinctly what lies around 
us. But still we see as yet only the wholes which 
lie proximately around us, and of these, only the 
parts which possess a certain size. The more distant 
wholes, and the smaller parts of nearer wholes, are 
still seen by us only in their conjoint result, only as 
they concur in making up that whole which is for us 
a visible minimum. Thus it is, that in the distant 
forest or the distant hill, we perceive a green surface ; 
but we see not the several leaves, which in the one, 
nor the several blades of grass, which in the other, 
each contributes its effect to produce that amount of 
impression which our consciousness requires. Thus it 
is, that all which we do perceive is made up of parts 
which we do not perceive, and consciousness is itself 
a complement of impressions, which lie beyond its 
apprehension . 0 Clearness and distinctness are thus 
only relative. For between the extreme of obscurity 
and the extreme of distinctness, there are in vision an 
infinity of intermediate degrees. Now the same thing 
occurs in thought. For we may either be conscious 
only of the concept in general, or we may also be 
conscious of its various constituent attributes, or both 
the concept and its parts may be lost in themselves to 
consciousness, and only recognised to exist by effects 
which indirectly evidence their existence. 

The perfection of a notion, as I said, is contained in 
two degrees or in two virtues, — viz. in its clearness 
and in its distinctness ; and, of course, the opposite 
vices of obscurity and indistinctness afford two de- 
grees or two vices, constituting its imperfection. “ A 
concept is said to be clear , when the degree of con- 
sciousness by which it is accompanied is sufficient to 

o See Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. i. p. 343 ct scq. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lfi] 


discriminate what we think in and through it, from lect. 

what we think in and through other notions ; whereas ' - 

if the degree of consciousness be so remiss that this 
and other concepts run into each other, in that case, 
the notion is said to be obscure. It is evident that 
clearness and obscurity admit of various degrees ; 
each being capable of almost infinite gradations, ac- 
cording as the object of the notion is discriminated 
with greater or less vivacity and precision from the 
objects of other notions. A concept is absolutely t>ic .i«- 
clear, when its object is distinguished from all other and ii™, 
objects ; a concept is absolutely obscure, when its ob- iiw! ° b 
ject can be distinguished from no other object. But 
it is only the absolutely clear and the absolutely ob- 
scure which stand opposed as contradictory extremes ; 
for the same notion can at once be relatively or com- 
paratively clear, and relatively or comparatively ob- 
scure. Absolutely obscure notions, that is, concepts 
whose objects can be distinguished from nothing else, 
exist only in theory ; — an absolutely obscure notion 
being, in fact, no notion at all. For it is of the very 
essence of a concept, that its object should, to a cer- 
tain degree at least, be comprehended in its peculiar, 
consequently, in its distinguishing, characteristics. 

But, on the other hand, of notions absolutely clear, 
that is, notions whose objects cannot possibly be con- 
founded with aught else, whether known or unknown, 

— of such notions a limited intelligence is possessed 
of very few, and, consequently, our human concepts 
are, properly, only a mixture of the opposite qualities ; 

— clear or obscure as applied to them, meaning only 
that the one quality or the other is the preponderant. 

In a logical relation, the illustration of notions con- 
sists in the raising them from a preponderant obscu- 

VOL. I. L 


 



162 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

IX. 


The Dis- 
tinctness 
tuul Indis- 
tinctness of 
Concepts. 


Historical 
notice of 
this distinc- 
tion. 


I>uc to 
Leibnitz. 


Locke. 


rity to a preponderant clearness — or from a lower 
degree of clearness to a higher .” 0 So much for the 
quality of clearness or obscurity considered in itself. 

But a Clear concept may be either Distinct or Indis- 
tinct ; the distinctness and indistinctness of concepts 
are, therefore, to be considered apart from their clear- 
ness and obscurity. 

But before entering upon the nature of the distinc- 
tion itself, I may observe that we owe the discrimina- 
tion of Distinct and Indistinct from Clear and Obscure 
notions to the acuteness of the great Leibnitz. By the 
Cartesians the distinction had not been taken ; though 
the authors of the Port Royal Logic come so near, that 
we may well marvel how they failed explicitly to enounce 
it.P Though Locke published his Essay Concerning 
Human Understanding some five years subsequent to 
the paper in winch Leibnitz, — then a very young 
man, — had, among other valuable observations, pro- 
mulgated this distinction, Locke did not advance be- 
yond the limit already reached by the Cartesians ; — 
indeed, the praises that are so frequently lavished on 
this philosopher for his doctrine concerning the dis- 
tinctions of Ideas, — the conditions of Definition, &c., 
— only prove that his encomiasts are ignorant of what 
had been done, and, in many respects, far better done, 
by Descartes and his school : — in fact, with regard to 
the Cartesian Philosophy in general, it must be con- 
fessed, that Locke has many errors to expiate, arising 
partly from oversight, and partly from the most un- 
accountable misapprehension of its doctrines. It is 

a Esser, pp. 91, 92, [Loyllc, § 46 with those of Descartes anti Leibnitz, 

Ed.] see the Appendix to Mr Baynes’s 

/3 Part I. ch. ix. — For a comparison translation of the Port Royal Logic, p. 
of this statement of the distinction 423 (second edition.) — E d. 


 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


103 


almost needless to say, that those who, in this country, lect. 

have written on this subject, posterior to Locke, have i*' 

not advanced a step beyond him ; for though Leib- 
nitz be often mentioned, and even occasionally quoted, 
by our British philosophers, I am aware of none who 
possessed a systematic acquaintance with his philo- 
sophy, and, I might almost say, who were even super- 
ficially versed, either in his own writings, or in those of 
any of the illustrious thinkers of his school. 

But to consider the distinction in itself. — We have The .un- 
seen that a concept is clear, when we are able to re- 
cognise it as different from other concepts. But we 
may discriminate a whole from other wholes, we may 
discriminate a concept from other concepts, though 
we have only a confused knowledge of the parts of 
which that whole, or of the characters of which that 
concept, is made up. This may be illustrated by the iihutrmt- 
analogy of our Perceptive and Representative Faculties. «n»i^y *f 
We are all acquainted with many, say a thousand, LTrc'p™ 
individuals ; that is, we recognise such and such a " t 
countenance as the countenance of John, and as not 
the countenance of James, Thomas, Richard, or any of 
the other 999. This we do with a clear and certain 
knowledge. But the countenances, which we thus 
distinguish from each other, are, each of them, a com- 
plement made up of a great number of separate traits 
or features ; and it might, at first view, be supposed 
that, as a whole is only the sum of its parts, a clear 
cognition of a whole countenance can only be realised 
through a distinct knowledge of each of its constituent 
features. But the slightest consideration will prove 
that this is not the case. For how few of us are able 
to say of any, the most familiar face, what are the 


 



104 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

IX. 


The judicial 
detenni na- 
tion between 
life nnd 
death s*up- 

S s the 
rcncc 
between a 
clear and 
diatinct 
knowledge. 


Further 
illustration 
from tlio 
human 
counte- 
nance. 


particular traits which go to form the general result ; 
and yet, on that account, we hesitate, neither in regard 
to our own knowledge of an individual, nor in regard 
to the knowledge possessed by others. — Suppose a 
witness be adduced in a court of justice to prove the 
identity or non-identity of a certain individual with 
the perpetrator of a certain crime, the commission of 
which he had chanced to see, — would the counsel be 
allowed to invalidate the credibility of the witness by, 
first of all, requiring him to specify the various ele- 
ments of which the total likeness of the accused was 
compounded, and then by showing that, as the witness 
either could not specify the several traits, or specified 
what did not agree with the features of the accused, 
he was, therefore, incompetent to prove the identity 
or non-identity required ? This would not be allowed. 
For the court would hold that a man might have a 
clear perception and a clear representation of a face 
and figure, of which, however, he had not separately 
considered, and could not separately image to himself, 
the constituent elements. Thus, even the judicial de- 
termination of life and death supposes, as real, the 
difference between a clear and a distinct knowledge : 
for a distinct knowledge lies in the knowledge of the 
constituent parts ; while a clear knowledge is only of 
the constituted whole. 

Continuing our illustrations from the human coun- 
tenance, — we all have a clear knowledge of any face 
which we have seen, but few of us have distinct 
knowledge even of those with which we are familiar ; 
but the painter, who, having looked upon a counte- 
nance, can retire and reproduce its likeness in detail, 
has necessarily both a clear and a distinct know- 
ledge of it. Now, what is thus the case with percep- 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


1G5 


tions and representations, is equally the case with lkct. 
notions. We may be able clearly to discriminate — 1_ 
one concept from another, although the degree of con- 
sciousness does not enable us distinctly to discrimin- 
ate the various component characters of either con- 
cept from each other. The Clearness and the Distinct- 
ness of a notion are thus not the same ; the former 
involves merely the power of distinguishing the total 
objects of our notions from each other ; the latter in- 
volves the power of distinguishing the several charac- 
ters, the several attributes, of which that object is the 
sum. In the former, the unity, in the latter, the mul- 
tiplicity, of the notion is called into relief. 

The Distinctness of a concept supposes, however, the Special 
Clearness ; and may, therefore, be regarded as a higher of The d!L. 
degree of the same quality or perfection. “To the a Concept, 
distinctness of a notion, over and above its general degrees, 
clearness, there are required three conditions, — 1°, The 
clear apprehension of its several characters or compo- 
nent parts ; 2°, The clear contrast or discrimination of 
these ; and, 3°, The clear recognition of the nexus by 
which the several parts are bound up into a unity 
or whole. 

“ As the clearness, so the distinctness, of a notion 
is susceptible of many degrees. A concept may be 
called distinct , when it involves the amount of con- 
sciousness required to discriminate from each other its 
principal characters ; but it is so much the more dis- 
tinct, 1°, In proportion to the greater number of the 
characters apprehended ; 2°, In proportion to the 
greater clearness of their discrimination ; and, 3°, In 
proportion to the precision with which the mode of 
their connection is recognised. But the greater dis- 
tinctness is not exclusively or even principally deter- 


 


1G6 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

IX. 


mined by the greater number of the clearly appre- 
hended characters ; it depends still more on their su- 
perior importance. In particular, it is of moment, 
whether the characters be positive or negative, inter- 
nal or external, permanent or transitory, peculiar or 
common, essential or accidental, original or derived. 
From the mere consideration of the differences sub- 
sisting between attributes, there emerge three rules to 
be attended to in bestowing on a concept its requisite 
distinctness. In the first place, we should endeavour 
to discover the positive characters of the object con- 
ceived ; as it is our purpose to know what the object 
is, and not what it is not. When, however, as is not 
unfrequently the case, it is not at once easy to discover 
what the positive attributes are, our endeavour should 
be first directed to the detection of the negative ; and 
this not only because it is always an advance in know- 
ledge, when we ascertain what an object is not, but, 
likewise, because the discovery of the negative cha- 
racters conducts us frequently to a discovery of the 
positive. 

“ In the second place, among the positive qualities 
we should seek out the intrinsic and permanent before 
the extrinsic and transitory ; for the former give us 
a purer and more determinate knowledge of an ob- 
ject, though this object may likewise at the same time 
present many external relations and mutable modifi- 
cations. Among the permanent attributes, the pro- 
per or peculiar always merit a preference, if for no 
other reason, because through them, and not through 
the common qualities, can the proper or peculiar nature 
of the object become known to us. 

“ In the third place, among the permanent charac- 
ters we ought first to hunt out the necessary or essen- 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


167 


tial, and then to descend from them to the contingent 
or accidental ; and this not only because we thus give 
order and connection to our notions, but, likewise, be- 
cause the contingent characters are frequently only to 
be comprehended through the necessary.” a 

But before leaving this part of our subject, it may 
be proper to illustrate the distinction of Clear and 
Distinct notions by one or two concrete examples. Of 
many things we have clear but not distinct notions. 
Thus we have a clear, but not a distinct, notion of col- 
ours, sounds, tastes, smells, &c. For we are fully able 
to distinguish red from white, to distinguish an acute 
from a grave note, the voice of a friend from that of 
a stranger, the scent of roses from that of onions, the 
flavour of sugar from that of vinegar ; but by what 
plurality of separate and enunciable characters is this 
discrimination made 1 It is because we are unable to 
do this, that we cannot describe such perceptions and 
representations to others. 

“If you ask of me,” said St Augustin, “ what is Time, 
I know not ; if you do not ask me, I know.” P What 
does this mean ? Simply that he had a clear, but not 
a distinct, notion of Time. 

Of a triangle we have a clear notion, when we 
distinguish a triangle from other figures, without spe- 
cially considering the characters which constitute it 
what it is. But when we think it as a portion of 
space bounded by three lines, as a figure whose three 
angles are equal to two right angles, &c., then we 
obtain of it a distinct concept. 

We now come to the consideration of the question, — 
IIow does the Distinctness of a concept stand affected 


LECT. 

IX. 


The dis- 
tinction of 
Clear and 
Distinct 
notion* 
illustrated 
by concrete 
examples. 


How tho 
Distinctness 
of a Concept 


o Esaer, Loyik, § 47, p. 03-95. — $ Confessions, xi. c. 14. — Ed. 

Ed. 


 


1G8 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. by the two quantities of a concept % — and in reference 
1X ' to this point I would, in the first place, dictate to you 
the following paragraph 

IF XXIX. As a concept is a plurality of cha- 
racters bound up into unity, and as that plurality 
is contained partly in its Intensive, partly under 
its Extensive, quantity ; its Distinctness is, in like 
manner, in relation to these quantities, partly an 
Internal or Intensive, partly an External or Exten- 
sive Distinctness.® 

Explication. In explanation of this, it is to be observed, that, as 
the distinctness of a concept is contained in the clear 
apprehension of the various attributes of which it is 
the sum, as it is the sum of these attributes in two 
opposite relations, which constitute, in fact, two oppo- 
site quantities or wholes, and as these wholes are 
severally capable of illustration by analysis, — it follows, 
that each of these analyses will contribute its peculiar 
share to the general distinctness of the concept. Thus, 
if the distinctness of a notion bears reference to that 
plurality which constitutes its comprehension, in other 
words, to that which is contained in the concept, the 
distinctness is denominated an internal or intensive 
distinctness, or distinctness of comprehension. On the 
other hand, if the distinctness refers to that plurality 
which constitutes the extension of the notion, in other 
words, to what is contained under it, in that case, the 
distinctness is called an external or extensive distinct- 
ness, a distinctness of extension . It is only when a 
notion combines in it both of these species of distinct- 
ness, it is only when its parts have been analysed in 

a Krug, Loyik, § 34 ; Esaer, Logit:, § 48. — Ed. 


quantities of 
a Concept. 

Par. XXIX. 
Distinctness, 
Internal 
and Exter- 
nal. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


169 


reference to the two quantities, that it reaches the lkct. 

highest degree of distinctness and of perfection. — 

The Internal Distinctness of a notion is accomplished Definition 
by Exposition or Definition, that is, by the enumeration Z'u. 
of the characters or partial notions contained in it ; 
the External Distinctness, again, of a notion is accom- 
plished through Division, that is, through the enu- 
meration of the objects which are contained under 
it. Thus the concept man is rendered intensively 
more distinct, when we declare that man is a rational 
animal ; it is rendered extensively more distinct, when 
we declare that man is partly male, partly female man* 

In the former case, we resolve the concept man into its 
several characters, — into its partial or constituent attri- 
butes ; in the latter, we resolve it into its subordinate 
concepts, or inferior genera. In simple notions, there simple no. 
is thus possible an extensive, but not an intensive, dis- ®r »¦> «»”¦ 

. . . . ... »ivo, indivi- 

tinctness ; in individual notions, there is possible an diminution. 

• • i . . A of an inten- 

intensive, but not an extensive, distinctness." Thus »i v© distinct- 

. nesa. 

the concepts existence, green, sweet, & c., though, as abso- 
lutely or relatively simple, their comprehension cannot 
be analysed into any constituent attributes, and they do 
not, therefore, admit of definition ; still it cannot be said 
that they are incapable of being rendered more distinct. 

For do we not analyse the pluralities of which these 
concepts are the sum, when we say, that existence is 
either ideal or real, that green is a yellowish or a 
bluish green, that sweet is a pungent or a mawkish 
sweet 1 — and do we not, by this analysis, attain a 
greater degree of logical perfection than when we 
think them only clearly and as wholes 1 7 “A con- The high- 
cept has, therefore, attained its highest point of dis- of a. 

a Krug, p. 95, [Logit, § 31 El).] 7 Knig, Logit, § 31, Anmerk., i 

/3 Easier, Logit, § 18. — Eu. pp. 95, 98 .— Ed. 


 


170 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

IX. 


non* of a 
Concept. 


tinctness, when there is such a consciousness of its 
characters that, in rendering its comprehension dis- 
tinct, we touch on notions which, as simple, admit of 
no definition, and, in rendering its extension distinct, 
we touch on notions which, as individual, admit of no 
ulterior division. It is true, indeed, that a distinct- 
ness of this degree is one which is only ideal ; that is, 
one to which we are always approximating, but which 
we never are able actually to reach. In order to ap- 
proach as near as possible to this ideal, we must 
always inquire, what is contained in, and what under, 
a notion, and endeavour to obtain a distinct conscious- 
ness of it in both relations. What, in this research, 
first presents itself we must again analyse anew, with 
reference always both to comprehension and to exten- 
sion ; and descending from the higher to the lower, 
from the greater to the less, we ought to stop only 
when our process is arrested in the individual or in 
the simple.” “ 

a Eaaer, Loyik , § 4S, p. 96 . — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


171 


LECTURE X. 
STOICHEIOLOGY. 


SECT. II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 
I. — ENNOEMATIC. 


IMPERFECTION OF CONCEPTS. 


It is now necessary to notice an Imperfection to which lf.ct. 
concepts are peculiarly liable, and in the exposition of 


which I find it necessary to employ an expression, SSHf Con. 
which, though it has the highest philosophical author- ccpU ’ 
ity for its use, I would still, in consequence of its ambi- 
guity in English, have avoided, if this could have been 
done without compromising the knowledge of what it 
is intended to express. The expression I mean, is in- 
tuitive, in the particular signification in which it is 
used by Leibnitz,® and the continental philosophers in 
general, — to denote what is common to our direct and 
ostensive cognition of individual objects, in Sense or 
Imagination, (Presentation or Representation), and in 
opposition to our indirect and symbolical cognition of 
general objects, through the use of signs or language, 
in the Understanding. But, on this head, I would, 
first of all, dictate to you the following paragraph. 


•[j XXX. As a notion or concept is the fac- Par. xxx. 
titious whole or unity made up of a plurality of tion of Cou- 
attributes, — a whole too often of a very complex ccpU * 

a Meditationes ih Cognitione, Yeritatc ct Idcis, Opera, ed. Erdmann, p. 80.— El). 


 


172 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. multiplicity ; and as this multiplicity is only 

— -1 — mentally held together, inasmuch as the concept 

is fixed and ratified in a sign or word ; it fre- 
quently happens, that, in its employment, the 
word does not suggest the whole amount of 
thought for which it is the adequate expression, 
but, on the contrary, we frequently give and take 
the sign, either with an obscure or indistinct con- 
sciousness of its meaning, or even without an 
actual consciousness of its signification at all. 

uiuatnuion. This liability to the vices of Obscurity and Indis- 
tinctness arises, 1°, From the very nature of a concept, 
which is the binding up of a multiplicity in unity ; 
and, 2°, From its dependence upon language, as the 
necessary condition of its existence and stability. In 
consequence of this, when a notion is of a very com- 
plex and heterogeneous composition, we are frequently 
wont to use the term by which it is denoted, without 
a clear or distinct consciousness of the various cha- 
racters of which the notion is the sum ; and thus it is, 
that we both give and take words without any, or, at 
least, without the adequate complement of thought. 
I may exemplify this : — You are aware, that in coun- 
tries where bank-notes have not superseded the use of 
the precious metals, large payments are made in bags 
of money, purporting to contain a certain number of a 
certain denomination of coin, or, at least, a certain 
amount in value. Now, these bags are often sealed 
up and passed from one person to another, without 
the tedious process, at each transference, of counting 
out their contents, and this upon the faith, that, if 
examined, they will be found actually to contain the 
number of pieces for which they are marked, and for 
which they pass current. In this state of matters, it 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


173 


is, however, evident, that many errors or frauds may 
be committed, and that a bag may be given and taken 
in payment for one sum, which contains another, or 
which, in fact, may not even contain any money at all. 
Now the case is similar in regard to notions. As the 
sealed bag or rouleau testifies to the enumerated sum, 
and gives unity to what would otherwise be an uncon- 
nected multitude of pieces, each only representing its 
separate value ; so the sign or word proves and ratifies 
the existence of a concept, that is, it vouches the tying 
up of a certain number of attributes or characters in 
a single concept, — attributes which would otherwise 
exist to us only as a multitude of separate and uncon- 
nected representations of value. So far the analogy 
is manifest ; but it is only general. The bag, the 
guaranteed sum, and the constituent coins, represent 
in a still more proximate manner the term, the con- 
cept, and the constituent characters. For in regard 
to each, we may do one of two things. On the one 
hand, we may test the bag, that is, open it, and 
ascertain the accuracy of its stated value, by counting 
out the pieces which it purports to contain ; or we 
may accept and pass the bag, without such a critical 
enumeration. In the other cSse, we may test the 
general term, prove that it is valid for the amount 
and quality of thought of which it is the sign, by 
spreading out in consciousness the various characters 
of which the concept professes to be the complement ; 
or we may take and give the term without such an 
evolution* 

It is evident from this, that notions or concepts are 
peculiarly liable to great vagueness and ambiguity, 
and that their symbols are liable to be passed about 

o A hint of this illustration is to be 1. chap. viii. p. 200 . — Ed. 
found in Degerando, Dtt Signet, vol. 


LF.CT. 

X. 


 



174 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. without the proper kind, or the adequate amount, of 
thought. 

The liability This interesting subject has not escaped the obser- 
MdTv^'e- y vation of the philosophers of this country, and by 
“ent»'ne- un them it has, in fact, with great ingenuity been illus- 
nriti.il' phi- trated ; but as they are apparently ignorant, that the 
luHopbcn. ma ^ er bad, before them, engaged the attention of 
sundry foreign philosophers, by whom it has been 
even more ably canvassed and expounded, I shall, 
in the exposition of this point, also do justice to the 
illustrious thinkers to whom is due the honour of hav- 
ing originally and most satisfactorily discussed it. 
st cw »rt The following passage from Mr Stewart will afford 
th'i'.’TubjKt. the best foundation for my subsequent remarks. “In 
the last section I mentioned Dr Campbell as an in- 
genious defender of the system of the Nominalists, 
and I alluded to a particular application which he has 
made of their doctrine. The reasonings which I had 
then in view, are to found in the seventh chapter of 
the second book of his Philosophy of Rhetoric, in which 
chapter he proposes to explain how it happens, ‘ that 
nonsense so often escapes being detected both by the 
writer and the reader/ The title is somewhat ludicrous 
in a grave philosophical work, but the disquisition to 
which it is prefixed, contains many acute and profound 
remarks on the nature and power of signs, both as a 
medium of communication, and as an instrument of 
thought. 

Refer* to Dr Campbell’s speculations with respect to lan- 
ame ' guage as an instrument of thought, seem to have 
been suggested by the following passage in Mr Hume’s 
Treat ise of Human Nature :° — ‘ I believe every one 
who examines the situation of his mind in reasoning, 

a Part i, § 7 * — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


175 


will agree with me, that we do not annex distinct and lect. 
complete ideas to every term we make use of ; and — — — 
that in talking of Government, Church, Negotiation, 
Conquest, we seldom spread out in our minds all the 
simple ideas of which these complex ones are composed. 

It is, however, observable, that notwithstanding this 
imperfection, we may avoid talking nonsense on these 
subjects, and may perceive any repugnance among 
the ideas, as well as if we had a full comprehension of 
them. Thus if, instead of saying, that in war the 
weaker have always recourse to negotiation, we should 
say, that they have always recourse to conquest ; the 
custom which we have acquired, of attributing certain 
relations to ideas, still follows the words, and makes 
us immediately perceive the absurdity of that pro- 
position/ 

“ In the remarks which Dr Campbell has made on 
this passage, he has endeavoured to explain in what 
manner our habits of thinking and speaking gradually 
establish in the mind such relations among the words 
we employ, as enable us to carry on processes of 
reasoning by means of them, without attending in 
every instance to their particular signification. With 
most of his remarks on this subject I perfectly agree ; 
but the illustrations he gives of them are of too great 
extent to be introduced here, and I would not wish 
to ran the risk of impairing their perspicuity by 
attempting to abridge them. I must, therefore, refer 
such of my readers as wish to prosecute the specula- 
tion, to his very ingenious and philosophical treatise. 

“ ‘ In consequence of these circumstances/ says Dr An.i camp- 
Campbell, ‘ it happens that, in matters which are per- 
fectly familiar to us, we are able to reason by means 
of words, without examining, in every instance, their 


 



176 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

X. 


signification. Almost all the possible applications of 
the terms (in other words, all the acquired relations 
of the signs) have become customary to us. The con- 
sequence is, that an unusual application of any 
term is instantly detected ; this detection breeds 
doubt, and this doubt occasions an immediate recourse - 
to ideas. The recourse of the mind, when in any 
degree puzzled with the signs, to the knowledge it has 
of the things signified, is natural, and on such subjects 
perfectly easy. And of this recourse the discovery of 
the meaning, or of the unmeaningness of what is said, 
is the immediate effect. But in matters that are by 
no means familiar, or are treated in an uncommon 
manner, and in such as are of an abstruse and intricate 
nature, the case is widely different/ The instances in 
which we are chiefly liable to be imposed on by words 
without meaning, are (according to Dr Campbell), the 
three following : — 

u First , When there is an exuberance of metaphor. 

“ Secondly , When the terms most frequently occur- 
ring denote things which are of a complicated nature, 
and to which the mind is not sufficiently familiarised. 
Such are the words, — Government, Church, State, Con- 
stitution, Polity, Power, Commerce, Legislature, Juris- 
diction, Proportion, Symmetry, Elegance. 

“ Thirdly , When the terms employed are very 
abstract, and consequently of very extensive signifi- 
cation. 

“ * The more general any word is in its signification, 
it is the more liable to be abused by an improper or 
unmeaning application. A very general term is appli- 
cable alike to a multitude of different individuals, a 
particular term is applicable but to a few. When the 
rightful applications of a word are extremely numer- 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


177 


ous, they cannot all be so strongly fixed by habit, but lect. 
that, for greater security, we must perpetually recur — LI — 
in our minds from the sign to the notion we have of 
the thing signified ; and for the reason aforementioned, 
it is in such instances difficult precisely to ascertain 
this notion. Thus the latitude of a word, though 
different from its ambiguity, hath often a similar 
effect.’ ” ° 

Now, on this I would, in the first place, observe, wuo an- 
that the credit attributed to Ilume by Dr Campbell Hume in 
and Mr Stewart, as having been the first by whom the employ- 
the observation had been made, is, even in relation to tem* with- 
British philosophers, not correct. Hume has stated meaning, 
nothing which had not, with equal emphasis and an 
equal development, been previously stated by Locke, 
in four different places of his Essay A 

Thus, to take only one out of at least four passages 
directly to the same effect, and out of many in which 
the same is evidently maintained, he says, in the 
chapter entitled — Of the Abuse of Words : — “ Others Locke 
there be, who extend this abuse yet farther, who take 4 
so little care to lay by words, which in their primary 
notation have scarce any clear and distinct ideas 
which they are annexed to, that by an unpardonable 
negligence they familiarly use words, which the pro- 
priety of language has affixed to very important 
ideas, without any distinct meaning at all. Wisdom , 

glory , grace , &c., are words frequent enough in every 
man’s mouth ; but if a great many of those who use 
them, should be asked what they mean by them, they 
would be at a stand, and not know what to answer : 

a Elements , vol. i., Worts, vol. ii. 7 ; ii., xxix. 9 ; ii., xxxi. 8 ; iiL, ix. 6 ; 
chap. iv. § 4, pp. 193, 195. iii., x. 2. — En. 

0 Compare Essay, B. ii., ch. xxii., § 

VOL. I. 


J 


M 


178 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

X. 


a plain proof, that though they have learned those 
sounds, and have them ready at their tongue’s end, 
yet there are no determined ideas laid up in their 
minds, which are to be expressed to others by them. 
Men having been accustomed from their cradles to 
learn words, which are easily got and retained, before 
they knew, or had framed the complex ideas to which 
they were annexed, or which were to be found in the 
things, they were thought to stand for, they usually 
continue to do so all their lives ; and without taking 
the pains necessary to settle in their minds determined 
ideas, they use their words for such unsteady -and 
confused notions as they have, contenting themselves 
with the same words other people use : as if their 
very sound necessarily carried with it constantly the 
same meaning. This, though men make a shift with, 
in the ordinary occurrences of life, where they find it 
necessary to be understood, and therefore they make 
signs till they are so ; yet this insignificancy in their 
words, when they come to reason concerning either 
their tenets or interest, manifestly fills their discourse 
with abundance of empty unintelligible noise and jar- 
gon, especially in moral matters, where the words, for 
the most part, standing for arbitrary and numerous col- 
lections of ideas, not regularly and permanently united 
in nature, their bare sounds are often only thought 
on, or at least very obscure and uncertain notions 
annexed to them. Men take the words they find in 
use among their neighbours, and that they may not 
seem ignorant what they stand for, use them confi- 
dently, without much troubling their heads about a 
certain fixed meaning : whereby, besides the ease of it, 
they obtain this advantage, that as in such discourses 
they seldom are in the right, so they are as Beldom to 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


170 


be convinced that they are in the wrong ; it being lect. 

all one to go about to draw those men out of their — — 

mistakes, who have no settled notions, as to dis- 
possess a vagrant of his habitation, who has no 
settled abode. This I guess to be so ; and every 
one may observe in himself and others, whether it 
be or no ” a 

From a comparison of this passage with those 
which I have given you from Stewart, Campbell, and 
Hume, it is manifest that, among British philosophers, 

Locke is entitled to the whole honour of the observa- 
tion : for it could easily be shown, even from the iden- 
tity of expression, that Hume must have borrowed it 
from Locke ; and of Humes doctrine the two other 
philosophers profess only to be expositors. 

This curious and important observation was not, The distinc- 
however, first made by any British philosopher ; for tuitivo and 
Leibnitz had not only anticipated Locke, in a pub- knowledge 
lication prior to the Essay , but afforded the most pre- by Leibnitz, 
cise and universal explanation of the phenomenon, 
which has yet been given. 

To him we owe the memorable distinction of our Tins di*tinc- 
knowledge into Intuitive and Symbolical, in which superseded 
distinction is involved the explanation of the pheeno- v^ofNo- 
menon in question. It is the establishment of this J^aamcep- 
distinction, likewise, which has superseded in Germany 
the whole controversy of Nominalism and Concep- 
tualism, — which, in consequence of the non-establish- 
ment of this distinction, and the relative imperfection 
of our philosophical language, has idly agitated the 
Psychology of this country and of France. 

That the doctrines of Leibnitz, on this and other 

a Essay concerning Human Under- x. §§ 3, 4. — Ed.] 
standing, vol. ii. p. 228 ; [B. III., ch. 


180 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. cardinal points of psychology, should have remained 
apparently unknown to every philosopher of this 


Leibnitz. 


Manner in 
which ho 
gave his 
writings to 
the world. 


anchor the 1 country, is a matter not less of wonder than of regret, 
of't&ou" and is only to be excused by the mode in which 
ditrinMof Leibnitz gave his writings to the world. His most 
valuable thoughts on the most important subjects 
were generally thrown out in short treatises or letters, 
and these, for a long time, were to be found only in 
partial collections, and sometimes to be laboriously 
sought out, dispersed as they were, in the various 
scientific Journals and Transactions of every country of 
Europe ; and even when his works were at length col- 
lected, the attempt of his editor to arrange his papers 
according to their subjects (and what subject did 
Leibnitz not discuss X ) was baffled by the multifari- 
ous nature of their contents. The most important of 
his philosophical writings, — his Essays in refutation 
of Locke, — were not merely a posthumous publication, 
but only published after the collected edition of his 
Works by Dutens ; and this treatise, even after its 
publication, was so little known in Britain, that it 
remained absolutely unknown to Mr Stewart, — (the 
only British philosopher, by the way, who seems to 
have had any acquaintance with the works of Leib- 
nitz), — until a very recent period of his life. The 
matter, however, with which we are at present en- 
gaged, was discussed by Leibnitz in one of his very 
His^aper earliest writings ; and in a paper entitled De Cogni- 
tioiJfveri- tione, Veritate , et I dels, published in the Acta Eni- 
tatt,ei Jdeu. ditont/m, of 1684, we have, in the compass of two 

quarto pages, all that has been advanced of principal 
importance in regard to the peculiarity of our cognitions 
by concept, and in regard to the dependence of our 
concepts upon language. In this paper, besides estab- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


181 


lishing the difference of Clear and Distinct knowledge, lect. 
he enounces the memorable distinction of Intuitive — — — 
and Symbolical knowledge, — a distinction not cer- 
tainly unknown to the later philosophers of this coun- 
try, but which, from their not possessing terms in 
which precisely to embody it, has always remained 
vague arid inapplicable to common use. Speaking of 
the analysis of complex notions, he says — “For the Leibnitz 

. r quoted on 

SIS 01 any Intuitive 

length, we do not view at once (non simul intuemur) nci S £w^ 
the whole characters or attributes of the thing, but lulgu ’ 
in place of these we employ signs, the explication 
of which into what they signify, we are wont, at the 
moment of actual thought, for the sake of brevity, 
to omit, knowing or believing that we have this expli- 
cation always in our power. Thus, when I think a 
cliiliogon, (or polygon of a thousand equal sides), I do 
not always consider the various attributes, of the side, 
of the equality, and of the number a thousand, but 
use these words, (whose meaning is obscurely and im- 
perfectly presented to the mind), in lieu of the notions 
which I have of them, because I remember, that I 
possess the signification of these words, though their 
application and explication I do not at present deem 
to be necessary : — this kind of thinking I am used to 
call blind or symbolical : we employ it in Algebra and 
in Arithmetic, but in fact universally. And certainly, 
when the notion is very complex, we cannot think at 
once all the ingredient notions : but where this is 
possible, — at least, inasmuch as it is possible, — 1 call the 
cognition intuitive. Of the primary elements of our 
notions, there is given no other knowledge than the 
intuitive : as of our composite notions, there is, for 
the most part, possible only a symbolical. From these 


most part, however, especially in an analy 


 


182 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. considerations it is also evident, that of the things 

I — which we distinctly know we are not conscious of the 

ideas, except in so far as we employ an intuitive cog- 
nition. And, indeed, it happens that we often falsely 
believe that we have in our mind the ideas of things ; 
erroneously supposing, that certain terms which we 
employ, had been applied and explicated ; and it is 
not true, at least it is ambiguously expressed, what 
some assert, — that we cannot speak concerning any- 
thing, understanding what we say, without having 
an idea of it actually present. For we frequently 
apply any kind of meaning to the several words, or we 
merely recollect us, that we have formerly understood 
them, but because we are content with this blind 
thinking, and do not follow out the resolution of the 
notions, it happens, that contradictions are allowed to 
lie hid, which perchance the composite notion involves.” 

. . . . “ Thus, at first sight, it must seem, that we 
' could form an idea of a maximum velocity (motus 
celerrimi), for in using the terms we understand what 
we say ; we shall find, however, that it is impossible, 
for the notion of a quickest motion is shown to be con- 
tradictory, and, therefore, inconceivable. Let us sup- 
pose, that a wheel is turned with a velocity absolutely 
at its maximum ; every one perceives that if one of 
its spokes be produced, its outer end will be moved 
more rapidly than the nails in the circumference of 
the wheel ; the motion, therefore, of these is not a 
maximum, which is contrary to the hypothesis, and, 
therefore, involves a contradiction.” 

Effect of This quotation will suffice to show you how cor- 
tkmb)- rectly Leibnitz apprehended the nature of concepts, 

Leibnitz on . . . _ 

tbo phiioso- as opposed to the presentations and representations 
m!uiy. ' ir of the subsidiary faculties ; and the introduction of 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


183 


the term Symbolical knowledge, to designate the lect. 

former, and the term Intuitive knowledge to compre- — 

hend the two latter, — terms which have ever since 
become classical in his owm country, — has bestowed 
on the German language of philosophy, in this re- 
spect, a power and precision to which that of no other 
nation can lay claim. In consequence of this, while 
the philosophers of this country have been all along 
painfully expounding the phenomenon as one of the 
most recondite arcana of psychology, in Germany it 
has, for a century and a half, subsided into one of the 
elementary doctrines of the science of mind. It was 
in consequence of the establishment of this distinction 
by Leibnitz, that a peculiar expression, (Begriff, con - 
ceptus ), was appropriated to the symbolical notions of 
the Understanding, in contrast to the intuitive pre- 
sentations of Sense and representations of Imagination, 
which last also were furnished with the distinctive 
appellations of intuitions , (Anschauungcn, intuitus). 

Thus it is, that, by a more copious and well-appointed 
language, philosophy has, in Germany, been raised above 
various controversies, which, merely in consequence 
of the poverty and vagueness of its English nomen- 
clature, have idly occupied our speculations. But to 
return to the mere logical question. 

The doctrine of Leibnitz in regard to this natural Tiw dutiuc- 
imperfection of our concepts was not overlooked by his cjatcd 1 
disciples, and I shall read to you a passage from the of Leibnitz. 
Lesser Logic of Wolf, — a work above a century old, and 
which was respectably translated from German into 
English in the year 1770. This translation is now 
rarely to be met with, which may account for its being 
apparently totally unknown to our British philosophers ; 
and yet, upon the whole, with all its faults and imper- 


184 - 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

X. 


•Wolf 
quoted. 
Words or 
terms, — 
what. 


In speaking 
or thinking, 
the meaning 
of words 
not always 
attended to. 


How words 

without 

meaning 


fections, it is perhaps the most valuable work on Logic, 
(to say nothing of the Port Royal Logic), in the 
English language. 

“ By Words, we usually make known our thoughts 
to others : and thus they are nothing but uttered 
articulate signs of our thoughts for the information 
of others : for example, if one asks me, what I am 
thinking of, and I answer, the sun ; by this word I 
acquaint him what object my thoughts are then em- 
ployed about. 

“ If two persons, therefore, are talking together, it 
is requisite, in order to be understood, first, that he 
who speaks, shall join some notion or meaning to each 
word ; secondly, that he who hears, shall join the 
very same notion that the speaker does. 

“ Consequently, a certain notion or meaning must 
be connected with, and therefore something be signi- 
fied by, each word. 

“Now, in order to know whether we understand 
what we speak, or that our words are not mere empty 
sound, we ought, at every word we utter, to ask our- 
selves what notion or meaning we join therewith. 

“ For it is carefully to be observed, that we have 
not always the notion of the thing present to us, or in 
view, when we speak or think of it ; but are satisfied 
when we imagine we sufficiently understand what we 
speak, if we think we recollect that we have had at 
another time the notion which is to be joined to this 
or the other word ; and thus we represent to ourselves, 
as at a distance only, or obscurely, the thing denoted 
by the term (§ 9, c. i.) 

“ Hence it usually happens, that when we combine 
words together, to each of which apart a meaning or 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


185 


notion answers, we imagine we understand what we lect. 

utter, though that which is denoted by such combined - — 

words be impossible, and, consequently, can have no deniood”” 
meaning : for that which is impossible is nothing at 
all ; and of nothing there can be no idea. For instance, 
we have a notion of gold, as also of iron : but it is 
impossible that iron can, at the same time, be gold, 
consequently neither can we have any notion of iron- 
gold ; and yet we understand what people mean when 
they mention iron-gold. 

“ In the instance alleged, it certainly strikes every Further 
one at first that the expression iron-gold is an empty I>ro ' c,i ' 
sound ; but yet there are a thousand instances in 
which it does not so easily strike : For example, when 
I say a rectilineal two-lined figure, contained under 
two right-lines, I am equally well understood as when 
I say a right-lined triangle, a figure contained under 
three right-lines : and it should seem we had a dis- 
tinct notion of both figures (§ 13, c. i.) However, as 
we show in geometry that two right-lines can never 
contain a space, it is also impossible to form a notion 
of a rectilineal two-lined figure ; and, consequently, 
that expression is an empty sound. Just so it holds 
with the vegetable soul of plants, supposed to be a 
spiritual being, whereby plants are enabled to vege- 
tate or grow : for though those words taken apart 
are intelligible, yet in their combination they have 
no manner of meaning. Just so if I say that the 
Attractive Spirit, or Attractive Cord, as Linus calls 
it, or the Attractive Force, as some philosophers at 
this day, is an immaterial principle superadded to 
matter, whereby the attractions in nature are per- 
formed ; no notion or meaning can possibly be joined 


 



180 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

x. 


with these words. To this head also belong the Na- 
tural Sympathy and Antipathy of Plants ; the Band 
of Right or law, ( vinculum juris), used in the defini- 
tion of Obligation, by Civilians ; the Principle of Evil 
of the Manicheans,” &c.“ 

o Isogic or Rational Thoughts on the Translated from the German of Baron 
Potcert of the Human Understanding. Wolf as, a. SL, p. 54-57 ; London, 

1770. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


187 


LECTURE XI. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECT. I. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

I. — ENNOEMATIC. 

III. RECIPROCAL RELATIONS OF CONCEPTS. 

A. QUANTITY OF EXTENSION — SUBORDINATION AND 

CO-ORDINATION. 

I now proceed to the third and last Relation of Con- lect. 
cepts, — that of concepts to each other. The two — — — 
former relations of notions,- — to their objects and to 
their subject, — gave their Quantity and Quality. This, 
the relation of notions to each other, gives what is 
emphatically and strictly denominated their Relation. 

In this rigorous signification, the Relation of Con- 
cepts may be thus defined. 

IT XXXI. The Relation proper of notions con- Par. xxxi. 

< * * • ¦ • * 

sists in those determinations or attributes which Relations 
belong to them, not viewed as apart and in them- ° f ConccpU * 
selves, but as reciprocally compared. Concepts can 
only be compared together with reference, either, 1°, 

To their Extension ; or, 2°, To their Comprehension. 

All their relations are, therefore, dependent on the 
one or on the other of these quantities.® 

IT XXXII. As dependent upon Extension, con- Par. xxxii. 
cepts stand to each other in the five mutual tension, 
o Cf. Krug, Loffik, § 36. — Ed. 


 


188 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

XI. 


Examples 
of the live 
mutual re- 
lations of 
Concepts. 


relations, 1°, Of Exclusion ; 2°, Of Coextension ; 
3°, Of Subordination ; 4°, Of Co-ordination ; and, 
5°, Of Intersection. 

1. One concept excludes another, when no part 
of the one coincides with any part of the other. 
2. One concept is coextensive with another, 
when each has the same number of subordinate 
concepts under it. 3. One concept is subor- 
dinate to another, (which may be called the 
Superordinate ), when the former is included 
within, or makes a part of, the sphere or exten- 
sion of the latter. 4. Two or more concepts are 
co-ordinated, when each excludes the other from 
its sphere, but when both go immediately to 
make up the extension of a third concept, to 
which they are cosubordinate. 5. Concepts in- 
tersect each other, when the sphere of the one 
is partially contained in the sphere of the other.® 

Of Exclusion, horse, syllogism , are examples : there 
is no absolute exclusion. 

As examples of Coextension, — the concepts, living 
being , and organised beings , may be given. For, using 
the term life as applicable to plants as well as ani- 
mals, there is nothing living which is not organised, 
and nothing organised which is not living. This reci- 
procal relation will be represented by two circles 
covering each other, or by two lines of equal length 
and in positive relation. 

As examples of Subordination and Co-ordination, — 
man, dog, horse , stand, as correlatives, in subordination 
to the concept animal, and, as reciprocal correlatives, 
in co-ordination with each other. 


a. Cf. Krug, Lojik, § 41. — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


189 


What I would call the reciprocal relation of In- 
tersection, takes place between concepts, when their 
spheres cross or cut each other, that is, fall partly 
within, partly without, each other. Thus, the concept 
black and the concept heavy mutually intersect each 
other, for of these some black things are heavy, some 
not, and some heavy things are black, some not. 


CONCEPTS, THEIR RELATIONS PROPER: TO WIT OF 


1. Exclusion a 




2. Coextension 



3. Subordination 





5. Intersection, 
or Partial Co- 
inclusion and 
Cooxclusion 



Of these relations those of Subordination and Co- 
ordination are of principal importance, as on them 

a The notation by straight lines was first employed by the author in 1848.- En. 


LF.crr. 

XI. 


Subordina- 
tion and 
Co-ordina- 


190 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. reposes the whole system of classification ; and to 

^ them alone it is, therefore, necessary to accord a more 

principal particular consideration. 

importance. Under the Subordination of notions, there are vari- 

1 erms ex- 

ThTdiffcrent 0U8 terms to express the different modes of this rela- 
«u^nof h8 ti° n these it is necessary that you should now learn 
Subordina- an( | hereafter bear in mind, for they form an essential 
part of the language of Logic, and will come fre- 
quently, in the sequel, to be employed in considering 
the analysis of Reasonings. 

Par. xxxin. *f XXXIII. Of notions which stand to each 

Superior ami 

inferior, other in the relation of Subordination, — the one 

Brooder ami 

notions' 01 *' i s the Higher or Supeidor, ( notio , conceptus, svpe- 
rior), the other the Lower or Inferior, {notio, con- 
ceptus, infei-ior). The superior notion is likewise 
called the Wider or Broader, ( latior ), the inferior 
is likewise called the Narrower, {angustior). a 

Explication. The meaning of these expressions is sufficiently 
manifest. A notion is called the higher or superior t 
inasmuch as it is viewed as standing over another in 
the relation of subordination, — as including it within 
its domain or sphere ; and a correlative notion is called 
the lower or inferior, as thus standing under a supe- 
rior. Again the higher notion is called the wider or 
broader, as containing under it a greater number of 
things ; the lower is called the narrower, as contain- 
ing under it a smaller number. 

O 


Pur. xxxiv. T XXXIV. The higher or wider concept is 
and Particu- also called, in contrast to the lower or narrow, 

a Universal or General Notion, {rorjfxa xadokov, 

a Cf. Krug, Log ik f § 42. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


191 


n otto, conceptus , universalis, generalis) ; the lower lect. 

or narrower concept, in contrast to the higher or 1 — 

wider, a Particular Notion, (voryia pepucov, notio, 
conceptus, particularis). a 

The meaning of these expressions, likewise, requires Expiiauion. 
no illustration. A notion is called universal, inas- 
much as it is considered as binding up a multitude of 
parts or inferior concepts into the unity of a whole ; 
for universus means in unum versus or ad unum 
vei'sus, that is, many turned into one, or many re- 
garded as one, and universal is employed to denote 
the attribution of this relation to objects. A notion 
is called particular, inasmuch as it is considered as 
one of the parts of a higher concept or whole. 

IT XXXV. A superior concept, inasmuch as it p«. xxxv. 
constitutes a common attribute or character for Specie., 
a number of inferior concepts, is called a General 
Notion, ( vorjfia kclOoXov, notio, conceptus, genera- 
lis), or, in a single word, a Genus ( yevo* genus). 

A notion, inasmuch as it is considered as at once 
affording a common attribution for a certain 
complement of inferior concepts or individual 
objects, and as itself an inferior concept, con- 
tained under a higher, is called a Special Notion, 

(voppa elSiKov, notio, conceptus, specicdis), or in 
a single word, a Species, (eTSos, species). The 
abstraction which carries up species into genera, 
is called, in that respect, Generification, or, more 
loosely, Generalisation. The determination which 


a [See Ammonius, In De Interpret ., ca, p. 39] [Logie a, tom. i., P. I., c. 
f. 72 b., (Br&ndis, Scholia in Aristot. f iv., § 8, 4th edit, Venice, 1772. Cf. 
p. 113) ; Facciolati, Rudimenta Logi- Krug, Logik, § 42. — Ed.] 


 



102 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lf.ct. divides a genus into its species is called, in that 

1 — respect, Specification. Genera and Species are 

both called Classes ; and the arrangement of 
things under them is, therefore, denominated 
Classification. 0 

Explication. It is manifest that the distinction into Genera and 

The distiuc- i • , ..... « 

tion of Genus species is a merely relative distinction ; as the same 
me^rX notion is, in one respect, a genus, in another respect, 
a species. For except a notion has no higher notion, 
that is, except it be itself the widest or most universal 
notion, it may always be regarded as subordinated to 
another ; and, in so far as it is actually thus regarded, 
it is a species. Again, every notion except that which 
has under it only individuals, is, in so far as it is thus 
viewed, a genus. For example, the notion triangle, if 
viewed in relation to the notion of rectilineal figure, 
is a species, as is likewise rectilineal figure itself, as 
viewed in relation to figure simply. Again, the con- 
cept triangle is a genus, when viewed in reference to 
the concepts, — right-angled triangle, acute-angled 
triangle, &c. A right-angled triangle is, however, 
only a species, and not possibly a genus, if under it be 
necessarily included individuals alone. But, in point 
of fact, it is impossible to reach in theory any lowest 
species ; for we can always conceive some difference 
by which any concept may be divided ad infinitum. 
This, however, as it is only a speculative curiosity, 
like the infinitesimal divisibility of matter, may be 
thrown out of view in relation to practice ; and, 
therefore, the definition, by Porphyry and logicians in 
general, of the lowest species, (of which I am imme- 
diately to speak), is practically correct, even though 

a Krug, Loijil , § 43. — Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


193 


it cannot be vindicated against theoretical objections, lf.ct. 
On the other hand, we soon and easily reach the — LJ — 
highest genus, which is given in to ov, ens oliquid , 
being, thing , something , &c., which are only various 
expressions of the same absolute universality. Out of 
these conditions there arise certain denominations of 
concepts, which it is, likewise, necessary that you be 
made aware of. 

In regard to the terms Generification and Specified - Generifica- 
tion, these are limited expressions for the processes of Spocifica- 
Abstraction and Determination, considered in a par- what, 
ticular relation. Abstraction and Determination, you 
will recollect, we have already spoken of in general a ; 
it will, therefore, be only necessaiy to say a very few 
words in reference to them, as the several operations 
by which out of species we evolve genera, and out of 
genera we evolve species. And first, in regard to 
Abstraction and Generification. In every complex Gcnerifica- 
notion, we can limit our attention to its constituent 
characters, to the exclusion of some one. We thus 
think away from this one, — we abstract from it. Now, 
the concept which remains, that is, the fasciculus of 
thought minus the one character which we have 


thrown out, is, in relation to the original, — the entire, 
concept, the next higher, — the proximately superior 
notion. But a concept and a next higher concept 
are to each other as species and genus. The process of 
Abstraction, therefore, by which out of a proximately 
lower we evolve a proximately higher concept, is, 
when we speak with logical precision, called the pro- 
cess of Generification. 

Take, for example, the concept man. This concept 
is proximately composed of the two concepts or con- 


VOL. i. 


a See above, p. 122 et seq Ed. 

N 


 


LECTURES OX LOCTC. 


194 . 

lect. stituent characters, — animal and rational being. If 

1 — we think either of these characters away from the 

other, we shall have in that other a proximately higher 
concept, to which the concept man stands in the 
relation of a species to its genus. If we abstract 
from animal, then man will stand as a species in 
subordination to the genus rational being, and the 
concept animal will then afford only a difference to 
distinguish man as a co-ordinate species from immate- 
rial intelligences. If, on the other hand, we abstract 
from rational being, then man will stand as a species 
in subordination to the genus animal, having for a 
co-ordinate species irrational animal. Such is the 
process of Gencrification. Now for the converse pro- 
cess of Specification. 

Specific#- Every series of concepts which has been obtained 
by abstraction, may be reproduced in an inverted 
order, when, descending from the highest notion, we, 
step by step, add on the several characters from which 
we had abstracted in our ascent. This process, as 
you remember, is called Determination ; — a very ap- 
propriate expression, inasmuch as by each character 
or attribute which we add on, we limit or determine 
more and more the abstract vagueness or extension of 
the notion ; until at last, if every attribute be annexed, 
the sum of attributes contained in the notion becomes 
convertible with the sum of attributes of which some 
concrete individual or reality is the complement. 
Now, when we determine any notion by adding on a 
subordinate concept, we divide it ; for the extension 
of the higher concepts is precisely equal to the exten- 
sion of the added concept ]>lus its negation. Thus, if 
to the concept animal we add on the next lower con- 
cept rational, we divide its extension into tw r o halves. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


105 


— the one equal to rational animal, — the other equal LECT . 
to its negation, that is, to irrational animal. Thus XL 
an added concept and its negation always constitute 
the immediately lower notion, into which a higher 
notion is divided. But as a notion stands to the 
notions proximately subordinate to it, in the imme- 
diate relation of a genus to its species ; the proceas of 
Determination, by which a concept is thus divided, 
is, in logical language, appropriately denominated 
Specification. 

So much in general for the Subordination of no- 
tions, considered as Genera and Species. There are, 
however, various gradations of this relation, and cer- 
tain terms by which these are denoted, which it is 
requisite that you should learn and lay up in memory. 

The most important of these are comprehended in the 
following paragraph : — 

IT XXXVI. A Genus is of two degrees, — a high- p«. xxxvi. 

i i T • , . , ° , .. GnwUtion* 

est and a lower. In its highest degree, it is of Hone™ 

called the Supreme or Most General Genus, (yivos cie*. ami 

, .... their ilwig. 

yf.viKOiTa.Tov, genus summum or generalissimum), nation*, 
and is defined, “ that which being a genus cannot 
become a species.” In its lower degree, it is 
called a Subaltern or Intermediate, (yeVos U7r- 
aWrjkov, genus subalternum or medium), and is 
defined, “ that which being a genus can also be- 
come a species.” A Species also is of two de- 
grees, — a lowest and a higher. In its lowest de- 
gree, it is called a Lowest or M ost Special Species, 

(eTSos etSoccuraroi', species ufima, ultima, or spe- 
cial issima a ), and is defined, “that which being 
a species cannot become a genus.” In its higher 

a Vide Tiinpler, p. 263, [Lor/icct Syttema, L. ii. c. 1. q. 15.— En.] 


 



10 6 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XI. 


degree, it is called a Subaltern or Intermediate 
Species , (etSos vi TaWrjXov, species subalterna, 
media), and is defined, “that which being a 
species may also become a genus.” Thus a Sub- 
altern Genus and a Subaltern Species are con- 
vertible. 


Explication. The distinctions and definitions in this paragraph 
are taken from the celebrated Introduction 0 ' of Por- 
phyry to the Categories of Aristotle, and they have 
been generally adopted by logicians. It is evident, 
that the only absolute distinction here established, is 
that between the Highest or Supreme Genus and the 
Lowest Species, for the other classes, to wit, the Sub- 
altern or Intermediate, are, all and each, either genera 
or species, according as we regard them in an ascend- 
ing or a descending order ; the same concept being a 
genus, if considered as a whole containing under it 
inferior concepts as parts, and a species, if considered 
as itself the part of a higher concept or whole. The 
distinction of concepts into Genus and Species, into 
Supreme and Intermediate Genus, into Lowest and 
Intermediate Species, is all that Logic takes into 
account ; because these are all the distinctions of 
degree that are given necessarily in the form of 
thought, and as abstracted from all determinate 
matter. 

categories It is, however, proper here to say a word in regard 

«.f Aristotle. £ 0 Categories or Predicaments of Aristotle. These 

are ten classes into which Existence is divided, — viz. 
1, Substance ; 2, Quantity ; 3, Quality ; 4, Relation ; 
5, Action ; 6, Passion ; 7, Where ; 8, When ; .9, Posture ; 
and 10, Habit. (By this last is meant the relation of 

a C. ii, §§ 23, 28, 29. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


197 


a containing to a contained.) They are comprehended lect. 
in the two following verses : — ' .1 

Arbor, sex servos, fervore, refrigerat ustos, 

Ruri eras stabo, nec tunicatus ero.a 

In regard to the meaning of the word category, original 
it is a term borrowed from the courts of law, in which and employ- 
it literally signifies an accusation. In a philosophical tenn cate- 
application, it has two meanings, or rather it is used v ' M ’ 
in a general and in a restricted sense. In its general 
sense, it means, in closer conformity to its original 
application, simply a predication or attribution; in 
its restricted sense, it has been deflected to denote 
predications or attributions of a very lofty generality, 
in other words, certain classes of a very wide exten- 
sion. I may here notice, that, in modern philosophy, 
it has been very arbitrarily, in fact very abusively, 
perverted from both its primary and its secondary 

signification amono; the ancients. Aristotle first ern- 
es o 

ployed the term, (for the supposition that he borrowed 
his categories, name and thing, from the Pythagorean 
Archytas is now exploded, — the treatise under the 
name of this philosopher being proved to be a com- 
paratively recent forgery P), — I say, Aristotle first em- 
ployed the term to denote a certain classification, a pos- 
teriori, of the modes of objective or real existence; 7 
and the word was afterwards employed and ap- 
plied in the same manner by Plotinus, 5 and other 
of the older philosophers. By Kant* again, and, in Kant's em- 
conformity to Ins example, by many other recent the term. 

a Murmellii Isagoge, c. i. Vide Mi- the treatise specially devoted to them, 
cnclius [Lex. Phil. v. Prcedicamcnta. the Categories are viewed rather in a 
— Ei>.] p. 1085. Facciolati, Logica , grammatical than in a metaphysical 
[t. i., Jludimenta Logica, P. I. c. iii. aspect. — E d. 
p. 82 . — Ed.] 5 Enn. VI., 1. i., c. i. — E d. 

$ See Discussions, p. 140 . — Ed. e h’ritik d. r. V., p. 78 (ed. ltoscn- 

y See especially MctapL, iv. 7. In kranz), Prolegomena , § 39. — Ed. 


 


198 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XL 


Transcend- 
ent and 
Transcend- 
ental , — 
their ori- 
ginal em- 
ployment 
and use by 
Kant. 


philosophers, the word has been usurped to denote 
the a priori cognitions, or fundamental forms of 
thought. Nor did Kant stop here ; and I may ex- 
plain to you the genealogy of another of his expres- 
sions, of which I see many of his German disciples are 
unaware. By the Schoolmen, whatever, as more gen- 
eral than the ten categories, could not be contained 
under them, was said to rise beyond them, — to tran- 
scend them ; and, accordingly, such terms as being , 
one , whole , good, &c., were called transcendent or 
transcendental (i transcendentia or transcendentalia ). a 
Kant, as he had twisted the term category , twisted 
also these correlative expressions from their original 
meaning. He did not even employ the two terms 
transcendent and transcendental as correlative. The 


a [See Facciolati, Rud p. 39 ; and 
Inst., p. 26.) [Logica, t. i., Rudimenta 
Logica, P. I., c. iv. f § 7. “ Aliiul est 

catcgoricum, quod signific.it certam 
quaindam rem categoria comprehen- 
sam : aliud rag am, quod nulla cate- 
goria continetur, sed per omnes vaga- 
tur, cujusniodi sunt essentia, boni- 
tas, ordo, et similia multa.” Logica, 
t. ii., Institutions Logics, P. I., c. ii. 
“ Sunt qu:cdam vocabula, quee raga et 
transcendentia dicuutur ; quod genus 
quodlibet exsuperent in oinni cate- 
goria. Ilujusmodi sunt ens, illiquid, 
res, unuin, rerum, bonum .” Cf. Reid's 
Works, p. 687 note §. — Ed.] 

Excluded from the Aristotelic Cate- 
gories, all except the following : — 

Ex parte vocis — “ Vox una et sim- 
plex, rebus concinna locandis.” 

Ex parte rei — “ Entiu per sese, finita, 
realia, tota.” 

See others in Murmellius, Isagoge, 
c. i. ; Sanderson, p. 20, [Munnellius 
gives as his own the verses — 
Complexum, Consignificans, Fictum, 
Polysemum, 


Vox logical, Deus, Excedens, Privatio, 
Parsque, 

Hicc, studiose, categoriis non accipi- 
untur. 

And Sanderson, (Lof/ica, L. i. c. viii.), 
after citing the mnemonic of the Cate- 
gories themselves, adds, “ In aliquaista- 
rum classium quicquid uspiam rerum 
est collocatur; modo sit unuin quid, 
reale, completum, limitatipque ac finita r 
naturoe. Exulant ergo his sedibus 
Jntenliones Seeundec, Privationes, et 
Picta, quia non sunt realia ; Concreta , 
Equivoca, ct Complexes, quia non sunt 
una ; Pars, quia non est completum 
quid ; Deus, quia non est finita; ; 
Iranscendens, quia non eat limitatjc 
naturae. Hinc versiculi : 

Complexum, Consignificans, Priva- 
tio, Fictum, 

Pars, Deus, yEquivocum, Traus- 
cendens, Ens ratiouis : 

Sunt exclusa decern classibus ista 
uovem.” — E d.] 

[That the Categories of Aristotle are not 
applicable to God, see (Pseudo) Augus- 
tin, Dc Cognitione Veres Viter, c. iii.] 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


109 


latter lie applied as a synonym for a priori, to denote leot. 
those elements of thought which were native and — 1- — 
necessary to the mind itself, and which, though not 
manifested out of experience, were still not contin- 
gently derived from it by an a posteriori process of 
generalisation. The term transcendent , on the con- 
trary, he applied to all pretended knowledge that 
transcended experience, and was not given in an 
original principle of the mind. Transcendental he 
thus applied in a favourable ; transcendent in a con- 
demnatory acceptation.® — But to return from this 
digression. 

The Categories of Aristotle do not properly con- Categories 
stitute a logical, but a metaphysical, treatise ; and Meuphysi! 
they are, accordingly, not overlooked in the Aristo- ca ‘* 
telic books on the First Philosophy, which have ob- 
tained the name of Metaphysics (ra pera ra <f>vcriKd). 

Their insertion in the series of the surviving treatises of 


Aristotle on a logical argument, is, therefore, an error/ 

But looking at these classes as the highest genera Categories 
into which simple being is divided, they are, I think, a» aciawi- 
obnoxious to various objections. Without pausing iking, 
to show that in other respects they are imperfect, it 
is manifest that the supreme genus or category Being 
is not immediately divided into these ten classes, and 
that they neither constitute co-ordinate nor distinct 
species. For Being (to ov, ens) is primarily divided 
into Being by itself, (ens per se), and Being by acci- 
dent ( ens per accidens). Being by itself corresponds 
to the first Category of Aristotle, equivalent to Sub- 
stance ; Being by accident comprehends the other 


a Kritik d. r. V., p. 240, edit. Ro- C. Curleton; [Thomas Compton Carle- 
Bonkranz. — E d. ton, Philosophia Univena, Dizp. Met. 

P [That the Categories of Aristotle d. vi. § 1. — Ed.] 
are not logical but metaphysical, see 


200 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XI. 


nine, but is, I think, more properly divided in the 
following manner : — Being by accident is viewed either 
as absolute or as relative. As absolute, it flow r s either 
from the matter, or from the form of things : If from 
the matter, — it is Quantity , Aristotle’s second category : 
If from the form, it is Quality , Aristotle’s third cate- 
gory. As relative, it corresponds to Aristotle’s fourth 
category, Relation ; and to Relation all the other six 
may be reduced. For the categoiy Where is the rela- 
tion of a thing to other tilings in space ; the category 
When is the relation of a thing to other things in 
time. Action and Passion constitute a single relation, 
— the relation of the agent and the patient. Posture 
is the relation of the parts of a body to each other ; 
finally, Habit is the relation of a thing containing and 
a thing contained.® The little I have now said in re- 
gard to the categories of Aristotle is more, perhaps, 
than I was strictly warranted to say, considering them, 
as I do, as wholly extralogical, and I have merely re- 
ferred to them as exhibiting an example of the appli- 
cation of the doctrine of classification/ 


a With this classification of tho 
Categories, compare Aquinas, In A rist. 
Mctaph., L. v. lect. 9. Suarez, Disjm - 
tationes Mctaphysicce, Disp. 39, §§ 12, 
15.— En. 

/3 There is nothing in regard to 
which a greater diversity of opinion 
has prevailed, even among Logicians, 
than tho number of the Categories. 
For some allow only two — Substance 
and Mode ; others three — Substance, 
Mode, and Relation ; others four — 
Mind, Space, Matter, and Motion ; 
others seven, which are comprehended 
in the following distich : — 

“ Men.*, Mcnsura , Quics, Motus , Post 
turn, Fiy lira, 

Crassaque Matcrics, dederunt exordia 
rebus.” 


Second line better — 

“ Sunt, cum Materia , cunctarum ex- 
ordia rerum.” 

Aristotle' 's Loyic, c. ii. §§1,2, Works, 
See Facciolati, Loyica, t. i., Radimcnta 
Loyica, P. I., c. ili. p. 32. Purchot, 
Instit. Philos., t. i. Loyica, p. 82, ed. 
1 7 1 G. Chauvin, Lexicon Philosopht 
cum v. Catcyorema. lie ills Account of 
p. 685 cl seq. [For various attempts 
at reduction and classification of tho 
categories, sco Plotinus, Enncad., VI. 
L. ii., c. 8 ct seq. (Tennemann, Gcsch • 
der Phil., vi., p. 175 ct seq.) David 
the Armenian, in Brandis, Scholia 
ad A ristot., p. 49. Ramus, A nimad- 
Aristot., [L. iv. p. 80 ct seq., ed. 
1550, Ed.] Jo. Ficus Mirandulauus, 
Conclusioncs, Opera, p. 90, cd. Basil, 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


201 


I may, likewise, notice, by the way, that in the lect. 
physical sciences of arrangement, the best instances — _ 1 — 
of which are seen in the different departments of 
Natural History, it is found necessary, in order to S’# of U '° 
mark the relative place of each step in the ascending 
and descending series of classes, to bestow on it aS^ of 
particular designation. Thus kingdom , class , order , mcnt * 
tribe, family, genus , subgenus, s 2 >ecies, subspecies , vari- 
ety, and the like, are terms that serve conveniently 
to mark out the various degrees of generalisation, in 
its application to the descriptive sciences of nature. 

With such special applications and contingent differ- 
ences, Logic has, however, no concern. I, therefore, 
proceed to the last relative denomination of concepts 
under the head of Subordination in Extension. It is 
expressed in the following pdhigraph : — 

If XXXVII. A genus as containing under it Par. xxxvn. 

. . . . . -. ... Logical and 

species, or a species as containing under it m- Met*phy«i- 

^ l • -t« *i y m 1 XT’* 7 cal ^ holc'8 

ciivicluals, is called a Logical , or Universal , or and ran*. 
Subject, or Subjective, or Potential Whole ; while 
species as contained under a genus, and indivi- 
duals as contained under a species, are called 
Logical, or Universal , or Subject, or Subjective, 
or Potential Parts. E convei'so , — an individual 

as containing in it species, or a species as con- 
taining in it genera, is called a Metaphysical or 
Formal or Actual Whole ; while species as con- 
tained in an individual, and genera as contained 

1572; Laurentius Valla, [Dialectics menta, p. 1 et seq. For the doctrines 
Disputat 'tones, cc. i. ii. — E d.] Euge- of the Platonists and Stoics on the sub- 
nios, Aoyud), p. 225 et sc 7. On catego- ject (if the Categories, see Facciolati, 
ric tables of various authors, see Den- Instit. Log., [Log lea, t. ii., p. ii., 
zinger, Inst. Log., ii. § 608, p. 55. On p. 64 el scq. Cf. Trendelenburg, 
history of categories in antiquity see Geschichtc der Katcgoricnlehrc, pp. 

Petersen, Chrgsippca: Phil. Funda - 251, 2G7. — Ed.] 


 


202 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XI. 


Explica- 

tion. 


General 
view of the 
various 
possible 
Wholes. 


Whole 
jwr st, and 
Whole jkt 
accident. 


in species, are called Metaphysical, or Formal , or 
Actual Parts. a This nomenclature, however, in 
so far as metaphysical is opposed to logical, is 
inept ; for we shall see that both these wholes 
and parts are equally logical, and that logicians 
have been at fault in considering one of them, 
in their doctrine of reasoning, to the exclusion 
of the other. 

A whole is that which contains parts ; a part is 
that which is contained in a whole. But as the rela- 
tion of a whole aud parts is a relation dependent on 
the point of view from which the mind contemplates 
the objects of its knowledge, and as there are differ- 
ent points of view in which these may be considered, 
it follows that there may also be different wholes and 
parts. Philosophers have, accordingly, made various 
enumerations of wholes ; and, without perplexing 
you with any minute discussion of their various divi- 
sions, it may be proper, in order to make you the 
better aware of the two wholes with which Logic is 
conversant, — (and that there are two logical wholes, 
and, consequently, two grand forms of reasoning, aud 
not one alone, as all logicians have hitherto taught, I 
shall hereafter endeavour to convince you), — to this 
end, I say, it may be expedient to give you a general 
view of the various wholes into which the human 
mind may group up the objects of its speculation. 

Wholes may be first divided into two genera, — into 
a Whole by itself, (totum per sc), and a Whole by 
accident, ( totum per accidens). A Whole per se is 

a See Timpler, Logica , [p. 232 et stifnta, P. III., c. ii., § 2, ed. Geneva?, 
Facciolati, [Logica, t. i., Radi- 1068. — Ed.] Burgersdyk, [Inttitn* 
menta Logica, P. II., c. vi., p. 51-52. tioncs Logica, p. 51.— Ed.] 

— Ed.] Dcrodon, p. -147 [. Logica Rc- 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


203 


that which the parts of their proper nature neces- lect. 

sarily constitute ; thus body and soul constitute the 1— 

man. A Whole per accidens is that which the 
parts make up contingently ; as when man is consi- 
dered as made up of the poor and the rich. A whole 
per se may, again, be subdivided into five kinds, into 
a Logical, a Metaphysical, a Physical, a Mathematical, 
and a Collective. 1°, A Logical, styled also a Uni-w holo /XT 
versal, a Subject or Subjective, a Potential Whole ; into, r, 
and, 2°, A Metaphysical, styled also a Formal or an 2°, Meta- 
Actual Whole, — these I have defined in the paragraph. 

It is manifest that the logical and metaphysical 
wholes are the converse of each other. For as the 
logical whole is the genus, the logical parts the species 
and individual ; in the metaphysical, e contra , an in- 
dividual is the whole of which the species, a species 
the whole of which the genera, are the parts. A 
metaphysical whole is thus manifestly the whole de- 
termined by the comprehension of a concept, as a 
logical whole is that whole determined by its exten- 
sion ; and if it can be shown that the whole of com- 
prehension affords the conditions of a process of rea- 
soning equally valid, equally useful, equally easy, and, 
to say the least of it, equally natural, as that afforded 
by the whole of extension, it must be allowed that it 
is equally well entitled to the name of a logical whole, 
as the whole which has hitherto exclusively obtained 
that denomination. 3°, A Physical, or, as it is like- 3 °, physi- 
wise called, an Essential Whole, is that which consists 
of matter and of form, in other words, of substance 
and of accident, as its essential parts. 4°, A Mathe- 4°. Mathe- 
matical, called likewise a Quantitative, an Integral, niatlLa1 ’ 
more properly an Integrate, Whole, (totum integration), 
is that which is composed of integral, or, more properly, 


204 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XI. 


•5°, Collec- 
tive. 


The terms 
subject and 
subjective 
os applied 
to Logical 
whole and 
parts. 


of integrant, parts, (partes integrantes). In this 
whole every part lies out of every other part, whereas, 
in a physical whole, the matter and form, the sub- 
stance and accident, permeate and modify each other. 
Thus in the integrate whole of a human body, the 
head, body, and limbs, its integrant parts, are not con- 
tained in, but each lies out of, each other. 5°, A Col- 
lective, styled also a Whole of Aggregation, is that 
which has its material parts separate and accidentally 
thrown together, as an army, a heap of stones, a pile 
of wheat, &c.° 

But to proceed now to an explanation of the terms 
in the paragraph last dictated. Of these, none seem 
to require any exposition, save the words subjective 
and potential , as synonyms applied to a Logical or 
Universal whole or parts. 

The former of these, — the term subjective , or more 
properly subject , as applied to the species as parts sub- 
jacent to, or lying under, a genus, — to the individuals, 
as parts subjacent to, or lying under, a species, is a 
clear and appropriate expression. But as applied to 
the genus or species, considered as wholes, the term 
subject is manifestly improper, and the term subjective 
hardly defensible. In like manner, the term universal , 
as applied to genus or species, considered as logical 
wholes, is correct ; but as applied to individuals, con- 
sidered as logical parts, it is used in opposition to its 
proper meaning. The desire, however, to obtain 
epithets common both to the parts and to the whole, 
and thus to indicate at once the relation in general, 
has caused logicians to violate the proprieties both of 
language and of thought. But as the terms have 


u See above, p. 202, note. — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


205 


been long established, I think it sufficient to put you lect. 
on your guard by this observation. — 1— 


In regard to the term potential , — I shall, before Tho term 
saying anything, read to you a passage from the C*ni Mon- 
Antient Metaphysics of the learned Lord Monboddo. “quoted. 

“ In the first place, it is impossible, by the nature of 
things, that the genus should contain the species as a 
part of it, and the species should likewise contain the 
genus, in the same respect. But, in different respects, 
it is possible that each of them may contain the other, 
and be contained by it. We must, therefore, try to 
distinguish the different manners of containing, and 
being contained. And there is a distinction that runs 
through the whole of ancient philosophy, solving many 
difficulties that are otherwise insurmountable, and 
which, I hope, will likewise solve this difficulty. The 
distinction I mean is the distinction betwixt what 
exists SwapeLy or potentially only, and that which ex- 
ists ivepye ta, or actually. In the first sense, every- 
thing exists in its causes ; and, in the other sense, 
nothing exists but what is actually produced. Now, 
in this first sense, the whole species exists in the 
genus ; for the genus virtually contains the whole 
species, not only what actually exists of it, but what 
may exist of it in any future time. In the same 
manner, the lowest species, below which there is no- 
thing but individuals, contains virtually all those indi- 
viduals, present and future. Thus, the species man , 
comprehends all the individuals now existing, or 
that shall hereafter exist ; which, therefore, are said 
to be parts of the species man. On the other 
hand, the genus is actually contained in the species ; 

a VoL i. p. 479. 


20G 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


lect. and the species, likewise, in each of the individuals 
— under it. Thus, the genus animal is actually con- 
tained in the species man, without which it could 
not be conceived to exist. And, for the same reason, 
the species man is actually contained in each indivi- 
dual. It is a piece of justice which I think I owe to 
an author, hardly known at all in the western parts of 
Europe, to acknowledge that I got the hint of the so- 
lution of this difficulty from him. The author I mean 
is a living Greek author, Eugenius Diaconus, at present 
Professor, as I am informed, in the Patriarch’s Univer- 
sity at Constantinople, who has written an excellent 
system of logic, in very good Attic Greek.” 
stcwort'* This, or rather a similar passage at p. 73 of the fourth 

this j.ar,ai;c volume of the Antient Metaphysics, affords Mr Stewart 

considered. . _ _ . 1 . . . 

an opportunity ol making sundry unfavourable stric- 
tures on the technical language of Logic, in regard 
to which he asserts, “ the adepts are not, to this 
day, unanimously agreed ; ” and adds, that “ it is an 
extraordinary circumstance, that a discovery on which, 
in Lord Monboddo’s opinion, the whole truth of the 
syllogism depends, should be of so very recent a date.” 0 
Now this is another example which may serve to 
put you on your guard against any confidence in the 
assertions and arguments even of learned men. You 
may be surprised to hear, that so far is Eugenius from 
being the author of this observation, and of the term 
potential as applied to a logical whole, that both are 
to be found, with few exceptions, in all the older sys- 
tems of Logic. To quote only one, but one of the 
best and best known, that of Burgersdyck, — he says, 
speaking of the logical whole : “ Et quia universale 
subjectas species et individua non actu continet sed 

a Element*, vol. it, c. Hi., § 1 ; Work*, vol iii., p. 199 and p. 200, note. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


207 


potentia ; factum est, ut hoc totum dictum sit totum lf.ct. 
j)otentiale, cum ceterrn species totius dicantur totum — — — 
actuate , quia partes suas actu continent.” a Aristotle 
notices this difference of the two wholes. P 

Having thus terminated the consideration of con- 
cepts as reciprocally related in the perpendicular line 
of Subordination, and in the quantity of Extension, 
in so far a3 they are viewed as containing classes, — I 
must, before proceeding to consider them under this 
quantity in the horizontal line of Co-ordination, state 
to you two terms by which characters or concepts are 
denominated, in so far as they are viewed as differ- 
ences by which a concept is divided into two sub- 
ordinate parts. 

H XXXVIII. The character, or complement of Pwr.xxxvm. 
characters, by which a lower genus or species is Specific, 
distinguished, both from the genus to which it is dual Differ- 
subordinate, and from the other genera or species 
wdth which it is co-ordinated, is called the Generic 
or the Specific Difference , (Sicu^opa yevuaj, and 
Sta^opa €181/07, differentia generica , and differen- 
tia specified). The sum of characters again, by 
which a singular or individual thing is discrim- 
inated from the species under which it stands, 
and from other individual things along with 
which it stands, is called the Individual or 
Singular or Numerical Difference , (differentia 
individualis vel singularis vel numerica)? 

Two things are thus said to be generically dif- Expiica- 
ferent, inasmuch as they lie apart in two different t,on ’ 
genera ; specifically different, inasmuch as they lie 

a Lib. I.,c.xiv., p. 43, ed. 1GG0 . — Ed. De Tolo et Parte. — Ed.J 
0 Vide Tiinplcr, Logica, [L. II. c. i. y Krug, Logit, § 45.— Ed. 


 


208 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. apart in two different species ; individually or nume- 
— _1 — rically different, inasmuch as they do not constitute 
one and the same reality. Thus animal and stone 
may be said to be generically different ; horse and ox 
to be specifically different ; Highflyer and Eclipse to 
Generic be numerically or individually different. It is evi- 
i5ffewnco. c dent, however, that as all genera and species, except 
the highest of the one and the lowest of the other, 
may be styled indifferently either genera or species ; 
generic difference and specific difference are in gen- 
eral only various expressions of the same thing, and, 
accordingly, the terms heterogeneous and homogene- 
ous , which apply properly only to the correlation of 
genera, are usually applied equally to the correlation 
of species. 

individual “ Individual existences can only be perfectly discri- 
Diffcrenc© ar m inated in Perception, external or internal, and their 
numerical differences are endless ; for of all possible 
contradictory attributes the one or the other must, 
on the principles of Contradiction and Excluded 
Middle, be considered as belonging to each individual 
thing. On the other hand, species and genera may be 
perfectly discriminated by one or few characters. For 
example, man is distinguished from eveiy genus or 
species of animal by the one character of rationality ; 
triangle , from every other class of mathematical 
figures, by the single character of trilaterality. It is, 
therefore, far easier adequately to describe a genus or 
species than an individual existence ; as in the latter 
case, we must select, out of the infinite multitude of 
characters which an individual comprises, a few of 
the most prominent, or those by which the thing may 
most easily be recognised.” ° But as those which we 

a Krog, Logik, § 45, p. 134-5 .— Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


'209 


thus select are only a few, and are only selected with lect. 
reference to our faculty of apprehension and our capa- . _ 
city of memory, they always constitute only a petty, 
and often not the most essential, part of the numeri- 
cal differences by which the individuality of the ob- 
ject is determined. 

Having now terminated the consideration of the 
Subordination of concepts under Extension, it is only 
necessary to observe that their Co-ordination under 
that quantity affords nothing which requires explana- 
tion, except what is contained in the following para- 
graph : — 


If XXXIX. Notions, in so far as they are Par. xxxix. 
considered the co-ordinate species of the same tionofCun- 
genus may be called Consjiecics ; and in so far as cq,t *’ 
Conspecies are considered to be different but not 
contradictory, they are properly called Discrete or 
Disjunct Notions ( notiones discretes vel disjunctcs). 

The term Disparate ( notiones disparates) is fre- 
quently applied to this opposition of notions, 
but less properly ; for this ought to be reserved to 
denote the corresponding opposition of notions in 
the quantity of Comprehension. 


I conclude the consideration of concepts, as depend- 
ent on Extension, by a statement of the two general 
laws, by which both Subordination and Co-ordination of 
notions, under this quantity, are regulated. 


Tf XL. The whole classification of things by Par. xl. 
Genera and Species is governed by two laws. The general law* 
one of these, the law of Homogeneity , ( principium Suborina- 
Honiogeneitatis ), is, — That how different soever t,on mil 


VOL. I. 


O 


 


210 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


may be any two concepts, they both still stand 
subordinated under some higher concept ; in other 
words, things the most dissimilar must, in certain 
respects, be similar. The other, the law of Hetero- 
geneity , ( principium Heterogeneitatis), is, — That 
every concept contains other concepts under it ; 
and, therefore, when divided proximately, we de- 
scend always to other concepts, but never to in- 
dividuals ; in other words, things the most homo- 
geneous, — similar, — must, in certain respects, be 
heterogeneous, — dissimilar. 

’ these two laws, the former, as the principle which 
. Generific*- enables, and in fact compels, us to rise from species to 
Spwtfica- genus, is that which determines the process of Generi- 
fication ; and the latter, as the principle which enables, 
and in fact compels, us to find always species under a 
genus, is that which regulates the process of Specifica- 
Law of tion. The second of these laws, it is evident, is only 
ieityTme true ideally, only true in theory. The infinite divisi- 
thwry. bility of concepts, like the infinite divisibility of space 
and time, exists only in speculation. And that it is 
theoretically valid, will be manifest, if we take two 
similar concepts, that is, two concepts with a small 
difference : let us then clearly represent to ourselves 
this difference, and we shall find that how small soever 
it may be, we can always conceive it still less, without 
being nothing, that is, we can divide it ad infinitum ; 
but as each of these infinitesimally diverging differ- 
ences affords always the condition of new species, it is 
evident that we can never end, that is, reach the indi- 
vidual, except per saltum. a 

a Cf. Krug, Logit, § i5 p. 135, and pp. 136, 137. — En. 


LECT. 

XI. 

ordination, 
under Ex- 
tensiou, are 
regulated, — 
vir.. of Ho- 
mogeneity 
and Hetero- 
geneity. 


Explica- 


Of 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


211 


There is another law, which Kant promulgates in 
the Critique of Pure Reason, a and which may be called 
the law of Logical Affinity, or the law of Logical Con- 
tinuity. It is this, — That no two co-ordinate species 
touch so closely on each other, but that we can con- 
ceive other or others intermediate. Thus man and 
orang-outang, elephant and rhinoceros, are proximate 
species, but still how great is the difference between 
them, and how many species can we not imagine to 
ourselves as possibly interjacent \ 

This law I have, however, thrown out of account, 
as not universally true. For it breaks down when 
we apply it to mathematical classifications. Thus all 
angles are either acute or right or obtuse. For be- 
tween these three co-ordinate species or genera no 
others can possibly be interjected, though we may 
always subdivide each of these, in various manners, 
into a multitude of lower species. This law is also 
not true when the co-ordinate species are distin- 
guished by contradictory attributes. There can in 
these be no interjacent species, on the principle of 
Excluded Middle. For example ; — in the Cuvierian 
classification the genus animal is divided into the 
two species of vertebrata and invertebrata, that is, 
into animals with a backlrone, — with a spinal mar- 
row' ; and animals without a backbone, — without a 
spinal marrow. Is it possible to conceive the pos- 
sibility of any intermediate class ? P 

a P. 510, ed. Roscnkmnz. Of. Krug, 0 Bachmann, [Loffit, § 61, pp. 102, 
Loffik, p. 138.— Ed. 103.— Ed.] [Compare Fries, Logik, § 

31.— Ed.] 


LF.CT. 

XI. 


Law of Lo- 
gical Affi- 
nity. 


Grounds on 
which thin 
law- must be 
rejected. 


 



212 


LECTURES ON LOGTC. 


LECT. 

XU. 


Reciprocal 
Relation of 
notions in 
Compre- 
hension. 


Par. XLI. 
Identical 
and Differ- 
ent notions. 


LECTURE XII. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECT. II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

I. — ENNOEMATIC. 

III. RECIPROCAL RELATIONS OF CONCEPTS. 

B. QUANTITY OF COMPREHENSION. 

Having now concluded the consideration of the Reci- 
procal Relation of Concepts as determined by the 
quantity of Extension, I proceed to treat of that 
relation as regulated by the counter quantity of 
Comprehension. On this take the following para- 
graph : — 

H XLI. When two or more concepts are com- 
pared together according to their Comprehension, 
they either coincide or they do not ; that is, they 
either do or do not comprise the same characters. 
Notions are thus divided into Identical and Dif- 
ferent , ( conceptus identici et diversi). The Iden- 
tical are either absolutely or relatively the same. 
Of notions Absolutely Identical there are actu- 
ally none; notions Relatively Identical are called, 
likewise, Similar or Cognate, (notiones similes , 
affmes , cognatce) ; and if the common attributes, 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


213 


by which they are allied, be proximate and neces- lect. 
sary, they are called Reciprocating or Convertible , —I — — 
(notiones reciprocal , convertibiles.) a 

In explanation of this paragraph, it is only neces- Expiic*- 
sary to say a word in regard to notions absolutely Absolutely 
Identical. That such are impossible is manifest, notion im- 
“ For, it being assumed that such exist, as absolutely I,0! " ,lble ' 
identical, they necessarily have no differences by which 
they can be distinguished : but what are indiscernible 
can be known, neither as two concepts, nor as two 
identical concepts ; because we are, ex hypothesis unable 
to discriminate the one from the other. They are, 
therefore, to us as one. Notions absolutely identical 
can only be admitted, if, abstracting our view alto- 
gether from the concepts, we denominate those notions 
identical which have reference to one and the same 
object, and which are conceived either by different 
minds, or by the same mind, but at different times. 

Their difference is, therefore, one not intrinsic and 
necessary, but only extrinsic and contingent. Taken 
in this sense, Absolutely Identical notions will be only 
a less correct expression for Reciprocating or Convert- 
ible notions.” ^ 


IF XLII. Considered under their Comprehen- 
sion, concepts, again, in relation to each other, are 
said to be either Congruent or Agreeing y inas- 
much as they may be connected in thought ; or 
Con/lictive y inasmuch as they cannot. The con- 
fliction constitutes the Opposition of notions, (to 
avriKeiaOoLi, oppositio). This is twofold ; — 1°, 


Par. XLII. 
Opposition 
of Concepts, 


a [Esger, Logik, § 36.] Krug, Logik, § 37, and Aum. i. — 

/3 [E&jer, Logik, § 36, p. 79.] Cf. Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


214 

lect. Immediate or Contradictory Opposition, called 
— — likewise Repugnance, (to amafyaTiKox; amiKti- 

<r6ai, amtyacris, oppositio immediata sive contra- 
dictoria, repugnantia) ; and, 2°, Mediate or Con- 
trary Opposition, (to iv am lots amiseiadai, evav- 
nonjs, oppositio mediata vel contrana). The 
former emerges when one concept abolishes, ( tol - 
lit), directly or by simple negation, what another 
establishes, (ponit ) ; the latter, when one concept 
does this not directly or by simple negation, but 
through the affirmation of something else . 0 


Expiica- “ Identity is not to be confounded with Agreement 
i'ckntity and or Congruence, nor Diversity with Confliction. All 
dwotT™ 1 ’ identical concepts are, indeed, congruent ; but all 
Md ooniiic. con g men £ notions arc not identical. Thus, learning 
and virtue, beauty and riches, magnanimity and sta- 
ture, are congruent notions, inasmuch as, in thinking 
a thing, they can easily be combined in the notion 
we form of it, although in themselves very different 
from each other. In like manner, all conffictive no- 
tions are diverse or different notions, for unless differ- 
ent, they could not be mutually conflictive ; but on 
the other hand, all different concepts are not conflic- 
tive ; but those only whose difference is so great that 
each involves the negation of the other ; as, for ex- 
ample, virtue and vice, beauty and deformity, wealth 
and poverty. Thus these notions are by pre-emin- 
ence, — kot i^o^rjv , — said to be opposed, although 
it is true, that in thinking we can oppose, or place 
in antithesis, not only different, but even identical, 
concepts.” 


Contnwlio 
lory and 


“ To speak now of the distinction of Contradictory 


a [Cf. Drobiech, p. 17, § 25 #* 5 .] 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


215 


and Contrary Opposition, or of Contradiction and i.f.ct. 

Contrariety ; — of these the former, — Contradiction, — 1_ 

is exemplified in the opposites, — yellow, not yellow, op^Sm. 
walking, not walking. Here each notion is directly, 
immediately, and absolutely, repugnant to the other, 

— they are reciprocal negatives. This opposition is, 
therefore, properly called that of Contradiction or of 
Repugnance ; and the opposing notions themselves 
are contradictory or repugnant notions, in a single 
word, contradictories. The latter, or Contrary Oppo- 
sition, is exemplified in the opposites, yellow, blue, 
red, &c., walking, standing, lying, &c.” 

“ In the case of Contradictory Opposition, there are 
only two conflictive attributes conceivable ; and of 
these one or other must be predicated of the object 
thought. In the case of Contrary Opposition, on the 
other hand, more than two conflictive characters are 
possible, and it is not, therefore, necessary, that if 
one of these be not predicated of an object any one 
other must. Thus, though I cannot at once sit and 
stand, and consequently sitting and standing are attri- 
butes each severally incompatible with the other ; 
yet I may exist neither sitting nor standing, — I may 
lie ; but I must either sit or not sit, I must either 
stand or not stand, &c. Such, in general, are the 
oppositions of Contradiction and Contrariety.” 

“ It is now necessary to say a word in regard to Logical »ig- 
their logical significance. Immediate or Contradictory c.mtradio 
Opposition constitutes, in Logic, affirmative and nega- contrary 
tive notions. By the former something is posited or oppMltlon ' 
affirmed, (ponitur, affirmatur) ; by the latter, some- 
thing is sublated or denied, (lollitiir, negatur). This, 
however, is only done potentially, in so far as concepts 
are viewed apart from judgments, for actual affirma- 


 


216 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XII. 


Par.XLlII. 
Intrinsic 
and Extrin- 
sic notions. 


tion and actual negation suppose an act of judgment ; 
but, at the same time, in so far as two concepts afford 
the elements, and, if brought into relation, necessitate 
the formation of an affirmative or negative proposi- 
tion, they may be considered as in themselves negative 
and affirmative. ” 

“ Further, it is evident that a notion can only be 
logically denied by a contradiction. For when we 
abstract from the matter of a notion, as Logic does, 
it is impossible to know that one concept excludes 
another, unless the one be supposed the negation of 
the other. Logically considered, all positive or affir- 
mative notions are congruent, that is, they can, as 
far as their form is concerned, be all conceived or 
thought together ; but whether in reality they can co- 
exist, — that cannot be decided by logical rules. If, 
therefore, we would, with logical precision and cer- 
tainty, oppose things, we must oppose them not as 
contraries, (A. B. C.)> but as contradictories, (A. — not 
A. B. — not B. C. — not C.) — Hence it also follows, 
that there is no negation conceivable without the con- 
comitant conception of an affirmation, for we cannot 
deny a thing to exist, without having a notion of the 
existence which is denied. ” a 

There are also certain other relations subsisting be- 
tween notions, compared together in reference to their 
Comprehension. 

^ XLIII. Notions, as compared with each other 
in respect of their Comprehension, are further 
distinguished into Intrinsic and Extrinsic. The 
former are made up of those attributes which 
are essential, and, consequently, necessary to the 

a Krug, Lo'jik, p. 118-120 .— Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. • 


217 


object of the notion : these attributes, severally lect. 

considered, are called Essentials , or Internal De - — L. 

nominations, (ova-uoSr), essentialia, denominati- 
ones internee, intrinsicas ), and, conjunetly, the 
Essence, ( ovcria, essentia). The latter, on the con- 
trary, consist of those attributes which belong to 
the object of the notion only in a contingent 
manner, or by possibility ; and which are, there- 
fore, styled Accidents, or Extrinsic Denominations, 
(crvfxftefirjKOTa, accidentia, denominationes exter- 
nce or extrinsicee.y 


So much for the mutual relations of notions in re- 
ference to their Comprehension, when considered not 
in the relations of Involution and Co-ordination. 

Having thus given you the distinctions of notions, 
as founded on their more general relations under the 
quantity of Comprehension, I now proceed to con- 
sider them under this quantity in their proximate 
relations ; that is, in the relation of Involution and 
the relation of Co-ordination. These relations have 
been, I may say, altogether neglected by logicians : 
and, in consequence of this, they have necessarily over- 
looked one of the two great divisions of all reasoning ; 
for all our reasoning is either from the whole to the 
parts and from the parts to the whole, in the quantity 
of extension, or from the whole to the parts and from 
the parts to the whole, in the quantity of comprehen- 
sion. In each quantity there is a deductive, and in 
each quantity there is an inductive, inference ; and if 
the reasoning under either of these two quantities 
were to be omitted, it ought, perhaps, to have been 
the one which the logicians have exclusively cultivated. 

o Krug, Lotjik , § 39. — Ed. 


Involu- 
tion and 
Co-ordina- 
tion of Con- 
cept* under 
Comprehen- 
sion, — these 
wholly ne- 
glected by 
logicians. 


Hence 
reasoning 
in compre- 
hension 
overlooked 
by logicians. 


 


218 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XII. 


But pro- 
bably con- 
templated 
by Aristotle. 


For the quantity of extension is a creation of the 
mind itself, and only created through, as abstracted 
from, the quantity of comprehension ; whereas the 
quantity of comprehension is at once given in the 
very nature of things. The former quantity is thus 
secondary and factitious, the latter primary and na- 
tural. 

That logicians should have neglected the process of 
reasoning which is competent between the parts and 
whole of the quantity of comprehension, is the more 
remarkable, as, after Aristotle, they have, in general, 
articulately distinguished the two quantities from 
each other, and, after Aristotle, many of them have 
explicitly enounced the special law on which the logic 
of comprehension proceeds. This principle established, 
but not applied, is expressed in the axiom, — The cha- 
racter of the character is the character of the thing ; 
or, The predicate of the predicate is the predicate of 
the subject, (Nota notce eat nota rei ipsius ; Prcedi- 
catum preedicati est pradicatum subjecti). This 
axiom is enounced by Aristotle and its application, 
I have little doubt, was fully understood by him. In 
fact I think it even possible to show in detail, that 
his whole analysis of the syllogism has reference to 
both quantities, and that the great abstruseness of his 
Prior Analytics, the treatise in which he develops 
the general forms of reasoning, arises from this, — that 
he has endeavoured to rise to formulae sufficiently 
general to express at once what was common to both 
kinds ; — an attempt so far beyond the intelligence of 
subsequent logicians, that they have wholly misun- 
derstood and perverted his doctrine. They under- 
stood this doctrine, only as applied to the reasoning 


o Catty., c. iii. — E d. 


 



LECTUliES ON LOGIC. 


210 


in extensive quantity ; and in relation to this kind of 
reasoning, they have certainly made palpable and easy 
what in Aristotle is abstract and difficult. But then 
they did not observe that Aristotle’s doctrine applies 
to two species, of which they only consider one. It 
was certainly proper to bring down the Aristotelic 
logic from its high abstraction, and to deliver its 
rules in proximate application to each of the two 
several species of reasoning. This would have been 
to fill up the picture of which the Stagirite had given 
the sketch. But by viewing the analytic as exclu- 
sively relative to the reasoning in extension, though 
they simplified the one-half of syllogistic, they alto- 
gether abolished the other. This mistake, — this par- 
tial conception of the science, — is common to all 
logicians, ancient and modern : for in so far as I am 
aware, no one has observed, that of the quantities of 
comprehension and extension, each affords a reason- 
ing proper to itself ; and no one has noticed that the 
doctrine of Aristotle has reference indifferently to 
both ; although some, I know, having perceived in 
general that we do reason under the quantity of com- 
prehension, have on that founded an objection to all 
reasoning under the quantity of extension, that is, to 
the whole science of Logic as at present constituted. 
I have, in some degree, at present spoken of matters 
which properly find their development in the sequel ; 
and I have made this anticipation, in order that you 
should attend particularly to the relation of concepts, 
under the quantity of comprehension, as containing 
and contained, inasmuch as this affords the founda- 
tion of one, and that not the least important, of 
the two great branches, into which all reasoning is 
divided. 


LF.rr. 

XII. 


 


220 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XII. 


Par. XLIV. 
Involution 
and Co-ordi- 
nation. 


H XLIV. We have seen that of the two quan- 
tities of notions each affords a logical Whole and 
Parts ; and that, by opposite errors, the one of 
these has, through over inclusion, been called the 
logical; whilst the other has, through over exclu- 
sion, been called the metaphysical. Thus, in 
respect of their Comprehension, no less than of 
their Extension, notions stand to each other in a 
relation of Containing and Contained ; and this 
relation, which, in the one quantity (extension), 
is styled that of Subordination , may in the other 
(comprehension), for distinction’s sake, be styled 
that of Involution. Co-ordination is a term which 
may be applied in either quantity. 0 

In the quantity of comprehension, one notion 
is involved in another, when it forms a part of 
the sum total of characters, which together con- 
stitute the comprehension of that other ; and 
two notions are in this quantity co-ordinated, 
when, whilst neither comprehends the other, both 
are immediately comprehended in the same lower 
concept. 


Expiica- From what has been formerly stated, you are aware 
that the quantity of comprehension, belonging to a 
notion, is the complement of characters which it con- 
tains in it ; and that this quantity is at its maximum 
in an individual. Thus the notion of the individual 
SocratcSy contains in it, besides a multitude of others, 
the characters of Son of Sophroniscus, Athenian , Greek , 
European , man f animal , organised being , &c. But 
these notions, these characters, are not all equally 
proximate and immediate ; some are only given in 

a [Cf. Drobisch, Loyilc, §§ 22, 23. Fischer, Loylk, § 49.] 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


221 


and through others. Tlius the character Athenian 
is applicable to Socrates only in and through that of 
Son of Sophroniscus , — the character of Greek, only in 
and through that of Athenian, — the character of Euro- 
pean, only in and through that of Greek, — and so forth ; 
in other words, Socrates is an Athenian only as the 
son of Sophroniscus, only a Greek as an Athenian, 
only a European as a Greek, only a man as a Euro- 
pean, only an animal as a man, only an organised 
being as an animal. Those characters, therefore, that 
are given in and through others, stand to these others 
in the relation of parts to wholes ; and it is only on 
the principle, — Part of the part is a part of the 
whole, — that the remoter parts are the parts of the 
primary whole. Thus, if we know that the individual 
Socrates comprehends the character son of Sophron- 
iscus, and that the character son of Sophroniscus 
comprehends the character Athenian ; we are then 
warranted in saying that Socrates comprehends Athe- 
nian, in other words, that Socrates is an Athenian. 
The example here taken is too simple to show in what 
manner our notions are originally evolved out of the 
more complex into the more simple, and that the pro- 
gress of science is nothing more than a progressive 
unfolding into distinct consciousness of the various 
elements comprehended in the characters, originally 
known to us in their vague or confused totality. 

It is a famous question among philosophers, — 
Whether our knowledge commences with the gen- 
eral or with the individual, — whether children first 
employ common, or first employ proper, names. In 
this controversy, the reasoners have severally proved 
the opposite opinion to be untenable ; but the question 
is at once solved, by showing that a third opinion 


LECT. 

XII. 


Controversy 
regarding 
the Primrtm 
Cognition. 


222 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. is the true, — viz. that our knowledge commences 

— with the confused and complex, which, as regarded 

in one point of view or in another, may easily be 
mistaken either for the individual, or for the general. 
The discussion of this problem belongs, however, to 
Psychology, not to Logic.® It is sufficient to say in 
general, that all objects are presented to us in com- 
plexity ; that we are at first more struck with the 
points of resemblance than with the points of con- 
trast ; that the earliest notions, and, consequently, 
the earliest terms, are those that correspond to this 
synthesis, while the notions and the terms arising from 
an analysis of this synthesis into its parts, are of a 
subsequent formation. But though it be foreign to 
the province of Logic to develop the history of this 
procedure ; yet, as this procedure is natural to the 
human mind, Logic must contain the form by which 
it is regulated. It must not only enable us to reason 
from the simple and general to the complex and in- 
dividual ; it must, likewise, enable us to reverse the 
process, and to reason from the complex and in- 
dividual to the simple and the general. And this it 
does by that relation of notions as containing and 
contained, given in the quantity of comprehension, 
in Comprc- The nature of this reasoning can indeed only be 

involving shown, when we come to treat ot syllogism ; at pre- 
notion is the T1 ... . ••11 

more com- sent-, I only request that you will bear in mind the 
involved, 0 relations of Involution and Co-ordination, in which 

the more . 1 i i • 1 1 i • 

simple. notions stand to each other in the whole or quantity 
of comprehension. In this quantity the involving 
notion or whole is the more complex notion ; the 
involved notion or part is the more simple. Thus 
pigeon as comprehending bird, bird as comprehend- 

a Sec Lectures on Metaphysics, 1. xxxvi., vol. ii. p. 319-327. — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


223 


ing feathered , feathered as comprehending warm - lf.ct. 
blooded , warm-blooded as comprehending heart with —1 — — 
four cavities , heart with four cavities as comprehend- 
ing breathing with lungs , are severally to each other 
as notions involving and involved. Again, notions, in 
the whole of comprehension, are co-ordinated, when c<>-<mnna- 
they stand together as constituting parts of the notion prehension, 
in which they are both immediately comprehended. 

Thus the characters oviparous and warm-blooded , 
heart with four cavities , and breathing by lungs , as 
all immediately contributing to make up the compre- 
hension of the notion bird, are, in this respect, sever- 
ally considered as its co-ordinate parts. These char- 
acters are not relative and correlative, — not containing 
and contained. For we have oviparous animals which 
are not warm-blooded, and warm-blooded animals 
which are not oviparous. Again, it is true, I believe, 
that all warm-blooded animals have hearts with four 
cavities, (two auricles and two ventricles), and that 
all animals with such hearts breathe by lungs and 
not by gills. But then, in this case, we have no 
right to suppose that the first of these characters 
comprehends the second, and that the second compre- 
hends the third. For we should be equally entitled 
to assert, that all animals breathing by lungs pos- 
sessed hearts of four cavities, and that all animals 
with such hearts are warm-blooded. They are thus 
thought as mutually the conditions of each other ; 
and whilst we may not know their reciprocal depend- 
ence, they are, however, conceived by us, as on an 
equal footing of co-ordination. (This at least is true 
of the two attributes heart with four cavities and 
breathing by lungs ; for these must be viewed as co- 
ordinate, but, taken together, they may be viewed 


224 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XII. 


Par. XLV. 
C’o-ordina- 
tion of 
notion* in 
Comprclicn 
siou. 


as jointly necessitating the attribute of warm-blooded, 
and, therefore, may be viewed as comprehending it.) 
On this I give you the following paragraph. 

IT XLV. Notions co-ordinated in the w r hole 
of comprehension, are, in respect of the discrim- 
inating characters, different without any similar- 
ity. They are thus, pro lanto , absolutely dif- 
ferent ; and, accordingly, in propriety are called 
. Disparate Notions , (notiones disparates). On the 
other hand, notions co-ordinated in the quantity 
or whole of extension, are, in reference to the 
objects by them discriminated, different (or 
diverse) ; but, as we have seen, they have al- 
ways a common attribute or attributes in which 
they are alike. Thus they are only relatively 
different (or diverse) ; and, in logical language, 
are properly called Disjunct or Discrete Notions , 
(notiones disjunct ce, discretes). 0. 


a [Drobiscli, Logilc , §§ 23, 24. C'f. Fischer, Lotjik, § 49 ct sr?.] 


LECTURES 0 N LOGIC. 


225 


LECTURE XIII. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

II. — APOPHANTIC, OR THE DOCTRINE OF JUDGMENTS. 

JUDGMENTS. — THEIR NATURE AND DIVISIONS. 

Having terminated the Doctrine of Concepts, we now lec t. 

proceed to the Doctrine of Judgments. Concepts and 

Judgments, as I originally stated, are not to be viewed judgment, 
as the residts of different operations, for every concept, 
as the product of some preceding act of Comparison, is 
in fact a judgment fixed and ratified in a sign. But 
in consequence of this acquired permanence, concepts 
afford the great means for all subsequent comparisons 
and judgments, and as this now forms their principal 
relation, it behoved, for convenience, throwing out of 
view their original genealogy, to consider Notions as 
the first product of the Understanding, and as the 
conditions or elements of the second. A concept may 
be viewed as an implicit or undeveloped judgment ; 
a judgment as an explicit or developed concept. But 
we must now descend to articulate statements. 

II XLVI. To Judge, (Kpiueiv. 0, judicctre ) is toPar.xLvi. 

. i.1 l i.* r e Judgment, 

recognise the relation of congruence or of con- —what. 

o The verb Kplvciv, to j udye, and still — (never by Aristotle}— ah technical 
more the substantive, Kplais, judy- terms of Logic or of Psychology. 
ment, are rarely used by the Greeks, 

VOL. 1. 


P 


22G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIII. 


Explication 
— what is 
implied in 
J udgment. 


diction, in which two concepts, two individual 
things, or a concept and an individual, compared 
together, stand to each other. This recognition, 
considered as an internal consciousness, is called 
a Judgment, (Xoyos ano^amKos, judicium) ; con- 
sidered as expressed in language, it is called a 
Proposition or Predication , (ano^avcns, irpora- 
<TL$, a Sido-Trjpa, propositio, prcedicatio , pronun- 
ciatum, enunciatio, effatum , profatum, axiomaP). 

, As a judgment supposes a relation, it necessarily 
implies a plurality of thoughts, but conversely a plu- 
rality of thoughts does not necessarily imply a judg- 
ment. The thoughts whose succession is determined 
by the mere laws of Association, are, though manifested 
in plurality, in relation, and, consequently, in connec- 
tion, not, however, so related and so connected as to 
constitute a judgment. The thoughts water , iron, 
and rusting , may follow each other in the mental 
train ; they may even be viewed together in a simul- 
taneous act of consciousness, and this without our 
considering them in an act of Comparison, and with- 
out, therefore, conjoining or disjoining them in an act 
of judgment. But "when two or more thoughts are 
given in consciousness, there is in general an endeavour 
on our part to discover in them, and to develop a 
relation of congruence or of confliction ; that is, we 
endeavour to find out whether these thoughts will or 
will not coincide, — may or may not be blended into 

a [Aristotle uses the term irpiratus a. Gr. p. 4. Lat. Facciolati, Jtudi- 
merely for the premise of a syllogism, menta Logica , P. ii. c i. p. 59. Waitz, 
especially the major (he has no other Commentariiu in Organon , I. p. 368. 
word for premise) ; whereas bir6<par<ns Organon Pacii, pp. 92, 127, 240 et seq , 
lie employs always for an enunciation 416, 417.] 
considered not .as merely syllogistic. $ By Stoics and Kumists. 

See Ammonius, In IJc Interpret., f. 4 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


227 


one. If they coincide, we judge, we enounce, their lect. 

congruence or compatibility ; if they do not coincide, 1— 

we judge, w’e enounce, their confliction or incompa- 
tibility. Thus, if we compare the thoughts, — water , 
iron , and rusting , — find them congruent, and connect 
them into a single thought, thus — water rusts iron — 
in that case we form a Judgment.® 

But if two notions be judged congruent, in other Condition 

i , .I*.!* i under which 

words, be conceived as one, tins their unity can only notions arc 
be realised in consciousness, inasmuch as one ot these gruent. 
notions is viewed as an attribute or determination of 
the other. For, on the one hand, it is impossible for 
us to think as one two attributes, that is, two things 
viewed as determining, and yet neither determining 
or qualifying the other ; nor, on the other hand, two 
subjects, that is, two things thought as determined, 
and yet neither of them determined or qualified by 
the other. For example, we cannot think the two 
attributes electrical and polar as a single notion, un- 
less we convert the one of these attributes into a sub- 
ject to be determined or qualified by the other ; but 
if we do, — if we say, what is electrical is polar , we at 
once reduce the duality to unity, — we judge that polar 
is one of the constituent characters of the notion 
electrical , or that what is dectncal is contained under 
the class of things marked out by the common charac- 
ter of polarity. In like manner, we cannot think the 
two subjects iron and mineral as a single notion, 
unless we convert the one of these subjects into an 
attribute by which the other is determined or quali- 
fied ; but if we do, — if we say, iron is a mineral , we 
again reduce the duality to unity, we judge that one 
of the attributes of the subject iron is, that it is a 

o Cf. Krug, Loyik, § 61. Amu. i. p. 149 — 150. 


228 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. mineral , or that iron is contained under the class of 

XIII 

— — things marked out by the common character of 
mineral. 

a judgment From what has now been said, it is evident that a 
uin three judgment must contain and express three notions, 
which, however, as mutually relative, constitute an 
indivisible act of thought. It must contain, 1°, The 
notion of something to be determined ; 2°, The notion 
of something by which another is determined ; and, 
3°, A notion of the relation of determination between 
the two. This will prepare you to understand the 
following paragraph. 

f XLVII. That which, in the act of Judging, 
we think as the determined or qualified notion, is 
technically called the Subject , (vnoKeipevov, sub- 
jectum) ; that which we think as the determining 
or qualifying notion, the Predicate , (Karrjyopovpe- 
vov>prcedicatum) ; and the relation of determina- 
tion, recognised as subsisting between the subject 
and the predicate, is called the Copula. By 
Aristotle, the predicate includes the copula a ; and, 
from a hint by him, the latter has, by subsequent 
Greek logicians, been styled the Appredicate , 
(TTpo(rKaTrjyopovpevov,a]>pi'cedicatum)P The Sub- 
ject and Predicate of a proposition are, after 
Aristotle, together called its Tenns or Extremes , y 
( opoi , aKpa, 7 TepaTCL, termini) ; as a proposition 

a See De Jnterp ., c. 3, where the For the term TrpotTKariiyopovpfvov to 
prjfi.a, or verb, includes the predicate denote the predicate of a proposition, 
and opula united. — E d. see Ammonius on De Interp., p. 110, b. 

/3 See I)e Interpretation, c. 10, § 4. ed. Aid. Venet., 1546. See below, 
*Orar 5< rb t <rri rplrov irpoaKarriyo- p. 230 . — Ed. [For the origin of this 
prjrat , — an expression to which may be distinction see Blemmidas (after Aris- 
traced the scholastic distinction be- totle), Dtffica, p. 186.] 
tween Mcumli and tertii adjaccntis. y Anal. Prior. ,1.1, 4. — Ed. 


Par. XLVII. 
Subject, 
Predicate, 
and Copula. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


220 


is by him sometimes called an Interval , (8ta- lect. 

J ' XIII 

<m)fia) y a being, as it were, a line stretched out be- 

tween the extremes or terms. We may, there- 
fore, articulately define a judgment or proposi- 
tion to be the product of that act in which we 
pronounce, that, of two notions thought as sub- 
ject and as predicate, the one does or does not 
constitute a part of the other, either in the 
quantity of Extension, or in the quantity of 
Comprehension. 

Thus in the proposition, iron is magnetic , we have illustration. 
iron for the Subject, magnetic for the Predicate, and 
the substantive verb is for the Copula. In regard to 
this hist, it is necessary to say a few words. “ It is 
not always the case, that in propositions the copula is 
expressed by the substantive verb is or est, and that 
the copula and predicate stand as distinct words. In 
adjective verbs the copula and predicate coalesce, as 
in the proposition, the sun shines, sol lucet, which is 
equivalent to the sun is shining, sol est lucens. In ex- 
istential propositions, that is, those in which mere 
existence is predicated, the same holds good. For 
when I say I am, Ego sum, the am or sum has here a 
far higher and more emphatic import than that of the 
mere copula or link of connection. For it expresses, 

I am existing , Ego sum existens. It might seem 
that, in negative propositions, when the copula is 
affected by the negative particle, it is converted into 
a non-copula. But if we take the word copula in a 
wider meaning, for that through which the subject 
and predicate are connected in a mutual relation, it 
will apply not only to affirmative but to negative, not 

a Anal. Prior., I. 15, 16, 25. — Ed. 


 


230 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIII. 

Proposi- 
tions of tho 
Third Ad- 
jacent. 


Concepts 
and judg- 
ments, — 
how far 
they coin- 
cide and 
differ. 


only to categorical but to hypothetical and disjunc- 
tive, propositions.” a I may notice that propositions 
with the subject, predicate, and copula, all three arti- 
culately expressed, have been called by the school- 
men those of the third adjacent , (proposiiiones tertii 
adjacentis , or tertii adjecti) f inasmuch as they mani- 
festly contain three parts. This is a barbarous ex- 
pression for what the Greeks, after Aristotle, called 
nporacreis c/c rpirov (eerri) Ka.Trfyopovp.evov. For the 
same reason, propositions with the copula and pre- 
dicate in one were called those of the second ad- 
jacent P 

“ What has now been said will enable you to per- 
ceive how far concepts and judgments coincide, and 
how far they differ. On the one hand, they coincide 
in the following respects : — In the first place, the 
concept and the judgment are both products ; the 
one the product of a remote, the other the product of 
an immediate, act of comparison. In the second place, 
in both, an object is determined by a character or 
attribute. Finally, in the third place, in both, things 
relatively different in existence are reduced to a rela- 
tive identity in the unity of thought. On the other 
hand, they differ in the following respects : — In the 
first place, the determination of an object by an attri- 
bute is far more express in the judgment than in the 
concept ; for in the one it is developed, in the other, 
only implied. In the second place, in the concept the 
unity of thought is founded only on a similarity of 
quality ; in the judgment, on the other hand, it is 
founded on a similarity of relation. For in the 


a Krug, Loyik, § 52 ; Anm., ii., pp. Crakanthorpe, Lor/ica, pp. 160, 167.] 

153-4 Ed. [Compare Bachmann, fi See above, p. 228, note /3. —Ed. 

Loffik, p. 127 ; Schulze, Loyik, p. 74 ; 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


231 


notion, an object and its characters can only be con- leot. 
ceived as one, inasmuch as they are congruent and — — _ 
not conflictive, for thus only can they be united into 
one total concept. But, in the judgment, as a subject 
and predicate are not necessarily thought under a 
similarity of quality, the judgment can comprehend 
not only congruent, but likewise conflictive, and even 
contradictory, notions ; for two concepts which are 
compared together can be recognised as standing in 
the relation either of congruence or of repugnance. 

Such is the sameness, and such is the diversity, of 
concept and judgment.”® 

We have thus seen that a judgment or proposition 
consists of three parts or correlative notions, — the 
notion of a subject, the notion of a predicate, and the 
notion of the mutual relation of these as determined 
and determining. 

Judgments may, I think, be primarily divided in J adgments, 
two ways, — the divisions being determined by the divided, 
general dependencies in which their component parts 
stand to each other, — and the classes afforded by these 
divisions, when again considered, without distinction, 
in the different points of view given by Quantity, 
Quality, and Relation, will exhaust all the possible 
forms in which judgments are manifested. 


H XLVIII. The first great distinction of Judg- Par. xi/nii. 
ments is taken from the relation of Subject and sion of 
Predicate, as reciprocally whole and part. If the — Compre- 
Subject or determined notion be viewed as the Extensive, 
containing whole, we have an Intensive or Com- 
prehensive proposition ; if the Predicate or de- 


a Easer, IahjHc, § 56, p. 111. 


 


232 


LECTURES ON LOGTC. 


lect. termining notion be viewed as the containing 
1_ whole, we have an Extensive proposition. 


Explication, 
— this dis- 
tinction 
founded 
on the 
Compre- 
hension and 
Extension of 
Concepts. 


This distinction of propositions is founded on the 
distinction of the two quantities of concepts, — their 
Comprehension and their Extension. The relation of 
subject and predicate is contained within that of 
whole and part, for we can always view either the 
determining or the determined notion as the whole 


which contains the other. The whole, however, which 
the subject constitutes, and the whole which the pre- 
dicate constitutes, are different, — being severally de- 
termined by the opposite quantities of comprehension 
and of extension ; and as subject and predicate neces- 
sarily stand to each other in the relation of these 
inverse quantities, it is manifestly a matter of indiffer- 
ence, in so far as the meaning is concerned, whether 
we view the subject as the whole of comprehension, 
which contains the predicate, or the predicate as the 
whole of extension, which contains the subject. In 
point of fact, in single propositions it is rarely appar- 
ent which of the two wholes is meant ; for the copula 
is, est, &c., equally denotes the one form of the relation 
as the other. Thus, in the proposition man is two- 
legged, — the copula here is convertible with compre- 
hends or contains in it, for the proposition means 
man contains in it two-legged, that is, the subject 
man, as an intensive whole or complex notion, com- 
prehends as a part the predicate two-legged. Again, 
in the proposition man is a biped, the copula corre- 
sponds to contained under, for this proposition is 
tantamount to, man is contained under biped, — that 
is, the predicate biped, as an extensive whole or class, 
contains under it as a part the subject man. But in 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


233 


point of fact, neither of the two propositions unam- lf.ct. 
biguously shows whether it is to be viewed as of an — i 1 . 1 ! 
intensive or of an extensive purport ; nor in a single 
proposition is this of any moment. All that can be 
said is, that the one form of expression is better 
accommodated to express the one kind of proposition, 
the other better accommodated to express the other. 

It is only when propositions are connected into syllo- 
gism, that it becomes evident whether the subject or 
the predicate be the whole in or under which the 
other is contained ; and it is only as thus constituting 
two different, — two contrasted, forms of reasoning, — 
forms the most general, as under each of these every 
other is included, — that the distinction becomes neces- 
sary in regard to concepts and propositions. The dis- 
tinction of propositions into Extensive and Intensive, 
it is needless to say, is, therefore, likewise the most 
general ; and, accordingly, it is only in subordination 
to this distinction that the other distinctions, of which 
we are about to treat, are valid. 

I now proceed to the second division of Judgments, 
and commence with the following paragraph. 


f XLIX. The second division of Judgments 
is founded on the different mode in which the 
relation of determination may subsist between 
the subject and predicate of a proposition. This 
relation is either Simple ox Conditioned ( propositio 
simplex , propositio conditional is). On the former 
alternative, the proposition is called Categorical ; a 
on the latter, inasmuch as the condition lies either 


Par. XLIX. 
Second 
division of 
J udgments, 
— Categori- 
cal and Con- 
ditional,— 
tho latter 
of which is 
subdivided 
into Hypo- 
thetical, 
Disjunctive, 
and Dilem- 
raatic. 


o [Categorical had better be called by Mocenicus, who has also A b solute. 
Absolute, as is done by Gassendi, Lo- See Con templati ones Peripatcti&z, ii. 
gica, p. 287, ed. Oxon ; or Perfect, as c. 2, p. 39 et «cy.] 


234 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


i.f.ct. in the subject, or in the predicate, or in both the 

1- subject and predicate, there are three species of 

proposition. In the first case, the proposition is 
Hypothetical, in the second, Disjunctive, in the 
third Dilemmatic or Hypothetico-disjunctive. a 


Explication, 
— l. Catego- 
rical Judg- 
ments. The 
term caletjo- 
nail. 


Its signifi- 
cation as 
used by 
Aristotle. 


Its meaning 
in the writ- 
ings of his 
disciples. 


I shall consider these in their order ; and, first, of 
Categorical propositions. But here it is proper, be- 
fore proceeding to expound what is designated by the 
term categorical, to commence with an explanation of 
the term itself. This word, as far as is now known, 
was first employed by Aristotle in a logical signifi- 
cation. I have already explained the meaning of 
the term category but you are not to suppose that 
categorical has any reference to the ten summa 
genera of the Stagirite. By Aristotle the term xarq- 
yopiKo<; is frequently employed, more especially in the 
books of the Prior Analytics, — and in these books 
alone it occurs, if I am correct in my estimate, eighty- 
seven times. Now you will observe, that in no single 
instance is this word applied by Aristotle, except in 
one unambiguous signification, that is, the signification 
of affirmative ; and it is thus by him used as a term 
convertible with /tara^aTt/cos, and as opposed to the two 
synonyms of negation he indifferently employs, — airo- 
<£<m»cos and crrepTjTiKos. 7 Such is the meaning of the 
word in Aristotelic usage. Now you will observe, that 
it obtained a totally different meaning in the writings 
of his disciples. This new meaning it probably ob- 
tained from Theophrastus, the immediate disciple of 
Aristotle, for by him and Eudemus we know that it 


a Cf. Krug, Logik t § 57. — Ed. [Mo- $ See above, p. 197 . — Ed. 
cenicus, loc. cit . ; Schulze, Lot/ik, §§ y Compare p. 152.— 

45, 52, 60-69.] Ed. 


Digitized by Googl 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


235 


was so employed ; — and in this new meaning it was i.f.ct. 

exclusively applied by all the Greek and Latin expo- — 

sitors of the Peripatetic philosophy, in fact, by all 
subsequent logicians without exception. In this 
second signification, the term categorical, as applied 
to a proposition, denotes a judgment in which the 
predicate is simply affirmed or denied of the subject, 
and in contradistinction to those propositions which 
have been called hypothetical and disjunctive. In this 
change of signification there is nothing very remark- 
able. But it is a singular circumstance that, though thi. 
the Aristotelic employment of the word be in every uiflcatiou 
instance altogether clear and unambiguous, no one, "wrvir* 0 
either in ancient or in modern times, should ever have 
made the observation, that the word was used in two 
different meanings ; and that in the one meaning it 
was used exclusively by Aristotle, and in the other 
exclusively by all other logicians. I find, indeed, that 
the Greek commentators on the Organon do, in refer- 
ence to particular passages, sometimes state, that Karrj- 
¦yopiKo? is there used by Aristotle in the signification 
of affirmative ; but, in so far as I have been able to 
ascertain, no one has made the general observation, 
that the word was never applied by Aristotle in the 
sense in which alone it was understood by all other 
logical writers. So much for the meaning of the 
term categorical ; as now employed for simple or 
absolute, and as opposed to conditional, it is used 
in a sense different from its original and Aristotelic 


meaning. 

In regard to the nature of a Categorical Judgment Nature »r # 

° ° Categorical 

itself, it is necessary to say almost nothing, x 1 or, as Judgment, 
this judgment is that in which the two terms stand 
to each other simply in that relation which every 


 


236 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIII. 


II. Condi- 
tional J uiig- 
mcnU. — 
These com- 
prise three 
species. 


Variations 
in regard to 
the applica- 
tion of the 
terms Con- 
ditional 
and //<//*>- 
thetical. 


judgment implies, to the exclusion of all extrinsic 
conditions, it is evident, that what we have already 
said of the essential nature of judgment in general, 
affords all that can be said of categorical judgments 
in particular. A categorical proposition is expressed 
in the following formulae, A is B, or, A is not B. I 
proceed, therefore, to the genus of propositions as 
opposed to categorical, — viz. the Conditional, — Condi- 
tioned. This genus, as stated in the paragraph, com- 
prises two species, according as the condition lies 
more proximately in the subject, or in the predicate, 
to which is to be added, either as a third species, or 
as a compound of these two, those propositions in 
which there is a twofold condition, — the one belonging 
to the subject, the other to the predicate. The first 
of these, as stated, forms the class Hypothetical, the 
second that of Disjunctive, the third that of Dilem- 
matic, propositions. I may notice, by the way, that 
there is a good deal of variation in the language of 
logicians in regard to the terms Conditional and 
Hypothetical. You are aware that condit ionalis , in 
Latin, is commonly applied as a translation of vnode - 
tlkos in Greek ; and by Boethius, who was the first 
among the Latins who elaborated the logical doctrine 
of hypothetical, the two terms are used convertibly 
with each other.® By many of the schoolmen, how- 
ever, the term hypothetical , (> hypotheticus ), was used to 
denote the genus, and the term conditional , to denote 
the species, and from them this nomenclature has 
passed into many of the more modern compends of 
logic, — and, among others, into those of Aldrich and 
Whately. This latter usage is wrong. If either 

a Compare Discussions, p. 150. For gismo Hypothetic o, L. i. — E d. 
Boethius, see his treatise De Syilo - 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


237 


term is to be used in subordination to the other, con- lect. 

ditional , as the more extensive term, ought to be 

applied to designate the genus ; and so it has accord- 
ingly been employed by the best logicians. But to 
pass from words to things. 

I said that Hypothetical propositions are those in i. iiypo- 
which the condition qualifying the relation between 
the subject and predicate lies proximately in the 
subject. In the proposition, B is A, the subject B is 
unconditionally thought to exist, and it thus consti- 
tutes a categorical proposition. But if we think the 
subject B existing only conditionally, and under this 
conditional existence enunciate the judgment, we 
shall have the hypothetical proposition , — If B is, A is, 

— or, in a concrete example , — Rainy weather is wet 
weather, is a categorical proposition — If it rains, it 
will be wet, is an hypothetical. In an hypothetical 
proposition the objects thought stand in such a mutual 
relation, that the one can only be thought in so far 
as the other is thought ; in other words, if we think 
the one, we must necessarily think the other. They 
thus stand in the relation of Reason and Consequent. 

For a reason is that which, being affirmed, necessarily 
entails the affirmation of something else ; a conse- 
quent is that which is only affirmed, inasmuch as some- 
thing previous is affirmed. The relation between rea- 
son and consequent is necessary. For a reason fol- 
lowed by nothing, would not be the reason of any- 
thing, and a consequent which did not proceed from 
a reason, would not be the consequent of anything. 

An hypothetical proposition must, therefore, contain 
a reason and its consequent, and it thus presents the 
appearance of two members or clauses. The first 
clause, — that which contains the reason, — is called the 


 


238 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIII. 


A hypothe 
ticaf judg- 
ment not 
composite. 


Antecedent , also the Reason , the Condition , or the Hy- 
pothesis, (hypothesis, conditio , ratao, antecedent, — i. e. 
memhrum si yq propositio) ; the second, which contains 
the consequent necessitated by this ground, is called 
the Consequent , also the Thetis , (< consequent , thesis, ra- 
tio natum, conditionaium) . The relation between the 
two clauses is called the Consequence, (consequential), 
and is expressed by the particles if on the one hand, 
and then, so, therefore, &c., on the other, which are, 
therefore, called the Consecutive particles (particulce 
consecutivce). a These are frequently, howevet, not for- 
mally expressed. 

“ This consequence (if is — then is) is the copula in 
hypothetical propositions ; for through it the concepts 
are brought together, so as to make up, in conscious- 
ness, but a single act of thought ; consequently, in it 
lies that synthesis, that connection, which constitutes 
the hypothetical judgment. Although, therefore, an 
hypothetical judgment appear double, and may be cut 
into two different judgments, it is nevertheless not a 
composite judgment. For it is realised through a 
simple act of thought, in which if and then, the ante- 
cedent and the consequent, are thought at once and as 
inseparable. The proposition, if B is, then A it, is 
tantamount to the proposition, A is through B. But 
this is as simple an act as if we categorically judged 
B is A, that is, B is under A. Of these two, 
neither the one, — If the sun shines, nor the other, 
— then it is day, — if thought apart from the other, 
will constitute a judgment, but only the two in con- 
junction. But if we think, — The sun shines, and 
it is day , each by itself, then the whole connection be- 
tween the two thoughts is abolished, and we have no- 

a Krug, Loyik, § 57, Anm. *2, p. 169 . — Ed. 


 


LECTU11KS ON LOGIC. 


230 


tiling more than two isolated categorical judgments, lect. 
The relatives if and then, in which the logical synthe- — — — 
sis lies, constitute thus an act one and indivisible.” 

“For the same reason, an Hypothetical judgment Not con- 
cannot be converted into a Categorical. For the a Oatcgon- 

• caI 

thought, A is through B, is wholly different from the 
thought, A is in B. The judgment, — If God is 
righteous , then will the wicked he ; punished , and the 
judgment, — A righteous God 'punishes the wicked , are 
very different, although the matter of thought is the 
same. In the former judgment, the punishment of 
the wicked is viewed as a consequent of the righteous- 
ness of God ; w r hereas the latter considers it as an at- 
tribute of a righteous God. But as the consequent is 
regarded as something dependent from, — the attribute, 
on the contrary, as something inhering in, it is from 
two wholly different points of view that the two judg- 
ments are formed. The hypothetical judgment, there- 
fore, A is through B, is essentially different from the 
categorical judgment, A is in B ; and the two judg- 
ments are regulated by different fundamental law r s. 

For the Categorical judgment, as expressive of the 
relation of subject and attribute, is determined by the 
laws of Identity and Contradiction ; the Hypothetical, 
as expressive of the relation of Reason and Conse- 
quent, is regulated by the principle of that name.” a 
So much for Hypothetical. 

“ Disjunctive judgments are those in which the 2. Difjunc- 
condition qualifying the relation between the subject 
and predicate, lies proximately in the predicate, as in 
the proposition, D is either B, or C, or A. In this class 


tive. 


a Krug, Loyik, § 57, p. 168, Anra. ( consequcntia .) Hence the logical rule, 
2 . — Ed. [Hypothetical*} take account Propositio Conditionalii nihil ponit in 
not of the correctness of the two e*se. Christian Weiss, Lehrbuch der 
clauses, but only of their connection, Loyik, p. 109, od. 1801.] 


240 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIII. 


A Disjunc- 
tive judg- 
ment not ii 


of judgments a certain plurality of attributes is predi- 
cated of the subject, but in such a manner that this 
plurality is not predicated conjunetly, but it is only 
judged that, under conditions, some one, and only 
some one, of this bundle of attributes appertains to 
the subject. When 1 say that Men are either Black, 
or White, or Tawny, — in this proposition, none of 
these three predicates is unconditionally affirmed ; but 
it is only assumed that one or other may be affirmed, 
and that, any one being so affirmed, the others must, 
eo ipso, be denied. The attributes thus disjunctively 
predicable of the subject, constitute together a certain 
sphere or whole of extension ; and as the attributes 
mutually exclude each other, they may be regarded 
as reciprocally reason and consequent. A disjunctive 
proposition has two forms, according as it is regulated 
by a contradictory, or by a contrary, opposition. A 
is either B or not B, — This mineral is either a metal 

K 

or not, — are examples of the former ; A is either B, 
or C, or D, — This mineral is either lead, or tin, or 
zinc, — are examples of the latter. The opposite attri- 
butes or characters in a disjunctive proposition are 
called the Disjunct Members, (membra d isjuncta) ; and 
their relation to each other is called the Disjunction, 
(disjunctio), which in English is expressed by the rela- 
tive particles either, or, (out, vel), in consequence of 
which these words constitute the Disjunctive particles, 
( particulce disjunctivce.) In propositions of this class 
the copula is formed by either is, — or is, for hereby 
the concepts are brought together so as to constitute 
a single object of consciousness, and thus a synthesis 
or union of notions is effected.” 

“ Now, although iu consequence of the multiplicity 
of its predicates, a disjunctive proposition may be 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


241 


resolved into a plurality of judgments, still it is not lect. 
on that account a complex or composite judgment. — — — 
For it is realised by one simple energy of thought, in positc, ami 
which the two relatives, — the either and the or, — are Suelntoa 
thought together as inseparable, and as binding up Catcgonc 
the opposing predicates into a single sphere. In con- 
sequence of this, a disjunctive proposition cannot be 
converted into a categorical. For in a categoiical 
judgment a single predicate is simply affirmed or de- 
nied of a subject ; whereas in a disjunctive judgment 
there is neither affirmation nor negation, but the op- 
position of certain attributes in relation to a certain 
subject constitutes the thought. Howbeit, therefore, 
that a disjunctive and a categorical judgment may 
have a certain resemblance in respect of their object 
matter ; still in each the form of thought is wholly 
different, and the disjunctive judgment is, conse- 
quently, one essentially different from the cate- 
gorical.” a 

Dilemmatic judgments are those in which a condi- 3. piiem- 

v ^ runt ic* 

tion is found, both in the subject and in the predicate, 
and as thus a combination of an hypothetical form 
and of a disjunctive form, they may also appropriately 
be denominated Hypothetico-disjunctive. If X is A, 
it is either B or C — If an action he prohibited , it is 
prohibited either by natural or by positive law — If a 
cogn ition be a cognition of fact , it is given either 
through an act of externicd perception or through an 
act of self-consciousness. In such propositions, it is 
not necessary that the disjunct predicates should be 
limited to two ; and besides what are strictly called 
dilemmatic judgments, we may have others that would 
properly obtain the names of trilemmatic , tetralem - 

a Krug, Loyik, pp. 170, 171. Compare Kant, Loyik , § 29. — Ed. 

VOL. I. Q 


i 


 


242 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

XIII. 


A Dilcm- 
matic ju«lg* 
tucnt indi- 
visible, and 
not redu- 
cible to a 
plurality 
of categori- 
cal proposi- 
tion*. 


Judgments 
considered 
in reference 
to Quantity. 


Par. L. 

T. The 
common 
doctrine of 
the division 
of Judg- 
ments ac- 
cording to 
their Quan- 
tity. 

2 °. The doc- 
trine of the 
author on 
this point. 


matic, polylemmatic, etc. But in reference to proposi- 
tions, as in reference to syllogisms, dilemma is a word 
used not merely to denote the cases where there are 
only two disjunct members, but is, likewise, extended 
to any plurality of opposing predicates. There re- 
mains here, however, always an ambiguity ; and per- 
haps, on that account, the term hypothetico-disjunctive 
might with propriety be substituted for dUemmatio. 
A proposition of this class, though bearing both an 
hypothetical and a disjunctive form, cannot, however, 
be analysed into an hypothetical and a disjunctive 
judgment. It constitutes as indivisible a unity of 
thought as either of these ; and can as little as these 
be reduced without distinction to a plurality of cate- 
gorical propositions. 

Every form of Judgments which we have hitherto 
considered, has its corresponding form of Syllogism ; 
and it is as constituting the foundations of different 
kinds of reasoning, that the consideration of these 
different kinds of propositions is of principal import- 
ance. These various kinds of propositions may, how- 
ever, be considered in the different points of view of 
Quantity, Quality, aud Relation. And first of Quan- 
tity ; in reference to which I give you the following 
paragraph. 

II L. The Quantity of Judgments has refer- 
ence to the whole of Extension, by the number 
of the objects concerning which we judge. On 
this I shall state articulately, 1°, The doctrine of 
the Logicians ; and, 2°, The doctrine which I con- 
ceive to be the more correct. 

1°. (The doctrine of the Logicians.) The 
common doctrine, which, in essentials, dates from 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


243 


Aristotle, 8 divides Propositions according to their 
Quantity into four classes ; viz., (A) the Universal 
or General ( pr . universales , generates, TTporacreLs al 
kolOoXov) ; (B) the Particular (pr. particulares 
7rpoTacrei9 pepLKal, al iu pepei) ; (C), the Indivi- 
dual or Singular (pr. individuates, singulares , 
expositories, irpoTaaeLs at KaOIsaaTov, ra aro/xa) ; 
(D), the Indefinite (pr. impreefinilee, indefinites, 
7r/Doracr€t5 aStoptoTot, air poorStoptcrrot). They 

mean by universal propositions , those in which 
the subject is taken in its whole extension ; 
by paHicular propositions, those in which the 
subject is taken in a part, indefinitely, of its 
extension ; by individual j^'tyositions, those 
in which the subject is at a minimum of ex- 
tension ; by indefinite propositions , those in 
which the subject is not articulately or overtly 
declared to be either universal, particular, or 
individual. 

2°. (The doctrine I prefer). This division ap- 
pears to me untenable, and I divide Proposi- 
tions according to their Quantity in the follow- 
ing manner : — In this respect their differences 
arise either (A), as in Judgments, from the 
necessary condition of the Internal Thought ; 
or (B), as in Propositions, merely from the 
accidental circumstances of its External Expres- 
sion. 

Under the former head (A), Judgments are 
either (a) of Determinate or Definite Quantity, 
according as their sphere is circumscribed, or (b) 
of Quantity Indeterminate or Indefinite, accord- 
ing as their sphere is uncircumscribed. — Again, 

a De Interp., c. 7. Anal. Prior., L 1 — Ed. 


LECT. 

XIII. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIII. 


241 


Judgments of a Determinate Quantity (a) are 
either (1) of a Whole Undivided, in which case 
they constitute a Universal or General Propo- 
sition ; or (2) of a Unit Indivisible, in which 
case they constitute an Individual or Singular 
Proposition . — A Judgment of an Indeterminate 
Quantity (b) constitutes a Particular Propo- 
sition. 

Under the latter head (B), Propositions have 
either, as propositions, their quantity, determi- 
nate or indeterminate, marked out by a verbal 
sign, or they have not; such quantity being 
involved in every actual thought. They may be 
called in the one case (a) Predesignate ; in the 
other (b) Preindesignate. 

Again, the common doctrine, remounting also 
to Aristotle, 0 takes into view only the Subject, 
and regulates the quantity of the proposition 
exclusively by the quantity of that term. The 
Predicate, indeed, Aristotle and the logicians 
do not allow to be affected by quantity ; at 
least they hold it to be always Particular in 
an Affirmative, and Universal in a Negative, 
Proposition. 

This doctrine I hold to be the result of an in- 
complete analysis ; and I hope to show you that 
the confusion and multiplicity of which our pre- 
sent Logic is the complement, is mainly the con- 
sequence of an attempt at synthesis, before the 
ultimate elements had been fairly reached by a 
searching analysis, and of a neglect, in this 
instance, of the fundamental postulate of the 
science. 

a De Intcrp., c. 7 . — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


21*5 


of Determinate or 
Definite Quantity 


(Mental) Judgment# 


r 1. 

of a Whole Undivided — 

Universal or General Judgment#. 

2 . 

of a Unit Indivisible — 

Individual or Singular Judgment#. 


[ of Indeterminate or 

indefinite Quantity— forming Particular Judgment#. 


B their Quantity Expressed— Predesignate. 

(Verbal) Propositions ' ^ 

I their Quantity Not Expressed — Preindeaignato.a 

Universal Judgments are those in which the whole 
number of objects within a sphere or class are judged 
of, — as All men are mortal, or Every man is mortal , 
the all in the one case defining the whole collectively, 
— the every in the other defining it discretively. In 
such judgments the notion of a determinate whole- 
ness or totality, in the form of omnitude or allness, is 
involved. 

Individual Judgments are those in which, in like 
manner, the whole of a certain sphere is judged of, 
but in which sphere there is found only a single 
object, or collection of single objects, — as Catiline is 
ambitions, — The twelve apostles were inspired. In such 
judgments the notion of determinate wholeness or 
totality in the form of oneness, indivisible unity, is 
involved/ 


a Vide Th. et Am. apud Am. In 
De Int ., 8vo, ft 72, 111-113. [In 
the first of these passages, Ammo- 
niua, proceeding on a merely arith- 
metical calculation, enumerates six- 
teen varieties of the Proposition, any 
one of four quantities in the subject, 
( all — not all, none — not none or tome), 
being capable of combination with 
any one of four quantities in the pre- 


dicate. But of these some are but 
verbal varieties of the same judgment, 
and others nre excluded on material 
grounds, so that his division finally 
coincides with Aristotle's. In the 
second passage Theophrastus is cited 
in illustration of a very obscure state- 
ment concerning the opposition of 
indesignate propositions. — E d.] 

$ Indiriduum ( proprium ) rignatum, 


LECT. 

XIII. 


Explica- 

tion. 

Universal 

Judgments. 


Singular or 
Individual 
J udgments, 
— what. 


 



240 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Particular Judgments are' those in which, among 
_ X1H _ the objects within a certain sphere or class, we judge 
j udements, concerning some indefinite number less than the whole, 
— as Some men are virtuous — Many boys are courage- 
ous — Most women are compassionate. The indefinite 
plurality, within the totality, being here denoted by 
Words the words some , many, most. There are certain words 
tormirout which serve to mark out the quantity in the case 
of Universal, Individual, and Particular propositions. 
andpS* The words which designate universality are all, the 
politic^' whole of, every, both, each, none, no one, neither, always, 
everywhere, etc. The words which mark out particu- 
larity are some, not all, one, two, three, etc., sometimes , 
somewhere , etc. There are also terms which, though 
they do not reach to an universal whole, approximate 
to it, as many, most, almost all, the greatest part, etc., 
few, very few, hardly any, etc., which, in the common 
employment of language, and in reference to merely 
probable matter, may be viewed as almost tantamount 
to marks of universality. 

Distinction By logicians in general it is stated, that, in a logical 
andindi^ relation, an Individual is convertible with an Universal 
partial proposition ; as in both something is predicated of a 
Judgments. w p 0 ] e subject and neither admits of any exception. 
But a Particular Judgment, likewise, predicates some- 
thing of a whole subject, and admits of no exception ; 
for it embraces all that is viewed as the subject, and 
excludes all that is viewed as not belonging to it. 
The whole distinction consists in this, — that, in Uni- 
versal and in Individual Judgments, the number of 
the objects judged of is thought by us as definite ; 
whereas, in Particular Judgments, the number of such 
objects is thought by us as indefinite. That Indi Vi- 


and individuttm vagina. So partial- The former of each, and the latter of 
lare signatnm, and particularc vagum. each, corresponding. — Memoranda,. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


247 


dual Judgments do not correspond to Universal Judg- lect. 
ments, merely in virtue of the oneness of their subject, -I — L- 
is shown by this, — that, if the individual be rendered 
indefinite, the judgment at once assumes the character 
of particularity. For example, the propositions, — A 
Gennan invented the art of printing , — An Englishman 
generalised the la w of gravitation, — are to be viewed as 
particular propositions. But, if we substitute for the 
indefinite expressions a German and an Englishman , 
the definite expressions Fust and Newton , the judg- 
ment obtains the form of an universal. 

With regard to quantity, it is to be observed, say Categorical 
the logicians, that Categorical Judgments are those aion^a" 13 
alone which admit of all the forms. “ Hypothetical tSogi- 10 

i *r\ • • . • • , • *i • i ciftnSj 

and Disjunctive propositions are always universal, mit of *n 
For in liypotheticals, by the position of a reason, there qiuuuity. ° 
is posited every consequent of that reason ; and in 
disjunctives the sphere or extension of the subject is 
so defined, that the disjunct attributes are predicated 
of the whole sphere. It may, indeed, sometimes seem 
as if in such propositions something were said of some, 
and, consequently, that the judgment is particular or 
indefinite. For example, as an hypothetical, — If 
some men are learned, then others are unlearned ; as 
a disjunctive, — Those men who are learned are either 
philosophers or not. But it is easily seen that these 
judgments are essentially of a general character. In 
the first judgment, the real consequent is, — then all 
others are unlearned; and in the second, the true 
subject is, — all learned men, for this is involved in 
the expression — Those men who are learned, etc.” a 


a Krug, Logit, § 57, Anm. 4, p. meinen, Logit , i. § 122. Schulze, Lo- 

171 et seq Ed. [Cf. Hoffbauer, An- git, §60. Contra; — Easer, Lo(/it, § 92, 

fangsgriinde der Logit, § 243. Sig- p. 177. — [See below, pp. 333, 334, 
wart, Logit, § 164 tt seq., ed. 1835. note a, — E d.] 

Kiesewetter, Grundriss einer allge- 


218 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIII. 


This doc- 
trine erro- 
neous. 


Such is the doctrine of the Logicians. This I cannot 
but hold to be erroneous ; for we can easily construct 
propositions, whether hypothetical or disjunctive, which 
cannot be construed either as universal or singular. 
For example, when we say, hypothetically , — If some 
Dodo is, then some animal is ; or, disjunctively, — 
Some men are either rogues or fools : — in either case, 
the proposition is indefinite or particular, and no inge- 
nuity can show a plausible reason wdiy it should be 
viewed as definite, — as general or individual 


¦  


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


249 


LECTURE XIV. 


STOICHEIOLOGY. 


SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 


II. APOPHANTIC. 


JUDGMENTS — THEIR QUALITY, OPPOSITION, AND CONVERSION. 


The first part of our last Lecture was occupied with 
the doctrine of Judgments, considered as divided into 
Simple and into Conditional ; Simple being exclusively 
Categorical, Conditional, either Hypothetical, Disjunc- 
tive, or Hypothetico-disjunctive. We then proceeded 
to treat of the Quantity of propositions, and, in this 
respect, I stated that they are either Definite or Inde- 
finite ; the Definite comprising the two subordinate 
classes of General or Universal, and of Singular or 
Individual propositions, while the Indefinite are cor- 
respondent to Particular propositions alone. In regard 
to the terms definite and indefinite , I warned you that 
I do not apply them in the sense given by logical wri- 
ters. With them, Indefinite propositions denote those 
in which the quantity is not explicitly declared by one 
of the designatory terms, all , every , some, many, etc. 
Such propositions, however, ought to be called pre- 
indesignate {jprce-indesignatce, airpoo-hiopicrTOL ), that 
is, not marked out by a prefix , — a term better adapted 
to indicate this external accident of their enunciation ; 


LECT. 

XIV. 


Recapitula- 

tion. 


 


250 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIV. 


Second 
division 
of Judg- 
ments, or 
that accord- 
ing to their 
Quality. 


Par. LI. 
Judgments, 
in respect of 
their Qua- 
lity, are Af- 
firmative 
and Nega- 
tive. 


for, in point of fact, these preindesignate propositions 
are either definite or indefinite, and quite as definite 
or indefinite in meaning, as if their quantity had been 
expressly marked out by the predesignatory terms. 

This being premised, I now go on to the next divi- 
sion of Judgments, — the division proceeding on that 
ground which by Logicians has been called the Qua- 
lity of Judgments. In itself the term quality is here 
a very vague and arbitrary expression, for we might, 
with equal propriety, give the name of quality to 
several other of the distinguishing principles of pro- 
positions. For example, the truth or falsehood of pro- 
positions has been also called their quality ; and some 
logicians have even given the name of quality to the 
ground of the distinction of judgments into categorical, 
hypothetical, and disjunctive. What, however, has 
been universally, if not always exclusively, styled the 
quality of propositions, both in ancient and modern 
times, is that according to which they are distributed 
into Affirmative and Negative. 


IF LI. In respect of their Quality, Judgments 
are divided into two classes. For either the 
Subject and Predicate may be recognised as reci- 
procally containing and contained, in the opposite 
quantities of Extension and Comprehension ; or 
they may be recognised as not standing in this 
relation. In the former case, the subject and 
predicate are affirmed of each other, and the 
proposition is called an Affirmative (nporaa-iq 
Kara(j>aTuaj or Karqyopucj , judicium ¦ affirmati- 
vum or jwsitivum) ; in the latter case, they are 
denied of each other, and the proposition is called 
a Negative {jrpoTa&is ano(f>aTi.Krj or areprjTucq, 
judicium negativum). 


Digitized by GoogI 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


251 


In this paragraph, I have enounced more generally lect. 
than is done by logicians the relation of predication, — 


unions. 


in its affirmative and negative phases. For their defi- (Wrant^ 1 * 
nitions only apply either to the subject or to the predi- nition of 
cate, taken as a whole ; whereas, since we may indiffer- Ltheparo- 
ently view either the subject as the whole in relation graph ' 
to the predicate, or the predicate as the whole in rela- 
tion to the subject, according as we consider the pro- 
position to express an intensive or to express an exten- 
sive judgment, — it is proper in our definition, whether 
of predication in general, or of affirmation and negation 
in particular, to couch it in such terms that it may 
indifferently comprehend both these classes, — both 
these phases, of propositions. 

As examples of Affirmative and Negative proposi- Affirmative 
tions, the following may suffice : — A is B — A is not B tivc Proj 
— God is merciful — God is not vindictive. In an 
Affirmative judgment, there is a complete inclusion 
of the subject within the predicate as an extensive 
whole ; or of the predicate within the subject as 
an intensive whole. In Negative judgments, on the 
contrary, there is a total exclusion of the subject 
from the sphere of the predicate (extensively), or of 
the predicate from the comprehension of the subject 
(intensively). In affirmative propositions there is also 
distinctly enounced through what predicate the notion 
of the subject is to be thought, that is, what predicate 
must be annexed to the notion of the subject ; in 
negative propositions, in like manner, it is distinctly 
enounced through what predicate the notion of the 
subject is not to be thought, that is, what predicate 
must be shut out from the notion of the subject. In 
negative judgments, therefore, the negation essentially 
belongs to the Copula ; for otherwise all propositions 
without distinction would be affirmative. This, how- 


 


252 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.OT. 

XIV. 

That nega- 
tion docs 
not belong 
to the Cop- 
ula, held by 
some logi- 
cians. 


The oppo- 
site doctrine 
maintained 
by the 
Author. 


True import 
of the logi- 
cal copula. 


ever, has been a point of controversy among modern 
logicians ; for many maintain that the negation belongs 
to the predicate, on the following grounds : — If the 
negation pertained to the copula, there could be no 
synthesis of the two terms, — the whole act of judg- 
ment would be subverted, — while at the same time a 
non-connecting copula, a non-copulative, is a contradic- 
tion in terms. But a negative predicate, that is, a pre- 
dicate by which something is taken away or excluded 
from the subject, involves nothing contradictory; and, 
therefore, a judgment with such a predicate is compe- 
tent . 0 

The opposite doctrine is, however, undoubtedly the 
more correct. For if we place the negation in the pre- 
dicate, negative judgments, as already said, are not 
different in form from affirmative, being merely affirm- 
ations that the object is contained within the sphere 
of a negative predicate, or that a negative predicate 
forms one of the attributes of the subject. This, how- 
ever, the advocates of the opinion in question do not 
venture to assert. The objection from the apparent 
contradiction of a non-connecting copula is valid only 
if the literal, the grammatical, meaning of the term 
copula be coextensive with that which it is applied 
logically to express. But this is not the case. If liter- 
ally taken, it indicates only one side of its logical 
meaning. What the word copula very inadequately 
denotes, is the form of the relation between the subject 
and predicate of a judgment. Now, in negative judg- 
ments, this form essentially consists in the act of tak- 
ing a part out of a whole, and is as necessary an act 


a Krug, Logik § 55, Anm. 3 . — Ed. B&rdili, Grand rift der ersten Logik, § 
[Compare on the same side Buffier, 12. Derodon, Logica , p. 642. Cf. p. 
Logigut, i., § 75 et seq. Bolzano, Wi+ 515 ct »eq. Contra; — Kant, 1s>g\k, § 
BentchaftsUhre, Logik, voL ii., §§ 127, 22, Anm. 3. Bachmann, Logik, §84, p. 
129, 136. Schulze, Logik , § 50, p. 74. 127. Eaaer, Logik , § 59, p. 115.] 


Digitized by GoogI 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


253 


of thought as the putting it in. The notion of the lect. 
one contradictory in fact involves the notion of the _ 
other.® 

The controversy took its origin in this, — that every Originoftho 
negative judgment can be expressed m an affirmative regarding 
form, when the negation is taken from the copula negation, 
and placed in the predicate. Thus, A is not B may be 
changed into, — A is not-15. The contrast is better 
expressed in Latin, A non est B — A est non- B. In 
fact, we are compelled in English to borrow the Latin 
non to make the difference unambiguously apparent, 
saying, A is non- B, instead of A is not- B. But this 
proves nothing ; for by this transposition of the 
negation from the copula to the predicate, we are 
also enabled to express every affirmative proposition 
through a double negation. Thus, A is B, in the affir- 
mative form is equivalently enounced by A is not non- 
B — A non est non- B, in the negative. 

This possibility of enunciating negative propositions Negative 
in an affirmative, and affirmative propositions in a how de*ig* 
negative form, has been the occasion of much perverse Aristot L 
refinement among logicians. Aristotle 0 denominated 
the negative terms, such as non B, non homo , non 
albus , &c. ovo/iara aopterra, literally, indefinite nouns. 
Boethius, 7 however, unhappily translated Aristotle’s n v 
Greek term dopiaros by the Latin infinitus , reserving Boct,uu "' 
the term indefinitus to render dStdptcrro? as applied to 
propositions, but of which the notion is more ap- 
propriately expressed, as we have seen, by the word 
indcsignate ( indesignatus ), or better preindesignate 
(prceindesignatus). The Schoolmen, following Boethi- By the 
us, thus called the ovopara aopLcrra of Aristotle no- 1 clloolmen- 
mina infinita : and the non they styled the particula 

o Bachmann, LogiJc, p. 127 Ed. 7 In De Tnterprctatione, L. ii. § 1. 

0 De Interpretatione, c. 2 . — Ed. Opera , p. 250 . — Ed. 


 


254 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIV. 

Propoti- 
lionet fn/i- 
uita; of the 
schoolmen, 
— what. 


On this 

f >oint fol- 
owcd by 
Kant. 


Kant’s 
three-fold 
division of 
Propositions 
unfounded. 


irifinitans. Out of such elements they also constructed 
Propositiones Infinite; that is, judgments in which 
either the subject or the predicate was a negative 
notion, as non-homo est viridis , and homo est non - 
viridis , and these they distinguished from the simple 
negative, homo — non est — viridis. Herein Boethius 

and the schoolmen have been followed by Kant, a 
through the Wolfian logicians ; for he explains Infi- 
nite Judgments as those which do not simply indicate, 
that a subject is not contained under the sphere of 
a predicate, but that it lies out of its sphere, some- 
where in the infinite sphere. He has thus considered 
them as combining an act of negation and an act of 
affirmation, inasmuch as one thing is affirmed in them 
through the negation of another. In consequence of 
this view, he gave them, after some Wolfians, the 
name of Limitative , which he constituted as a third 
form of judgments under quality, — all propositions 
being thus either Affirmative, Negative, or Limitative. 
The whole question touching the validity of the dis- 
tinction is of no practical consequence ; and consists 
merely in whether a greater or less latitude is to be 
given to certain terms. I shall not, therefore, occupy 
your attention by entering on any discussion of what 
may be urged in refutation or defence. But if what 
I have already stated of the nature of negation and 
its connection with the copula, be correct, there is no 
ground for regarding Limitative propositions as a 
class distinct in form, and co-ordinate with Affirma- 
tive and Negative judgments. £ 

If we consider the quantity and quality of judg- 
ments as combined, there emerges from this juncture 

aljogik,% 22. Compare Wolf, Ph i- see Bachmano, Logik, § 84, p. 128. 
lot. Ration., g 209 . — Ed. Schulze, Logik, § 50. Drobisch, Logik, 

& Compare Krug, Logik, § 55. Amu. §42.] 

2. — Ed. [Against the distinction, 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


255 


four separate forms of propositions, for they are either lf.ct. 
Universal Affirmative, or Universal Negative, Particu- — — 1 
lar Affirmative, or Particular Negative. These forms, 
in order to facilitate the statement and analysis of the 
syllogism, have been designated by letters, and as it 
is necessary that you should be familiar with these 
symbols, I shall state them in the following paragraph. 


If LI I. In reference to their Quantity and p«. lil 
Quality together, Propositions are designated by Propositions 
the vowels A, E, I, 0. The Universal Affrma- 
five are denoted by A; the Universal Negative Quality 
by E; the Particular Affirmative by I; the p.-ti,cr!° 
Particular Negative by 0. To aid the memory, 
these distinctions have been comprehended in the 
following lines : — 

Asserit A, negat E, sed uuiversaliter amine, 

Asserit I, negat O, Bed particulariter ambo. a 


I may here, likewise, show you one, and perhaps 
the best, mode, in which these different forms can be 
expressed by diagrams. 



a Petrus Hispanus.Siimmii/ff, Tract, tun, Expositio in Summulat, Tract, i. f. 
i. partic. 4, f. 9. C£ Petrus Tartare- 9 b. — E d. 


 



25G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. The invention of this mode of sensualising by 

circles the abstractions of Logic, is generally given to 

empS^ Euler, who employs it in his Letters to a German 
dmiar Princess on different Matters of Physics and Pliiloso- 
phy. But, to say nothing of other methods, this by 
wmCto circles is of a much earlier origin. For I find it in 
To be found the Nucleus Logical Weisiance, which appeared in 
We«c? #t,an 1712 ; but this was a posthumous publication, and 
the author, Christian Weise, who was Rector of Zit- 
Lambert's tau, died in 1708. I may notice, also, that Lambert’s 
be found in method of accomplishing the same end, by parallel 
lines of different lengths, is to be found in the Logic 
of Alstedius, published in 1G14, consequently above a 
century and a half prior to Lambert’s Neues Orga- 
non. P Of Lambert’s originality there can, however, 
I think, be no doubt ; for he was exceedingly curious 
about, and not over-learned in, the history of these 
subsidia, while in his philosophical correspondence 
many other inventions of the kind, of far inferior in- 
terest, are recorded, but there is no allusion whatever 
to that of Alstedius. 

Distinction Before leaving this part of the subject, I may take 
tions into notice of another division of Propositions made by 
ModaL* 1 all logicians, — viz., into Pure and Modal. Pure pro- 
positions are those in which the predicate is categori- 
cally affirmed or denied of the subject, simply, without 
any qualification ; Modal, those in which the predicate 
is categorically affirmed or denied of the subject, under 
some mode or qualifying determination. For example, 
— Alexander conquered Darius, is a pure, — Alexander 

a Partie ii., Lettre xxxv., ed Cour- figure, is given in the Loyiax Si/ztema 
not. — Ed. llarmonicum, of Alstedius (1614), p. 

/3 A very imperfect diagram of this 395. Lambert’s diagrams (Neua Or- 
kind, with the lines of equal length, rjanon, vol. i. p. Ill el seq.) are much 
in illustration of the first syllogistic more complete. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


257 


conquered Darius honourably , is a modal proposi- lect. 
tion. “ Nothing can be more futile than this distinc- . XIV ~ 
tion. The mode in such propositions is nothing more JJ^tion 
than a part of the predicate. The predicate may be fut,lc ‘ 
a notion of any complexity, it may consist of any 
number of attributes, of any number even of words, 
and the mere circumstance that one of these attributes 
should stand prominently out by itself, can establish 
no difference in which to originate a distinction of the 
kind. Of the examples adduced, — the pure proposi- 
tion, Alexander conquet'ed Darius , means, being re- 
solved, Alexander was the conqueror of Dairies , — 
Alexander being the subject, was the copula, and the 
conqueror oj Darius the predicate. Now, if we take 
the modal, — Alexander conquered Darius honourably , 
and resolve it in like manner, we shall have Alexander 
was the honourable conqueror of Darius ; and here the 
whole difference is, that in the second the predicate is 
a little more complex, being the honourable conqueror 
of Darius , instead of the conqueror' of Darius. 

But logicians, after Aristotle, ^ have principally con- Division of 
sidered as modal propositions those that are modified by 
by the four attributions of Necessity, Impossibility, 
Contingence, and Possibility. But in regard to these, 
the case is precisely the same ; the mode is merely a ^matter 


part of the predicate, and if so, nothing can be more ^tioiTare 0 * 
unwarranted than on this accidental, on this extra- c c l\!* hg " 
logical, circumstance to establish a great division of 
logical propositions. This error is seen in all its fla- 
grancy when applied to practice. The discrimination 


a These modal* are not acknow- by the Schoolmen. Compare Ammo* 
ledged by Aristotle, who allows only nius, In De Interp ., p. 148 b, ed. 1546. 
the four mentioned below. They ap- — Ed. 

pear, however, in his Greek commen- /3 Di Interp., c. 12. Compare A nal. 
tatora, and from them wero adopted Prior., i. 2 . — Ed. 

VOL. I. It 


258 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC'. 


LECT. 

XIV. 


W Lately 
quoted. 


Criticised. 


of propositions into Pure and Modal, and the discri- 
mination of Modal propositions into Necessary, Im- 
possible, Contingent, Possible, and the recognition of 
these as logical distinctions, rendered it imperative 
on the logician, as logician, to know what matter was 
necessary, impossible, contingent, and possible. For 
rules were laid down in regard to the various logical 
operations to which propositions were subjected, ac- 
cording as these were determined by a matter of one 
of these modes or of another, and this too when the 
modal character itself was not marked out by any 
peculiarity or form of expression. Thus, to take one of 
many passages to the same effect in Whately ; speaking 
of the quality of propositions, he says, — “ When the 
subject of a proposition is a Common-term, the uni- 
versal signs (‘ all, no, every ’) are used to indicate that 
it is distributed, (and the proposition consequently is 
universal) ; the 'particular signs (‘ some, etc.’), the con- 
trary. Should there be no sign at all to the common 
term, the quantity of the proposition (which is called 
an Indefinite proposition) is ascertained by the matter; 
i e. y the nature of the connection between the ex- 
tremes : which is either Necessary, Impossible, or 
Contingent. In necessary and in impossible matter 
an Indefinite is understood as a universe d ; e. g., birds 
have wings ; i.e. all : birds are not quadrupeds ; i. e. 
none: in contingent matter, (i, e. where the terms 
partly ( i . e. sometimes) agree, and partly not), an 
Indefinite is understood as a particular ; e. g ., food is 
necessary to life ; i. e. some food ; birds sing ; i. e. 
some do ; birds are not carnivorous ; i. e. some are 
not, or all are not/’ “ 

Now, all this proceeds upon a radical mistake of 
the nature and domain of Logic. Logic is a purely 

a Elcmenlx of Logic, book ii. chap. ii. § 2, pp. 63, 64. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


259 


formal science, it knows nothing of, it establishes lect. 

XIV 

nothing upon, the circumstances of the matter, to I— 

which its form may chance to be applied. To be able position 
to say that a thing is of necessary, impossible, or con- take* cog- 
tingent matter, it is requisite to generalise its nature the modality 
from an extensive observation ; and to make it in- this science 
cumbent on the logician to know the modality of all existence, 
the objects to which his science may be applied, is at 
once to declare that Logic has no existence ; for this 
condition of its existence is in every point of view 
impossible. It is impossible — 1°, Inasmuch as Logic 
would thus presuppose a knowledge of the whole cycle 
of human science ; and it is impossible — 2°, Because 
it is not now, and never will be, determined what 
things are of necessary or contingent, of possible or 
impossible existence. Speaking of things impossible 
in nature, Sir Thomas Brown declared, that it is im- 
possible that a quadruped could lay an egg, or that a 
quadruped could possess the beak of a bird ; and, in the 
age of Sir Thomas Brown, these propositions would 
have shown as good a title to be regarded as of im- 
possible matter as some of the examples adduced by 
Dr Whately. The discovery of New Holland, and of 
the Ornithorhynchus, however, turned the impossible 
into the actual ; for, in that animal, there is found a 
quadruped which at once lays an egg and presents 
the bill of a duck. On the principle, then, that Logic 
is exclusively conversant about the forms of thought, 

I have rejected the distinction of propositions and 
syllogisms into pure and modal, as extra-logical. 
Whatever cannot be stated by A, B, C, is not of logi- 
cal import ; and A, B, C, know nothing of the neces- 
sary, impossible, and contingent.® 

o See Discussion*, p. 145 et seq. 72, and § 23, p. 79: Schulze, Logit, 

— Ed. [Compare Bachmann, Logit, § 52, p. 7B.] 

§ 73, p. 115 ; Richter, Logit, § 19, p. 


LECT. 

XIV. 


Explana- 
tion of three 
terms u»c<l 
in reference 
to Pure and 
Modal Pro- 
positions. 


Third Divi- 
sion of J udg- 
mcnts — Re- 
lation to 
each other. 


Judgments, 

Identical. 


Different. 


Relatively 

Identical. 


Disparate. 


Disjunct. 

Sub- alter- 
nant. 


260 LECTURES OX LOGIC. 

It may be proper, however, to explain to you the 
meaning of three terms which are used in relation to 
Pure and Modal propositions. A proposition is called 
Assertory , when it enounces what is known as actual ; 
Problematic , when it enounces what is known as pos- 
sible ; Apodeictic or Demonstrative , when it enounces 
what is known as necessary.® 

The last point of view in whicli judgments are con- 
sidered, is their Relation to each other. In respect of 
these relations, propositions have obtained from Logi- 
cians particular names, which, however, cannot be un- 
derstood without at the same time regarding the mat- 
ter which the judgments contain. As the distinctions 
of Judgments and of Concepts are, in this respect, in 
a great measure analogous, both in name and nature, 
it will not be necessary to dictate them. 

When the matter and form of two judgments are 
considered as the same, they are called Identical , Con- 
vertible, Equal or Equivalent (propositiones identicce, 
pares , convert ibiles, cequipollentes) ; on the opposite 
alternative, they are called Different ( pr . diversce). If 
considered in certain respects the same, in others dif- 
ferent, they are called Relatively Identical , Similar , 
or Cognate (pr. relative identicce , similes, affines, cog- 
nates). This resemblance may be either in the subject 
and comprehension, or in the predicate and extension. 
If they have a similar subject, their predicates are 
Disparate (dispa, rata), if a similar predicate, their 
subjects are Disjunct (disjuncta.) 

When two judgments differ merely in their quan- 
tity of extension, and the one is, therefore, a parti- 
cular, the other a general, they are said to be subor- 
dinated, and their relation is called Subordination 

a Kant, Logik, § 30. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


201 


( subordinatio ). The subordinating (or as it might, lect. 

perhaps, be more properly styled, the superordinate) 1_ 

judgment, is called the Subaltemant (subaltemans) ; i^ lur 
the subordinate judgment is called the Subodtemate 
(subaltemat urn). 

When, of two or more judgments, the one affirms, OpjNMition 
the other denies, and when they are thus reciprocally menu, 
different in quality, they are said to be Opposed or 
Confiictive ( pr . apposite e, avriKtipevai), and their re- 
lation, in this respect, is called Opposition (oppositio). 

This opposition is either that of Contradiction or ewndic- 
Repug nance (contradictio, avri<f>ao-i<;), or that of Con- Contrariety. 
trariety ( contrarietas , ioainiorq^). 

If neither contradiction nor contrariety exists, the consent 
judgments are called Congruent (pr. congruentes, con- 
sonantes, consentientes). In regard to this last state- subwn- 
ment, you will find iu logical books, in general,® that S,. oppo ’ 
there is an opposition of what are called Subcontraries 
( subcontraria ), meaning by these particular proposi- 
tions of different quality, as, for example, some A are 
B, some A are not B, or, some men are learned, some 
men are not learned ; and they are called Subcontra- 
ries, as they stand subordinated to the universal con- 
trary propositions, — All A are B, no A is B, or, All 
men are learned, no man is learned. But this is a Not > r«-«i 
mistake, there is no opposition between Subcontraries ; opp " ,lt '" u - 
for both may at once be maintained, as both at once 
must be true if the some be a negation of all. They 
cannot, however, both be false. The opposition in 
this case is only apparent ; 0 and it was probably only 

a Element a of Logie, by Dr Whately, j8 For which reason Aristotle de- 

part iL chap. ii. § 3, p. 68, 3d edit, scribes it as an opposition in language, 

But see Scheibler, Opera, Logiea, Pars but not in reality. Anal. Prior., ii. 
iii. c. x\. p. 487, ed. 1665. Ulrich, [/n- 15.— Ed. [Compare Fonseca, Instil, 
itit. Lorj. tt Met., § 1B3, p. 190.— En.] Dialect L. iii. c. 6, p. 129. ed. 1604. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGTC. 


LECT. 

XIV. 


Conversion 
of Proposi- 
tions. 


Terms em- 
ployed to 
denote the 
original and 
converted 
proposition. 


2G2 


laid down from a love of symmetry, in order to make 
out the opposition of all the corners in the square of 
Opposition, which you will find in almost every work 
on Logic. 

Finally, various relations of judgments arise from 
what is called their Conversion. When the subject 
and predicate in a categorical proposition, (for to this 
we now limit our consideration), are transposed, the 
proposition is said to be converted ; the proposition 
given and its product are both called the juclicia con- 
versa ; the relation itself of reciprocation in which the 
judgments stand is called Conversion , sometimes Diver- 
sion and Transposition {reciprooatio, conversio, obversio, 
transpositio , /xera^ecris, yxera/loX 77, dvno-Tpo^T]. The 
given proposition is called the Converted or Con- 
verse , ( judicium , propositio , prcejacens, conversum, 
conversa) ; the other, into which it is converted, the 
Converting (jud prop., convertens). There is, how- 
ever, much ambiguity, to say the' least of it, in the 
terms commonly employed by Logicians to designate 
the two propositions, — that given, and that the pro- 
duct of the logical elaboration. The prejacent and 
subjacent may pass, but they have been very rarely 
employed. The term propositio eon versa , the con- 
verse or converted judgment, specially for the original 
proposition, is worse than ambiguous ; it is applied 
generally to both judgments ; it may, in fact, more 
appropriately denote the other, — its product, — to which 
indeed it has, but through a blunder, been actually 


Conimbrieentis No ra Lmjica, Tract 
iii. Di«p. iii., § 2, p. 124, edit. 1711. 
Kant expressly rejects Subcontrari- 
ety, Loyik , § 50, Anm. Compare 
Krug, Lo<jik, § 64, Anm. 4. Bratuss, 
(irundrisM tier Loyik, p. 105. Den- 


zinger, Io*tilntionf * Loyicte, vol. ii. 
§ 713, p. 138. Caramuel, p. 33. [/?«- 
tionalis ft Reali* Philosophia, authore 
Joanne Caramuel Jjobkoicitz , S. Th. Lo- 
r anienei Doctore, Abbot e Mrlronenti. 
Lovanii, 1642. — En.J 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


263 


LECT. 

XIV. 


applied by Aldrich, a and he is followed, of course, by 
Whately. The original proposition ought to be called 
the Convertend or Convertible (pr. convertenda , con- 
vertibilis)P The terra Converting (convertens) em- 
ployed for the proposition, the product of conversion, 
marks out nothing of its peculiar character. The ex- 
pression pr. exposita, applied by Aldrich, 7 without a Propositi* 
word of comment, to this judgment, is only another itH use by 

• a | • «| • • a . i n Aldrich or- 

instance ol his daring ignorance ; lor the phrase pr. ex - roneu*. 
posita had nothing to recommend it in this relation, and 
was employed in a wholly different meaning by logi- 
cians and mathematicians. 5 In this error Aldrich is 
followed by Whately, who, like his able predecessor, is 
wholly unversed in the literature and language of Logic, specie- <>r 

The logicians after Aristotle have distinguished two, SitiS.h- 
or, as we may take it, three, or even four, species of jfaJU ogi ‘ 
Conversion. 

1. The first, which is called Simple or Pure Con- 
version (conversio simplex , rot? opens 7rpos kavTTjv, 
Aristotle, i.e. t cum terminis reciprocal is)' is when 
the quantity and quality of the two judgments are 


a Rudiment a Loyicir, L. i. c. ii. 

/9 [So Noldius, p. 263, [Loyica Re- 
rofpiila, Ilafuhc, 1766. — Ed.] 
y Crakanthorpe, Sanderson, and 
Wallis [denominate the original pro- 
position pr. conversa , its product pr. 
convertens. See Crakanthorpe, Logica, 
L. iii. c. 10, p. 179, ed. 1677. Sander- 
son, Logica, L. ii. c. 7, p. 76, ed. 1741. 
Wallis, Institutio Logics, L. ii. c. 7, 
p. 113, edit. 1729. Wallis also uses 
pr. convertenda as a synonym for pr. 
comma. — Ed] 

5 The term exposition ( tK0«ris ) is 
employed by Aristotle, ami by most 
subsequent logicians, to denote the 
selection of an individual instance 
whose qualities may be perceived by 
sense {hcriOtyat, exponere, objicere sen- 


sin'), in order to prove a general re- 
lation between notions apprehended 
by tho intellect. This method is used 
by Aristotle in proving the conver- 
sion of propositions and the reduction 
of syllogisms. See A mil. Prior., i. 2 ; 
i. 6 ; i. 8. The instance selected i« 
called the expositum, (rb her t6lv) ; and 
hence singular propositions and syllo- 
gisms are called expository. Compare 
Pacius on Anal. Pr., i. 2, and Sir 
W. Hamilton’s note, RciXs Works, 
p. 696 . — Ed. 

f Toil Spots ayri(rrpe<p(ty, Anal. Pr., 
i. 2, i. c., when each term is the exact 
equivalent of the other. See Trendel- 
enburg, Klemevta Log. Arist., § 14 ; 
In De Anima, p. 408 j Waitz, In 
Arist. Org.,vo\. i. p. 373 . — Ed. 


 


2G4 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIV. 


Mnemonic 
verses ex- 
pressing 
conversion. 


the same. It holds in Universal Negative and Parti- 
cular Affirmative propositions. 

2. The second, which is called Conversion by Acci- 
dent (c. per aecidens , iv pepu, Kara pepos, Aristotle), 
is when, the quality remaining unaltered, the quantity 
is reduced. It holds in Universal Affirmatives. These 
two are the species of the conversion of propositions 
acknowledged by all ; they are evolved by Aristotle, 
not, as might have been expected, in his treatise On 
Enouncement , but in the second chapter of the first 
book of his Prior Analytics.* 

3. The third, which is called Conversion by Contra- 
position (c. per oppositionem , c. per contra positionem , 
both by Boethius/* contrapositio , airncrrpofjyrj crvv airrt- 
Oecre t, Alexander 7 ), is when, instead of the subject and 
predicate, the quantity and quality remaining the 
same, there is placed the contradictory of each. This 
holds in Universal Affirmatives, and most logicians 
allow it in Particular Negatives. It is commemorated 
by Aristotle in the eighth chapter of the second 
book of his Topics: it is there called the inverse con- 
secution from contradictions. 

I shall here mention to you some mnemonic verses 
in which the doctrine of conversion is expressed. 

1°. Regarding conversion as limited to the Simple 


a [Boethius seems the first who gave 
the name of Conversio per Aecidens. 
With him it is properly both Ampliative 
and Restrictive. ( So Ridiger, De Scrum 
Vcri et Falsi, pp. 250, 303, 2d edit. 1722. 
Fischer Logik , p. 108). It is opposed 
as a conspecies to c. general is; and both 
are Bpecies of c. simplex, which is op- 
posed to Contraposition. See Opera, 
De Syllogismo Categorico, L. i., p. 5S7. 
This conversio is divided primarily 
into c. simplex and c. per contrapositio 


onem. Aristotle does not use iv ptpti, 
as subsequent logicians, for c. dimi - 
riuta. He uses it mainly for particu- 
lar in opposition to universal. (Seo 
Anal. Prior, i. 2, § 4.) They are thus 
wrong in their use of the words acci- 
dental and partial .] 

$ Introductio ad Syllogismos Cate- 
gories , and De Syllogismo Categorico, 
L. i. — K d. 

7 In A nal. Prior., f. 10 b, edit. Aid. 
1520.— Ed. 


LECTURES ON 1.00 IC. 


2fi5 


and Accidental, and excluding altogether Contraposi- lect. 

tion, we have the doctrine contained in the two fol- 

lowing verses. 

E, I, siiupliciter vertendo, sign a manebunt ; 

Aat A cum vertia, aigna minora cape.o 

0 is not convertible. 

2°. Admitting Contraposition as a legitimate species 
of conversion, the whole doctrine is embodied in the 
following verses by Petrus Hispanus. 

F E c I (F E s I) timpliciter, convertitur E v A (E p A) per Acrid. 

Ast O (A e O) per Contrap. ; sic fit oonveraio'tota.0 

Or to condense the three kinds of conversion with 
all the propositions, prejacent and subjacent, in a 
single line : — 

“Ecce, tibi, Simp. ; Armi — oeros, Acc.; Arma, bono, Coni." y 

It may be proper now to make you acquainted with i>i*tinction 
certain distinctions of judgments and propositions, 1;™,™'.’"*' 
which, though not strictly of a logical character, it isgicai.' 
of importance that you should be aware of. “ Consi- 
dered in a material point of view, all judgments are, 
in the first place, distinguished into Theoretical and Theoretical 
Practical. Theoretical are such as declare that a cer-“ a 1 r “ t " 
tain character belongs or does not belong to a certain 
object ; Practical, such as declare that something can 
be or ought to be done, — brought to bear.” 

“ Theoretical, as well as practical, judgments are indenton- 
either Indemonstrable, when they are evident of’iw" 
themselves, — when they do not require and when 

o [Given by Chauvin, Lex Phil., v. Ct. Petrus Tartaretus, I'rpotitio in 
Conrertio. Denzinger, Institutions Summulas Petri Ilispani , Tract, i., f. 

Lot / icat , ii. 140.] 9 b. — Ed.] 

3 See Petrus Hispanus, p. 9 [Sum- y [Hispanus, Summuhe, l. c. Chau- 
mul(e r Tract. L, partic. 4, f. 9, ed. 1505. vin, /. c.] 


 



2fiG 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. they are incapable of proof ; or they are Demonstrable , 

when they are not immediately apparent as true or 

false, but require some external reason to establish 
their truth or falsehood.” 

“ Indemonstrable propositions are absolute prin- 
ciples (ap-^ciL, principia) ; that is, from which in the 
construction of a system of science cognitions alto- 
gether certain not only are, but must be, derived. 
Demonstrable propositions, on the other hand, can at 
best constitute only relative principles ; that is, such 
as, themselves requiring a higher principle for their 
warrant, may yet afford the basis of sundry other 
propositions.” 

Axioms ami If the indemonstrable propositions be of a tlieo- 
i ostuiatos. re j.* ca j c ] iarac t er> they are called Axioms ; if of a prac- 
tical character, Postulates. The former are principles 
of immediate certainty ; the latter, principles of imme- 
diate application.” 

Theorem* “ Demonstrable propositions, if of a theoretical 
r"ms Pr ° b nature, are called Theorems (theoremata) ; if of a 
practical, Problems ( problemata ). The former, as 
propositions of a mediate certainty, require proof ; 
they, therefore, consist of a Thesis and its Demonstra- 
tion ; the latter, as of mediate application, suppose a 
Question (qiuestio) and its Solution {resolutio).” 

“ As species of the foregoing, there are, likewise, 
Corollaries, distinguished Corollaries (consectaria, corollaria ), that 
is, propositions which flow without a new proof out 
of theorems or postulates previously demonstrated. 
Propositions whose validity rests on observation or 
Kx penmen* experiment are called Experiential, Experimental 
lion*. pro]>ositions ( empiremata , expenentice, experunenta). 
Hypotheses. IT i/putheses, that is, propositions which are assumed 
with probability, in order to explain or prove some- 


LECTURES ON LOOTC. 


2G7 


thing else which cannot otherwise be explained or 
proved. Lemmata, that is, propositions borrowed 
from another science in order to serve as subsidiary 
propositions in the science of which we treat. Finally, 
Scholia, that is, propositions which only serve as illus- 
trations of what is considered in chief. The clearest 
and most appropriate examples of these various kinds 
of propositions are given in mathematics.” a 


a Ksser, Logik , § 79, pp. 147, 148 . — Kd. [Compare Krug, Loyik, §§ 67, 68.] 


LECT. 

XIV. 


Lemmata. 


Scholia. 


 



208 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XV. 


The act of 
Reasoning, 
— what. 


LECTURE XV. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OP THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — THE DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

REASONING IN GENERAL SYLLOGISMS — THEIR 

DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO INTERNAL FORM. 

In my last Lecture, I terminated the Doctrine of 
Judgments, and now proceed to that of Reasonings. 

“When the necessity of the junction or separation of 
a certain subject-notion and a certain predicate-no- 
tion is not manifest from the nature of these notions 
themselves, but when, at the same time, we are desir- 
ous of knowing whether they must be thought as 
inclusive, or as exclusive, of each other, — in this case, 
we find ourselves in a state of doubt or indecision, 
from our ignorance of which of the two contradictory 
predicates must be affirmed or denied of the subject. 
But this doubt can be dissipated, — this ignorance can 
be removed, only in one way, — only by producing in 
us a necessity to connect with, or disconnect from, the 
subject one of the repugnant predicates. And since, 
ex hypothesi, this necessity does not, at least does 
not immediately, arise from the simple knowledge 
of the subject in itself, or of the predicate in it- 
self, or of both together in themselves ; it follows 


 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


269 


that it must be derived from some external source, lkct. 

and derived it can only be, if derived, from some other ' — 

knowledge, which affords us, as its necessary conse- 
quence, the removal of the doubt originally harboured. 

But if this knowledge has for its necessary conse- 
quence the removal of the original doubt, this know- 
ledge must stand to the existing doubt in the relation 
of a general rule ; and, as every rule is a judgment, it 
will constitute a general proposition. But a general 
rule does not simply and of itself reach to the re- 
moval of doubt and indecision ; there is required, 
and necessarily required, over and above, this further 
knowledge, — that the rule has really an application, 
or, what is the same thing, that the doubt really 
stands under the general proposition, as a case which 
can be decided by it as by a general rule. But when 
the general rule has been discovered, and when its 
application to the doubt has likewise been recognised, 
the solution of the doubt immediately follows, and 
therewith the determination of which of the contradic- 
tory predicates must or must not be affirmed of the 
subject ; and this determination is accompanied with 
a consciousness of necessity or absolute certainty.” ° A iihntnted 
simple example will place the matter in a clearer light. 

When the notion of the subject man is given along 
with the contradictory predicates free agent and ne- 
cessary agent, there arises the doubt, — with which of 
these contradictory predicates the subject is to be con- 
nected ; for, as contradictory, they cannot both be 
affirmed of the subject, and, as contradictory, the one 
or the other must be so affirmed ; in other words, I 
doubt whether man be a free agent or not. The no- 
tion man, and the repugnant notions free agent and 

a E&*er, Logil 4 , § 82, p. 153. 


 



270 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XV. 


Tho ex- 
ample given 
is a Reason- 
ing in tho 
whole of 
Kxtcnsion, 
and raav he 
represented 
bv three 
circle*. 


necessary agent, do not, in themselves, afford a solu- 
tion of the doubt ; and I must endeavour to discover 
some other notion which will enable me to decide. 
Now, taking the predicate free agent, this leads me 
to the closely connected notion morally responsible 
agent, which let it be supposed that I otherwise know 
to be necessarily a free agent, I thus obtain the pro- 
position, — Every morally responsible agent is a free 
agent. But this proposition does not of itself contain 
the solution of the doubt, for it may still be asked, does 
the notion morally responsible agent constitute a pre- 
dicate which appertains to the notion of man, the sub- 
ject 1 This question is satisfied, if it is recognised 
that the notion man involves in it the notion of a 
morally responsible agent. I can then say, — Man is a 
morally responsible agent. These two propositions 
being thus formed, and applied to the subsisting 
doubt, the removal of this doubt follows of itself ; and 
in place of the previous indecision, whether man be a 
free agent or not, there follows, with the conscious- 
ness of necessity or absolute certainty, the connected 
judgment that, Man is also a free agent. The whole 
process, — the whole series of judgments, — will stand 
thus: — 

Every morally responsible ayent is a free agent ; 

Man is a morally responsible agent ; 

Therefore, man is a free agent. 

Let us consider in what relation the different consti- 
tuent parts of this process stand to each other. It is 
evident that the whole process consists of three no- 
tions and their mutual relations. The three notions 
are, free agent, responsible- agent, and man. Their 
mutual relations are all those of whole and part, 
— and whole and part in the quantity of exten- 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


271 


sion ; for the notion free agent is seen to contain 
under it the notion responsible agent , and the notion 
responsible agent to contain under it the notion man . 
Thus, these three notions are like three circles of three 
various extensions severally, contained one within 
another ; and it is evident, that the process by which 
we recognise that the narrowest notion, man , is con- 
tained under the widest notion, responsible agent , is 
precisely the same by which we should recognise the 
inmost circle to be contained in the outmost, if we 
were only supposed to know the relation of these to- 
gether by their relation to the middle 
circle. Let ABC denote the three 
circles. Now, ex hypothesis we know, 
and only know, that A contains B, and 
that B contains C ; but as it is a self- 
evident principle that a part of the part is a part of the 
whole, we cannot, with our knowledge that B contains 
C, and is contained in A, avoid recognising that C is 
contained in A. This is precisely the case with the 
three notions, — -free agents — responsible agent y — man ; 
not knowing the relation between the notions free agent 
and man y but knowing that free agent contained under 
it responsible agents and that responsible agent contain- 
ed under it man y we, upon the principle, that the part 
of a part is a part of the whole, are compelled to think, 
as a necessary consequence, that free agent contains 
under it man . It is thus evident, that the process 
shown in the example adduced is a mere recognition 
of the relation of three notions in the quantity of ex- 
tension ; our knowledge of the relation of two of these 
notions to each other being not given immediately, 
but obtained through our knowledge of their relation 
to the third. 


A 



LK(T. 

XV. 


272 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XV. 

Tlie reason- 


But let us consider this process a little closer. The 
relations of the three notions, in the above example, 
ing B ofEx-* are those given in the quantity of Breadtli or Exten- 
bTexhiK 8 ^ on - But every notion has not only an Extensive, 
hension— but likewise an Intensive, quantity, — not only a 
S£tl! Iu * quantity in breadth, but a quantity in depth ; and 
these two quantities stand to each other, as we have 
seen, 0 always in a determinate ratio, — the ratio of inver- 
sion. It would, therefore, appear, a priori , to be a 
necessary presumption, that if notions bear a certain 
relation to each other in the one quantity, they must 
bear a counter relation to each other in the other 
quantity ; consequently, that if we are able, under the 
quantity of extension, to deduce from the relations of 
two notions to a third their relation to each other, a 
correspondent evolution must be competent of the 
same notions, in the quantity of comprehension. Let 
us try whether this theoretical presumption be war- 
ranted a posteriori , and by experiment, and whether, 
in the example given, the process can be inverted, and 
the same result obtained with the same necessity. 
That example, as in extension, was : — 


All resjxmsible aye nix arc free agent* ; 
But man is a responsible agent ; 
Therefore , man is a free agent. 


In other words, — the notion responsible agent is con- 
tained under the notion free agent ; but the notion 
man is contained under the notion responsible agent , 
therefore, on the principle, that the part of a part is a 
part of the whole, the notion man is also contained 
under the notion free agent. Now, on the general 
doctrine of the relation of the two quantities, we must, 

a See above, p. 146. — Ed. 


 


LECTUIIES ON LOGIC. 


273 


if we would obtain the same result in the compre- 
hensive which is here obtained under the extensive 
quantity, invert the whole process, that is, the notions 
which in extension are wholes become in comprehen- 
sion parts, and the notions which in the former are 
parts, become in the latter wholes. Thus the notion 
free agent , which, in the example given, was the great- 
est whole, becomes, in the counter process, the smallest 
part, and the notion man , which was the smallest part, 
now becomes the greatest whole. The notion respon- 
sible agent remains the middle quantity or notion in 
both, but its relation to the two other notions is re- 
versed ; what was formerly its part being now its 
whole, what was formerly its whole being now its 
part. The process will, therefore, be thus explicitly 
enounced : — 

The notion man comprehend s in it the notion responsible agent ; 

But the notion responsible agent comprehends in it the notion free 
agent ; 

i Therefore , on the principle , that the part of a part is a part of 
the whole , the notion man also comprehends in it the notion 
free agent. 

Or, in common language : — 

Man is a responsible agent ; 

But’ a responsible agent is a free agent ; 

Therefore , man is a free agent. 

This reversed process, in the quantity of comprehen- 
sion, gives, it is evident, the same result as it gave in 
the quantity of extension. For, on the supposition, 
that we did not immediately know that the notion 
man comprehended free agent , but recognised that 
man comprehended responsible agent f and that re- 
sponsible agent comprehended free agent , we neces- 
sarily are compelled to think, in the event of this 

VOL. i. s 


LECT. 

xv. 


274 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. recognition, that the notion man comprehends the 
1_ notion free agent. 

The copula It is only necessary further to observe, that in the 
l!nd comp'™- one process, — that, to wit, in extension, the copula is, 
counter ° * means is contained under, whereas in the other, it 
moaning. means com p re hends { n . Thus the proposition, — God 
is merciful, viewed as in the one quantity, signifies 
God is contained under merciful, that is, the notion 
God is contained under the notion merciful ; viewed 
as in the other, means, — God comprehends merciful, 
that is, the notion God comprehends in it the notion 
merciful. 

Now, this process of thought, (of which I have en- 
deavoured to give you a general notion), is called 
Reasoning ; hut it has, likewise, obtained a variety of 
other designations. The definition of this process, 
with its principal denominations, I shall include in 
the following paragraph : — 

! LIII. — Eeasoning is an act of mediate com- 
parison or Judgment ; for to reason is to recog- 
nise that two notions stand to each other in the 
relation of a whole and its parts, through a 
recognition, that these notions severally stand in 
the same relation to a third. Considered as 
an act, Reasoning or Discourse of Reason, (to 
\oyl(,ecr6ai, Xoyurfio s, Sidroia, to SutvoeicrOai), is, 
likewise, called the act or process of Argumenta- 
tion, ( argumentationis ), of Ratiocination, ( ratio - 
cinationis), of Inference or Illation, ( inferendi ), 
of Collecting, ( colligendi ), of Concluding, ( con - 
chidendi), of Syllogising, (row avXXoyfeaOaL, 
barbarously syllogisandi). The term Reasoning 
is, likewise, given to the product of the act ; and 


Par. liii. 
Definition 
of the pro- 
ce*§ of 
Reasoning, 
with the 
principal 
denomina- 
tion! of pro- 
cess and 
product. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


275 


a reasoning, in this sense, ( ratiocination ratioci- lect. 

nium ), is, likewise, called an Argumentation , L_ 

(argumentatio) ; also frequently an Argument , 

(< argumentum ), an Inference or Illation , (illatio); 
a Collection, {collect io), a Conclusion, (conclusio, 
crufinepaor/xa) ; and, finally, a Syllogism , (crvWo- 
yio-fibs). 

A few words in explanation of these will suffice ; Explication, 
and, first, of the thing and its definition, thereafter of 
its names. 

In regard to the act of Reasoning, nothing can be 1 . The Act 
more erroneous than the ordinary distinction of this fng. ca8on 
process, as the operation of a faculty different in kind 
from those of Judgment and Conception. Concep- 
tion, Judgment, and Reasoning, are in reality only 
various applications of the same simple faculty, that 
of Comparison or Judgment. I have endeavoured to 
show, that concepts are merely the results, ren- 
dered permanent by language, of a previous process 
of comparison ; that judgment is nothing but com- 
parison, or the results of comparison, in its immediate 
or simpler form ; and, finally, that reasoning is 
nothing but comparison in its mediate or more 
complex application.® It is, therefore, altogether a mwon- 
erroneous to maintain, as is commonly done, that a organic 

• 1 Til whole. 

reasoning or syllogism is a mere decompound whole, 
made up of judgments ; as a judgment is a compoimd 
whole, made up of concepts. This is a mere mecha- 
nical mode of cleaving the mental phenomena into 
parts ; and holds the same relation to a genuine 
analysis of mind which the act of the butcher does 
to that of the anatomist. It is true, indeed, that a 


a Soe above, pp. 116, 137 . — Ed. 


27G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lf.ct. syllogism can be separated into three parts or pro- 

— positions ; and that these propositions have a certain 

meaning, when considered apart, and out of relation 
to each other. But when thus considered, they lose 
the whole significance which they had when united 
in a reasoning ; for their whole significance consisted 
in their reciprocal relation, — in the light which they 
mutually reflected on each other. We can certainly 
hew down an animal body into parts, and consider its 
members apart ; but these, though not absolutely void 
of all meaning, when viewed singly and out of relation 
to their whole, have lost the principal and peculiar 
significance which they possessed as the coefficients 
of a one organic and indivisible whole. It is the same 
with a syllogism. The parts which, in their organic 
union, possessed life and importance, when separated 
from each other, remain only enunciations of vague 
generalities, or of futile identities. Though, when 
expressed in language, it be necessary to analyse a 
reasoning into parts, and to state these parts one after 
another, it is not to be supposed that in thought one 
notion, one proposition, is known before or after 
another ; for, in consciousness, the three notions and 
their reciprocal relations constitute only one identical 
and simultaneous cognition. 

Error of The logicians have indeed all treated the syllogism 
ti^irtrou” as if this w r ere not the case. They have considered 
Syllogism, one proposition as naturally the last in expression, 
and this they have accordingly' called the conclusion ; 
whilst the other two, as naturally going before the 
conclusion, they have styled the premises, forming 
together what they call the antecedent. The two 
premises they have also considered as the one the 
greater, (major), the other the less, (minor), by exclu- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


277 


sive reference to the one quantity of extension. All 
this, however, is, in my view, completely erroneous. 
For we may, in the theory of Logic, as we actually 
do in its practical applications, indifferently enounce 
what is called the conclusion first or last. In the 
latter case, the conclusion forms a thesis, and the 
premises its grounds or reasons ; and instead of the 
inferential therefore, {ergo, apa), we would employ 
the explicative for. The whole difference consists 
in this, — that the common order is synthetic, the other 
analytic ; and as, to express the thought, we must 
analyse it, the analytic order of statement appears 
certainly the most direct and natural." On the sub- 
ordinate matter of the order of the premises, I do not 
here touch. 

But to speak of the process in general : — without 
the power of reasoning we should have been limited in 
our knowledge, (if knowledge of such a limitation 
would deserve the name of knowledge at all), — 1 say 
without reasoning we should have been limited to a 
knowledge of what is given by immediate intuition ; 
we should have been unable to draw any inference 
from this knowledge, and have been shut out from 
the discovery of that countless multitude of truths, 
which, though of high, of paramount importance, are 
not self-evident. This faculty is, likewise, of pecu- 
liar utility in order to protect us, in our cogita- 
tions, from error and falsehood, and to remove these 
if they have already crept in. For every, the most 
complex, web of thought may be reduced to simple 
syllogisms; and when this is done, their truth or false- 
hood, at least in a logical relation, flashes at once into 
view. 

a Aristotle's Analytics arc synthetic. 


LECT. 

XV. 


Utility of 
the process 
of reason- 
ing. 


 



278 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Of the terms by which this process is denominated, 
— — Reasoning is a modification from the French rais - 
whTc}7thc by onner, (and this a derivation from the Latin ratio), 
iicaaoning and corresponds to ratiocinatio, which has indeed been 
natc(L° mi " immediately transferred into our language under the 
Rca*oning. form ratiocination. Ratiocination denotes properly 

Ratiociua- . 1 ' 

tion. the process, but, improperly, also the product of rea- 
soning ; . Ratiocinium marks exclusively the product. 
The original meaning of ratio was computation , and, 
from the calculation of numbers, it was transferred to 
Discourse, the process of mediate comparison in general. Dis- 
course , ( cliscursus , Sia^ota), indicates the operation of 
comparison, the running backwards and forwards be- 
tween the characters or notes of objects, — (discim'ere 
inter notas , hiavoeiarOaC ) : this term may, therefore, be 
properly applied to the Elaborative Faculty in general, 
which I have thus called the Discursive. The terms 
discourse and discursus , as hiavoia, are, however, often, 
nay generally, used for the reasoning process, strictly 
considered, and discursive is even applied to denote 
mediate, in opposition to intuitive, judgment, as is 
done by Milton.® The compound term discourse of 
reason P unambiguously marks its employment in 
Ay—* this sense. Argumentation is derived from argumen - 
Argument, tari, which means argumentis uti ; argument again, 
argumentum , — what is assumed in order to argue 
something, — is properly the middle notion in a reason- 
ing, — that through which the conclusion is established ; 
and by the Latin Rhetoricians it was defined, — “pro- 

o Paradise Lost, v. 4 86, — 0 Shakespeare, Hamlet, act 1 , sc. 2, — 

“ Whence the soul “ A beast, that wants discourse 

Reason receives, and reason ifl her of reason, 

being, Would have mourned longer.” 

Discursive or intuitive ; discourse Hooker, E. P., iii. 8, 18 — “ By dia- 
ls oftest yours.” course of reason, aided with the in- 

— Ed. lluenco of divine grace.” — E d. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


279 


babile inventum ad faciendam fidem.”® It is often, lect. 
however, applied as coextensive with argumentation. — . X - V -'— 
Inference or illation, (from infero), indicates the carry- inference, 
ing out into the last proposition what was virtually 
contained in the antecedent judgments. To conclude, t 0 conclude. 
( concludere ), again, signifies the act of connecting and 
shutting into the last proposition the two notions 
which stood apart in the two first. A conclusion, Conciiuioc. 
( conclusio ), is usually taken, in its strict or proper 
signification, to mean the last proposition of a reason- 
ing ; it is sometimes, however, used to express the 
product of the whole process. To syllogise means tOToSyiio- 
form syllogisms. Syllogism, (<rv\Xoyicr/ios), seems ori- y “ ogiTO ,. 
ginally, like ratio, to have denoted a computation, — an 
adding up, — and, like the greater part of the technical 
terms of Logic in general, was borrowed by Aristotle 
from the mathematicians/ This primary meaning of 
these two words favours the theory of those philoso- 
phers who, like Hobbes 7 and Leidenfrost,® maintain 
that all thought is in fact at bottom only a calcula- 
tion, a reckoning. SvXXoyioyAos may, however, be 
considered as expressing only what the composition of 
the word denotes, — a collecting together ; for crvXkoyi£- 
e<r0au comes from a-vWeyeiv, which signifies to collect .* 


a Cicero, Oratorios Partition* s, c. 2. 
Cf. Discussions, p. 149 . — Ed. 

jB [See Piccartua, Orff. A rutt., pp. 467, 
468. Ammoniua, In Quinque Voces, 
f. 1. Philoponus, In An. Prior , f. 
17 b . Paciua, Com. in Orff., pp. 118, 122. 
Bertius, Loff. Perip. p. 119. But see 
Waite, Orffanon I. p. 384. [Schulze, 
LoffiJc, § 70, p. 101. Discussions, p. 
667, note.— Ed.] 

y Leviathan, Pt. I. c. 5 ; Computalio 
site Loffica, c. 1. Cf. Stewart, Ele- 
ments, P. ii. c. ii. § 3 ; Works, vol. iii. 
p. 132 et seq. — Ed. 

8 De Mente Humana , c. viii. §§ 4, 
10, pp. 112, 118, ed. 1793 . — Ed. 


c Eugenios, A oytK^i, p. 405, et fbi 
Blemmidaa [Kal rb ptv ovopa, 8rt 
trvWoyf] tis itrr\ \6ytav irA u6ruv iv 
aintp . . . '0 8$ B\*pp\8. iv ’Eiri- 

rop. A oy. Kt<p. Act, “I1 ot$ 8$ k at abrb 
rb oupiripa opa xaXtTrai cn/AAo* 

yitrpis . . . us <rv\\iyov r^y iy ir act 
rots ftpois 8t«nrapp4yi)v itw68ti^iv . y ' — 
Cf. Zabnrella, In Anal. Post., 1. 1, 
Opera Loffica, p. 640. “ 2,v\\oyi<r- 
pbs, non ovWoyij ruy A 6yuy, aed quasi 
truAAoyl) rou \6yov, collect io rationis ; 
ratio autem colligi dicitur, dum con* 
cluaio infertur ; quare a conclusion® 
potiuB, quam a propoaitionibus dictus 
eat ayllogiamua/*— Ed.] 


 



280 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lkct. Finally, in Latin, a syllogism is called collect io, and to 
— — reason colligere. This refers to the act of collecting in 
Coiicciio. t j ie conc l U gion the two notions scattered in the premises. 

“ From what has already been said touching the 
The prnemi character of the reasoning process, it is easy to see 

conditions . . . J 

of.yiiogi.m, what are the general conditions which every syllogism 
supposes. For, as the essential nature of reasoning 
consists in this, — that some doubt should be removed 
by the application to it of some decisive general rule, 
there are to every syllogism three, and only three, requi- 
sites necessary ; 1°, A doubt, — which of two contra- 
dictory predicates must be affirmed of a certain sub- 
ject, — the problem or question, (problems, quassitum) ; 
2°, The application of a decisive general rule to the 
doubt ; and, 3°, The general rule itself. But these 
requisites, when the syllogism is constructed and ex- 
pressed, change their places ; so that the general rule 
stands first, the application of it to the doubt stands 
second, and the decision in regard to the doubt 
itself stands last. Each of these necessary constituents 
of a syllogism forms by itself a distinct, though a cor- 
relative, proposition ; every syllogism, therefore, con- 
tains three propositions, and these three propositions, 
in their complement and correlation, constitute the 
syllogism.”* It will be proper, however, here to dictate 
a paragraph, expressive of the denominations techni- 
cally given to the parts, which proximately make up 
the syllogism. 

IT LIV. A Reasoning or Syllogism is composed 
of two parts, — that which determines or precedes, 
and that which follows or is determined. The 
one is called the Antecedent, ( aniecedens ) ; the 

a Esscr, Logik, § 03, p. 150. 


Par. LTV. 
Denomina- 
tion* of the 
part* which 
proximately 
make up the 
m Uogisrn. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


281 


other, the Consequent, ( consequens ). The Ante- 
cedent comprises the two propositions, the one 
of which enounces the general rule, and the other 
its application. These, from their naturally pre- 
ceding the Consequent, are called the Premises 
{ propositiones prcemissce, sumptiones, membra 
antecedentia , XrjppaT a). Of the premises, the 

one which enounces the general rule, or the 
relation of the greatest quantity to the lesser, is 
called the Major Premise , or Major Proposition , 
or the Proposition simply, {propositio major, pro - 
posit io prima, propositio , sumptum, sumptio ma- 
jor, sumptio, thesis, expositio, intentio, 7rp6(rXr)\jjL<;, 
TrpoTaaris rj peitjwv, Xrjppa to pel tpv). The other 
premise, which enounces the application of the ge- 
neral rule, or the relation of the lesser quantity to 
the least, is called the Minor Premise, the Minor 
Proposition, the Assumption , or the Subsumption, 
{ propositio minor, propositio altera, assumptio , 
subsumptum , subsumplio, sumptio mino?', TrpoTao-is 
rj iXa TT<i)v, Xrjppa to eXarrov). It is manifest 
that, in the counter quantities of Breadth and 
Depth, the two premises will hold an opposite 
relation of major and minor, of rule and appli- 
cation. The Consequent is the final proposi- 
tion, which enounces the decision, or the relation 
of the greatest quantity to the least, and is called 
the Conclusion, { conclusio , conclusum, propositio 
conclusa, collectio, complexio, summa, connexio , 
illatio, intentio, and, in Greek, crupnepaapa, to 
avvayopevov , a to hrifyepopevov) . This part is 
usually designated by the conjunction, Therefore, 
{ergo, a pa), and its synonyms. The Conclusion 

a [Eugenios, AoyiK^ passim.] 


LF.CT. 

XV. 


 


282 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XV. 


Explica- 

tion. 

Antecedent 
and Conse- 
quent. 


Promises. 


Major. 


Minor. 


is the Problem, ( problema ), Question, ( queestio , 
queesitum), which was originally asked, stated 
now as a decision." The Problem is usually omit- 
ted in the expression of a syllogism ; but is one 
of its essential parts. The whole nomenclature 
of the syllogistic parts, be it observed, has refer- 
ence to the one-sided views of the logicians in 
regard to the process of reasoning/ 

The Syllogism is divided into two parts, the Ante- 
cedent and the Consequent : — the antecedent compre- 
hending the two propositions, in which the middle 
notion is compared with the two notions wo would 
compare together ; and the consequent comprising the 
one proposition, which explicitly enounces the relation 
implicitly given in the prior of these two notions to 
each other. 

The two propositions which constitute the antece- 
dent are called, among other names, the Premises. Of 
these the proposition expressing the relation of whole, 
which one of the originally given notions holds to the 
assumed or middle notion as its part, is called, among 
other appellations, the Major Proposition, the Major 
Premise, or The Proposition, ko.t The other 

proposition of the antecedent enouncing the relation of 
whole, which the assumed or middle notion holds to 
the other of the given notions as its part, is called, 
among other appellations, the Minor Proposition, the 
Minor Premise, the Assumption, or the Subsumption. 

a [See Alex. Aphrodisiensis, In Vert, L. ii. p. C06 et *eq., ed. 1555. 
Anal. Prior., i. c. 4, f. 17 b . Boethius, — Ed.] Bachm.onn, Loyik, p. 184. 
In Top tea Ciceroni*, 1. i., Opera , p. F&cciolati, Sextus Empiricus. [Fac- 
764.) ciolati, Btulinunta Loyica, c. iiL 

£ [Seo R. Agricola, De Invention e p. 83, ed. 1750. Sextus Empiricus, 
Dialectics, L. ii. c. xiv. pp. 401, 417, Ilypotyposa , L. ii. p. 86 et alibi . — 
420. Vivos, Opera [t. i., Dt Centura Ed.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


283 


These, as terms of relation, vary, of course, with the 
relation in the counter quantities. The one proposi- 
tion which constitutes the consequent is called, among 
other appellations, the Conclusion. Perhaps the best 
names for these three relative propositions of a syllo- 
gism would be Sumption , Subsumption , Conclusion , 
as those which express most briefly and naturally the 
nature and reciprocal dependence of the three judg- 
ments of a syllogism. In the first place, the expres- 
sions Sumption and Subsumption are appropriate 
logical expressions, in consequence of their both show- 
ing that Logic considers them, not as absolutely, but 
only as hypothetically true : for Logic does not war- 
rant the truth of the premises of a syllogism ; it only, 
on the supposition that these premises are true, guar- 
antees the legitimacy of the inference, — the necessity 
of the conclusion. It is on this account that the pre- 
mises have, by the Greek logicians, been very properly 
styled \>J/x/AaTa, 0 corresponding to the Latin sump- 
tiones; and were there any necessity to resort to 
Greek, the Major Proposition, which I would call 
Sumption , ( sumptio ), might be well denominated 
Lemma simply; and the Minor Proposition, which 
I would call the Subsumption, ( subsumptio ), might be 
well denominated the Hypolemma . In the second 
place, though both premises are sumptions or lem- 
mata, yet the term sumption , as specially applied to 
the Major Premise, is fully warranted both by pre- 
cedent and principle. For, in like manner, the major 
proposition, — the major lemma, has always obtained 
both from the Greek and Latin logicians the generic 
term ; — it has been called, The Proposition , The 
Lemma , (pi 'opositio, rj npoTao-us, to Xrjppa) ; and as 

a See Alexander, In Anal. Prior., f. 14, b. Scholia, ed. Brandis, p. 150. — Ed. 


LRCT. 

XV. 


Sumption, 
Subsump- 
tion, anu 
Conclusion. 


Grounds of 
their adop- 
tion as best 
names for 
the threo 
propositions 
of a syllo- 
gism. 


Lemma. 


Hypolem- 

ma. 


284 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lf.ct. this is the judgment which includes and allows both 
xv ' the others, it is well entitled, as the principal proposi- 
tion, to the style and title of the proposition, the 
Auurop- lemma, the sumption by pre-eminence. In the third 
place, the term subsumption is preferable to the term 
assumption, as a denomination of the Minor Premise ; 
for the term subsumption precisely marks out its rela- 
tion of subordination to the major premise, whereas 
the term assumption does not. Assumption would 
indeed, in contrast to subsumption, have been an 
unexceptionable word by which to designate the major 
proposition, had it not been that logicians have very 
generally employed it to designate the minor, so that 
to reverse its application would be productive of 
inevitable confusion. But for this objection, I should 
certainly have preferred the term assumption to that 
of sumption, for the appellation of the major proposi- 
tion ; not that in itself it is a preferable expression, 
but simply because assumption is a word of familiar 
usage in the English language, which sumption and 
subsumption certainly are not. 

Objections The preceding arc reasons why the relative terms 
minMioM of sumption and subsumption ought to be employed, as 
tionauf tile being positively good expressions ; but the expediency 
ordinary “ of their adoption becomes still more manifest, when 
they are compared and contrasted with corresponding 
Major Pro- denominations in ordinary use. For the terms major 

position and . . _ . 

Premia®, proposition and mo jov premise, minor proposition and 
p lum and minor premise, are exposed to various objections. In 
the first place, they are complex and tedious expres- 
sions, whereas sumption and subsumption are simple 
and direct. In the second place, the abbreviations in 
common use, (the major proposition being called the 
major, the minor proposition being called the minor). 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


285 


are ambiguous, not only in consequence of tlieir vague- lect. 

ness in general, but because there are two other parts 1 — 

of the syllogism to which these expressions, major and 
minor , may equally apply. For, as you will soon be 
informed, the two notions which we compare together 
through a third, are called the major and the minor 
terms of the syllogism ; so that when we talk of 
majors and minors in reference to a syllogism, it re- 
mains uncertain whether we employ these words to 
denote the propositions or the terms of a reasoning. 

Still more objectionable are the correlative terms, Pro- 
position and Assumption , as synonyms for the major 
and minor premises. The term proposition is a word Proposition. 

A * ¦* Assump- 

in too constant employment in its vague and general *ion. 
sense, to be unambiguously used in a signification so 
precise and special as the one in question ; and, in 
consequence of this ambiguity, its employment in 
this signification has been in fact long veiy generally 
abandoned. Again, the term assumption does not 
express the distinctive peculiarity of the minor pre- 
mise, — that of being a subordinate proposition, — a 
proposition taken or assumed under another ; this 
word would indeed, as I have noticed, have been 
applied with far greater propriety, had it been used to 
denote the major in place of the minor premise of a 
syllogism. 

These are among the reasons which have inclined 11,0 of 

° . # Sumption 

me to employ, at least along with the more ordinary aml Snb - 

. . ° J sumption 

denominations, the terms sumption and subsumption, sanctioned 

¦* by precctl- 

Nor is it to be supposed, that this usage is destitute eat. 
of precedent, for I could adduce in its favour even the 
high authority of Boethius." In general, and with- • 

a “ Quoniam eniin omnia ayllo- catur; secunda vero assumptio — 
gismus ex propositionibus texitur, Boethius, De Sylloyismo Hypothetic, 
priraa vel propositio, vel sumptum vo- lib. i. — E d. 


286 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lkct. out reference to Logic, it appears marvellous how, in 
xv ~ English philosophy, we could so long do without the 
noun subsumption, and the verb to subsume, for these 
denote a relation which we have very frequently oc- 
casion to express, and to express which there are no 
other terms within our reach. We have already in 
English assumption and assume, presumption and 
presume, consumption and consume, and there is no 
imaginable reason why we should not likewise enrich 
the language, to say nothing of sumption, by the ana- 
logous expressions subsumption and subsume. 

ThcCondu- In regard to the proposition constituting the con- 
sequent of a syllogism, the name which is generally 
bestowed on it, — the Conclusion, — is not exposed to 
any serious objections. There is thus no reason why 
it should be superseded, and there is in fact no other 
term entitled to a preference. So much in reference 
to the terms by which the proximate parts of a syllo- 
gism are denoted. I now proceed to state to you in 
general the Division of Syllogisms into Species deter- 
mined by these parts, and shall then proceed to con- 
sider these several species in detail. But I have first 
of all to state to you a division of Syllogisms, which, 
as comprehending, ought to precede all others. It is 
that of Syllogisms into Extensive and Comprehen- 
sive. 


Par. lv. IT LV. The First Division of Syllogisms is 

.'ianVfs'yi- taken from the different kinds of quantity under 

E^mive 10 which the reasoning proceeds. For while every 

prchcnTvc. syllogism infers that the part of a part is a part 
of the whole, it does this either in the quantity 
of Extension, — the Predicate of the two notions 
compared in the Question and Conclusion being 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


287 


the greatest whole, and the Subject the smallest lect. 
part ; or in the counter quantity of Comprehen- vi- 

sion, — the Subject of these two notions being the 
greatest whole, and the Predicate the smallest 
part. 


After what I have already stated in regard to 
the nature of these opposite quantities, under the 
doctrine of Concepts and Judgments,® and after the 
illustrations I have given you of the possibility of 
conducting any reasoning in either of these quanti- 
ties at will/ — every syllogism in the one quantity 
being convertible into a syllogism absolutely equi- 
valent in the other quantity, — it will be here need- 
less to enlarge upon the nature of this distinction in 
general. This distinction comprehends all others ; 
and its illustration, therefore, supposes that the nature 
of the various subordinate classes of syllogisms should 
be previously understood. It will, therefore, be expe- 
dient, not at present to enter on any distinct consider- 
ation of this division of reasonings, but to show, when 
treating of syllogisms under their various subaltern 
classes, how each is capable of being cast in the mould 
of either quantity, and not, as logicians suppose, in 
that of extensive quantity alone. 

The next distinction of Syllogisms is to be sought Matter m>,i 
for either in the constituent elements of which they 
are composed, or in the manner in which these are 
connected. The former of these is technically called 
the matter of a syllogism, the latter its form. You 
must, however, observe that these terms are here used 
in a restricted meaning. Both matter and form under 
this distinction are included in the form of a syllogism, 

a Soo above, p. 140 et uj. — Ed. 0 See above, p. 272 tt teq. — Ed. 


 


288 


AECTGIIES ON LOGIC. 


lkct. -when we speak of form in contrast to tbe empirical 
— 1— L_ matter which it may contain. This, therefore, is a 
distinction under that form with which Logic, as you 
know, is exclusively conversant ; and the matter here 
spoken of should be called, for distinction’s sake, the 
formal or necessary matter of a syllogism. In this 
sense, then, the matter of a syllogism means merely the 
propositions and terms of which every syllogism is 
necessarily made up ;° whereas, otherwise, the form of 
a syllogism points out the way in which these consti- 
tuents are connected/ This being understood, I 
repeat that the next distinction of syllogisms is to be 
sought for either in their matter or in their form. 

Their form, “ Now in regard to their matter, syllogisms cannot 

the ground . . 

or the next diner, tor every syllogism, without exception, requires 
tinction of the same constituent parts, — a question, the subsump- 
Sjii >gunu. £j on q £ -j. um j er a general ride, and the sumption of 
the general rule itself ; which three constituents, in 
the actual enunciation of a syllogism, change, as I 
have already noticed, their relative situation ; ” y — 
what was first in the order of thought being last in 
the order of expression. 

The form “ The difference of Syllogisms can, therefore, only 
twoLdfT be sought for in their different forms ; so that their 
External, distinctions are only formal. But the form of a syllo- 
gism, considered in its greatest generality, is of a two- 
fold kind, viz. either an Internal and Essential, or an 
External and Accidental. The former of these depends 
on the relations of the constituent parts of the syllo- 


a Proximate and remote matter, tionum, proxima vero Hunt proposi- 
Marginal Jotting. [See Hurtado de tiones ipsa?, quibuB coalcncit Byllogia- 
Mendoza, Dirput. Phil., Disp. Logieix, mua.” — Ed.] 

t. i. d. x. § 48, p. 465. “ Materia 0 Krug, Logit , § 72, An in., i.— Ed. 

(syllogismi) alia est proxima, alia re- [Cf. Fries, Logit , § 44 ] 

mota. Hernotu sunt termini proposi- y E&>or, Logit, g 85, p. 159. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


289 


gism to each other, as determined by the nature of the 
thinking subject itself ; the latter of these depends on 
the external expression of the constituent parts of the 
syllogism, whereby the terms and propositions are 
variously determined in point of number, position, 
and consecution. We must, therefore, in conformity 
to the order of nature, first of all, consider what classes 
of syllogism are given by their internal or essential 
form ; and thereafter inquire what are the classes 
afforded by their external or accidental modifications. 
First, then, in regard to the Internal or Essential Form 
of Syllogism. 

“ A Syllogism is only a syllogism when the conclu- 
sion follows from the premises with an absolute cer- 
tainty ; and as this certainty is determined by a 
universal and necessary law of thought, there must, 
consequently, be as many kinds of Syllogism as there 
are various kinds of premises affording a consequence 
in virtue of a different law. Between the premises 
there is only one possible order of dependency, for it 
is always the sumption, — the major premise, which, as 
the foundation of the whole syllogism, must first be 
taken into account. And in determining the difference 
of syllogisms, the sumption is the only premise which 
can be taken into account as affording a difference of 
syllogism ; for the minor premise is merely the sub- 
sumption of the lesser quantity of the two notions, 
concerning whose relation we inquire, under the ques- 
tion, and this premise always appears in one and the 
same form, — in that, namely, of a categorical pro- 
position. The same is, likewise, the case in regard to 
the conclusion, and, therefore, we can no more look 
towards the conclusion for a determination of the 
diversity of syllogism than towards the subsumption. 

VOL. i. T 


LECT. 

XV. 


 


290 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lkct. We have thus only to inquire in regard to the various 
xv possible kinds of major proposition.” 0 
Synods™ Now as all sumptions are judgments, and as we 
^ni'nlfto have already found that the most general division of 
toofthSi' judgments, next to the primary distinction of inten- 
¦od the°u« sive and extensive, is into simple and conditional, this 
division of judgments, which, when developed, affords 
the classes of categorical, disjunctive, hypothetical, 
aiuUoudu- PypotPetico-disj unctive propositions, will furnish 
us with all the possible differences of major premises. 
“ It is also manifest that in any of these aforesaid pro- 
positions, — (categorical, disjunctive, hypothetical, and 
hypothetico-disj unctive), — a decision of the question, 
— which of two repugnant predicates belongs to a 
certain subject, — can be obtained according to a 
universal and necessary law. In a categorical sump- 
tion, this is competent through the laws of Identity 
and Contradiction ; for what belongs or does not 
belong to the superordinate notion, belongs or does 
not belong to the subordinate. In disjunctive sump- 
tions, this is competent through the law of Excluded 
Middle ; since of all the opposite determinations one 
alone belongs to the object ; so that if one is affirmed 
the others must be, conjunctively, denied, and if one is 
denied the others must be, disjunctively at least, 
affirmed. In hypothetical sumptions, this is competent 
through the law of Reason and Consequent ; for where 
the reason is, there must be the consequent, and where 
the consequent is, there must be the reason.”* 3 There 


a Esaer, Logik, § 85. — Ed. son and Consequent is not admitted 

£ See Esaer, Zo'/ii-, §80, p. 161. This as a law of thought. See above, 
classification of syllogisms cannot be p. 86, note a. In a note by Sir W. 
regarded as expressing the author's Hamilton, appended to Mr Baynee’s 
final view ; according to which, as Essay on the New Analytic of Logical 
bafore observed, the principle of Rea- Forms , the author’s later view is cx- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


291 


are thus obtained three or four great classes of Syllo- lect. 
gisrns, whose essential characteristics I shall comprise — 
in the following paragraph : — 

1i LVI. Syllogisms are divided into different p«. lvi. 
classes, according as the connection between the ^mmi divi- 
premises and conclusion is determined by the *" 
different fundamental laws, 1®, Of Identity and the law re* 
Contradiction ; 2°, Of Excluded Middle ; 3°, Of mfcSc'. 1 ' 0 
Reason and Consequent ; these several determi- 
nations affording the three classes of Categorical, 
of Disjunctive, and of Hypothetical Syllogisms. 

To these may be added a fourth class, the Ilypo- 
thetico-disjunctive or Ddemmatic Syllogism, which 
is determined by the two last laws in combina- 
tion. 

Before proceeding to a consideration of these seve- Example* 
ral syllogisms in detail, I shall, first of all, give you .pede* »r 
examples of the four species together, in order that ’ )Uog " m ‘ 
you may have, while treating of each, at least a gene- 
ral notion of their differences and similarity. 

1. — Or a Categorical Syllogism. i. Catego- 

Sumption All matter is created ; "***" 

Subsumption But the heavenly bodies are material ; 

Conclusion Therefore, the heavenly bodies are created. 

2. — Or a Disjunctive Syllogism. 2. Di»junc- 

Sumption The hope of immortality is either a rational ex- t " c ’ 

peetation or an illusion ; 

Subsumption But the hope of immortality is a rational expecta- 

tion; 

Conclusion. Therefore, the hope of immortality is not an illusion. 

pressed ns follows : “ All Mediate in- reasoning aro reducible to immediate 
ferenee is one— that incorrectly call- inferences." Compare Vitcuuiont, 
ed Categorical ; for the Conjunctive p. 651 leg. — Ed. 
and Disjunctive forms of Hypothetical 


 


292 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XV. 


3. Hypo- 
thetical. 


4. Hvpo- 

thetico-dis- 

junctive. 


3. — Of an Hypothetical Syllogism. 

Sumption If Logie do not profess to be an instrument of 

invention, the reproach that it discovers nothing 
is unfounded ; 

Subsumption But Logic does not profess to be an instrument of 

invention ; 

Conclusion Therefore, the reproach that it discovers nothing 

is unfounded. 

4. — Of the Dilemma or Hypothetico-disjunctive Syllogism. 


Sumption If man were suited to live out of society, he would 

either be a god or a beast ; 

Subsumption But man is neither a god nor a beast ; 

Conclusion Therefore, he is not suited to live out of Society. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


203 


LECTURE XVI. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS. THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 

INTERNAL FORM. 

A. SIMPLE — CATEGORICAL. — I. DEDUCTIVE 
IN EXTENSION. 

In our last Lecture, I entered on the Division of lect. 

Syllogisms. I first stated to you the principles on 1_ 

which this division must proceed ; I then explained t ^ ap,tula ‘ 
the nature of the first great distribution of Reason- 
ings into those of Intensive and those of Extensive 
Quantity ; and, thereafter, that of the second great 
distribution of reasonings into Simple and Condi- 
tional, the Simple containing a single species, — the 
Categorical ; the Conditional comprising three species, 

— the Disjunctive, the Hypothetical, and Ilypotlietico- 
disjunctive.® These four species, I showed you, were 
severally determined by different fundamental Laws 
of Thought : the Categorical reposing on the laws of 
Identity and Contradiction; the Disjunctive on the 
law of Excluded Middle ; the Hypothetical on the 
law of Reason and Consequent ; and the Hypothe- 
tico-disjunctive on the laws of Excluded Middle and 
Reason and Consequent in combination. 


o Compare above, p. 236. — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


29-t 

lect. I now go on to the special consideration of the first 
XYI ' - of these classes of Syllogism — viz. the Syllogism 
syiul^fm. which has been denominated Categorical. And in 
Sir regard to the meaning and history of the term cate- 
gorical, it will not be necessary to say anything in 
addition to what I have already stated in speaking of 
The term judgments.® As used originally by Aristotle, the term 
cattgoruaL ca ^ t g 0r ^ ca g meant merely affirmative, and was opposed 

to negative. By Theophrastus it was employed in the 
sense of absolute, — simple, — direct, and as opposed to 
conditional ; and in this signification it has continued 
to be employed by all subsequent logicians, without 
their having been aware that Aristotle never employed 
it in the meaning in which alone they used it. 


Par. LVII. 

The Cate- 
gorical Syl- 
logism, — 
what. 


If LVII. A Categorical Syllogism is a reasoning 
whose form is determined by the laws of Identity 
and Contradiction, and whose sumption is thus a 
categorical proposition. In a Categorical Syllo- 
gism there are three principal notions, holding 
to each other the relation of whole and part ; 
and these are so combined together, that they 
constitute three propositions, in which each prin- 
cipal notion occurs twice. These notions are 
called Terms, (termini, opoi), and according as the 
notion is the greatest, the greater, or the least, it 
is called the Major, the Middle, or the Minor 
Term? The Middle Term is called the A rgument, 
(argumentum, Adyos, iricrns) ; the Major and 


a See above, p. 234 et seq. — Ed. p. 343. Hurtado de Mendoza, p. 469. 

0 [On principle of name of Major Diiput. Philosophictr, t. i. ; Ditp. 
and Minor terms, see Alex. Aphro- Logiccc , d. x. § 50 et tseq. Tolosm, 

disiensis, In A n. Prior., L. i. cc. iv. v. 1617. See also Discussion*, p. 666 et 
Philoponus, In An. Prior., L. i. f. 23 b. t eq. — En.j 
Fonseca, lmtit. Dialect L. vi. c. xii. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


295 


Minor Terms are called Extremes ( extrema , aupa). lect. 

If the syllogism proceed in the quantity of Ex - 

tension, (and this form alone has been considered 
by logicians), the predicate of the conclusion is 
the greatest whole, and, consequently, the Major 
Term ; the subject of the conclusion, the smallest 
part, and, consequently, the Minor Term. If the 
syllogism proceed in the quantity of Compre- 
hension, the subject of the conclusion is the 
greatest whole, and, consequently, the Major 
Term ; the predicate of the conclusion, the small- 
est part, and, consequently, the Minor Term. In 
either quantity, the proposition in which the rela- 
tion of the major term to the middle is expressed, 
is the Sumption or Major Premise, and the pro- 
position in which is expressed the relation of the 
middle term to the minor, is the Subsumption or 
Minor Premise. The general forms of a Cate- 
gorical Syllogism under the two quantities are 
consequently the following : — 


AN EXTENSIVE SYLLOGISM. 

B is A 
C is B 

CwA 

All man is mortal ; 

But Cains is a man ; 
Therefore, Cuius is mortal. 


AN INTENSIVE SYLLOGISM. 

CuB 
B is A 

CwA 

Cains is a man ; 

But all man is mortal ; 
Therefore, Cairn is mortal. 


In these examples, you are aware, from what has Expiic*. 
previously been said," that the copula in the two 1 '™' 
different quantities is precisely of a counter meaning ; 
in the quantity of extension, signifying contained 
under ; in the quantity of comprehension, signifying 
contains in it. Thus, taking the several formulae, the 


a Sec above, p. 274 . — Ed. 


 



29G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


Extensive Syllogism will, when explicitly enounced, be 
as follows : — 

The Middle term B is contained under the Major term A ; 

But the Minor term C is contained under the Middle term B ; 
Therefore, the Minor term C is also contained under the Major 
term A. 

Or, to take the concrete example : — 

The Middle term all men is contained under the Major term 
mortal ; 

But the Minor term Cuius is contained under the Middle term 
all men ; 

Therefore, the Minor term Cuius is also contained under the 
Major term mortal. 

of the in- On the contrary the Intensive Syllogism, when ex- 
plicated, is as follows : — 

The Major term C contains in it the Middle term B ; 

But the Middle term B contains in it the Minor term A ; 

Therefore, the Major term C also contains in it the Minor term A. 

Or, in the concrete example : — 

The Major term Cains contains in it the Middle term man ; 

But the Middle term man contains in it the Minor term mortal; 

Therefore, the Major term Cains also contains in it the. Minor 
term mortal. 

Thus you see that by reversing the order of the two 
premises, and by reversing the meaning of the copula, 
we can always change a categorical syllogism of the 
one quantity into a categorical syllogism of the other. 0 

In this paragraph is enounced the general nature of 
a categorical syllogism, as competent in both the 
quantities of extension and comprehension, or, with 
more propriety, of comprehension and extension ; for 
comprehension, as prior to extension in the order of 

a Not in Inductive Syllogisms.-— Jotting. [See below, p. 323 .— Ed.] 


LKCT. 

XVI. 


Example of 
the Exten- 
sive Cate- 
gorical Syl- 
logism. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


297 


nature and of knowledge, ought to stand first. But 
as all logicians, with the doubtful exception of Aris- 
totle, have limited their consideration to that process 
of reasoning given in the quantity of extension, to the 
exclusion of that given in the quantity of compre- 
hension, it will be proper, in order to avoid misappre- 
hension, to place some of the distinctions expressed in 
this paragraph in a still more explicit contrast. 

In the reasonings under both quantities, the words 
expressive of the relations and of the things related 
are identical. The things compared in both quantities 
are the same in nature and in number. In each there 


LECT. 

xvi. 


The reason- 
ing in Com- 
prehension 
and that in 
Extension 
explicitly 
compared 


are three notions, three terms, and three propositions, trusted, 
combined in the same complexity ; and, in each 
quantity, the same subordination of a greatest, a 
greater, and a least. The same relatives and the 
same relations are found in both quantities. But 
though the relations and the relatives be the same, 
the relatives have changed relations. For while the 
relation between whole and part is the one uniform 
relation in both quantities, and while this relation is 
thrice realised in each between the same terms ; yet, 
the term which in the one quantity was the least, is 
in the other the greatest, and the term which in both 
is intermediate, is in the one quantity contained by 
the term which in the other it contained. 

Now, you are to observe that logicians, looking Narrow and 
only to the reasoning competent under the quantity SSSm 
of extension, and, therefore, looking only to the possi- of thf m““ 
bility of a single relation between the notions or terms imi Minor 0 ’ 
of a syllogism, have, in consequence of this one-sided ivrm *’ 
consideration of the subject, given definitions of these 
relatives, which are true only when limited to the 
kind of reasoning which they exclusively contem- 


 


208 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVI. 


1. Major. 


2. Minor. 


3. Middle. 


Nomencla- 
ture of 
Major, 
Minor, and 
Middle 
terras. 


plated. This is seen in their definitions of the Major, 
Middle, and Minor Terms. 

In regard to the first, they all simply define the 
Major term to be the predicate of the conclusion. 
This is true of the reasoning under extension, but of 
that exclusively. For the Major term, that is, the 
term which contains both the others — in the reasoning 
of comprehension, is the subject of the conclusion. 
Again, the Minor term they all simply define to be 
the subject of the conclusion ; and this is likewise 
true only of the reasoning under extension : for, in the 
reasoning under comprehension, the Minor term is the 
predicate of the conclusion. Finally, they all simply 
define the Middle term as that which is contained 
under the predicate, and contains under it the subject 
of the conclusion. But this definition, like those of 
the two other terms, must be reversed as applied to 
the reasoning under comprehension. I have been 
thus tediously explicit, in order that you should be 
fully aware of the contrast of the doctrine I propose, 
to what you will find in logical books ; and that you 
may be prepared for the further development of this 
doctrine, — for its application in detail. 

In regard to the nomenclature of Major, Minor, and 
Middle terms, it is not necessary to say much. The 
expression term, ( terminus , opos), was first employed 
by Aristotle, and, like the greater part of his logical 
vocabulary, was, as I have observed, borrowed from 
the language of mathematics.® You are aware that 
the word term is applied to the ultimate constituents 
both of propositions and of syllogisms. The terms of 
a proposition are the subject and predicate. The terms 
of a syllogism are the three notions which in their 

a See Sclieibler, [Opera Loyica, Pars. iii. c. 2, p. 398, and above, p. 279, 

note /3 . — Ed.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


299 


threefold combination form the three propositions of lect. 

a syllogism. The major and minor terms Aristotle, 

by another mathematical metaphor, calls the extremes 
(aKpa), the major and minor extremes ; and his defi- Aristotle's 
nition of these and of the middle term is, unlike those tho terras 
of the subsequent logicians, so general, that it will^ a L? 11 °' 
apply with perfect propriety to a syllogism in either 
quantity. “ I call,” he says, “ the middle term that 
which is both itself in another and another in it ; and 
which, by its position, lies in the middle ; the extremes 
I call both that which is in another and that in which 
another is.” ° And in another place he says, “ I define 
the major extreme that in which the middle is ; the 
minor extreme that which is subordinated to the 
middle.” ^ 

I may notice that the part of his definition of the His dcfmi- 
middle term, where he describes it as “ that which, by Midd°io ° 
its position, lies in the middle,” does not apply to the middle by 
mode in which subsequent logicians enounce the syllo- applicable 
gism. For let A be the major, B the middle, and C iH ibidT* 0 
the minor term of an Extensive Syllogism, this will logicians 

¦, i.i enounce the 

be expressed thus : — syllogism. 

Sumption B is A, t. e. B is contained under A. 

Subsumption C is B, i. e. C is contained under B. 

Conclusion C is A, i. e. C is also contained under A. 

In this syllogism the middle term B stands first But quite 
and last in the premises, and, therefore, Aristotle’s uf tie rca- 
definition of the middle term, not only as middle by Comprchcn- 
nature, containing the minor and contained by the 8, ° u ‘ 
major, but as middle by position, standing after the 
major and before the minor, becomes inept. It w T ill 
apply, however, completely to the reasoning in com- 
prehension ; for the extensive syllogism given above 

a Anal. Prior., L. i., c. 4, § 3. & Ibid., § 8. 


300 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lkct. being converted into an intensive, by reversing the 

XVI 0 0 

two premises, it will stand as follows : — 


Sumption C is B, i. c. C contains in it B. 

Subsumption B is A, i. c. B contains in it A. 

Conclusion. C is A, i. c. C also contains in it A. 


It does not, It does not, however, follow from this, that Aristotle 
foiiow^that either contemplated exclusively the reasoning in com- 
contcmpiat- prehension, or that he contemplated the reasonings in 
sively the both quantities ; for it is very easy to state a reason- 
Comprehen- ing in extension, so that the major term shall stand 
first, the middle term second, and the minor last. We 
can state it thus : — 


Sumption A is B, i. e. A contains under it B. 

Subsumption B is C, i. e. B contains under it C. 

Conclusion A is C, i. c . A contains under it C. 


This is as good a syllogism in extension as the first, 
though it is not stated in the mode usual to logicians. 
We may also convert it into a comprehensive syllo- 
gism, by reversing its premises and the meaning of 
the copula, though here also the mode of expression 
will be unusual. 


Sumption B is C, /. e. B is contained in C. 

Subsumption A is B, i. e. A is contained in B. 

Conclusion A is C, /. e. A is contained in C. 


From this you will see, that it is not to the mere 
external arrangement of the terms, but to the nature 
of their relation, that we must look in determining the 
character of the syllogism. 

Mos«t con- Before leaving the consideration of the terms of a 
mo<jo of syllogism, I may notice that the most convenient mode 
BWiogfsm of stating a syllogism in an abstract form is by the 
3 tract form. letters S, P, and M, — S signifying the subject, as P 
the predicate, of the conclusion, and M the middle 
term of the syllogism. This you will be pleased to 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


301 


recollect, as we shall find it necessary to employ this lect. 
notation in showing the differences of syllogisms from _ h 
the different arrangement of their terms. 

I have formerly stated that categorical syllogisms Categorical 
are regulated by the fundamental laws of Identity divide*! into 
and Contradiction ; the law of Identity regulating ac- 
Affirmative, the law of Contradiction, Negative, Cate- the applica- 
goricals. As, however, the laws of Identity and "r 
Contradiction are capable of certain special appliea- MdCon- 
tions, these will afford the ground of a division of under the 
Categorical Syllogisms into a corresponding number wide ^’,1 
of classes. It has been already stated, that all reason- parL 
ing is under the relation of whole and part, and, con- 
sequently, the laws of Identity and Contradiction will 
find their application to categorical syllogisms only 
under this relation. 

But the relation of whole and part may be regarded ti.c relation 
in two points of view ; for we may either look from and pan 
the whole to the parts, or look from the parts to the ga^ici in 
whole. This being the case, may we not apply the vicw.Tud 
principles of Identity and Contradiction in such a way two clasacN 
that we either reason from the whole to the parts, or mg». 
from the parts to the whole ? Let us consider : — look- 
ing at the whole and the parts together on the prin- 
ciple of Identity, we are assured that the whole and 
all its parts are one, — that whatever is true of the 
one is true of the other, — that they are only different 
expressions for the different aspects in which we may 
contemplate what in itself is absolutely identical. On 
the principle, therefore, that the whole is only the sum 
of the parts, I am entitled, on the one hand, looking 
from the whole to its parts, to say with absolute cer- 
tainty, — What belongs to a whole belongs to its part; 
and what does not belong to a whole does not belong to 


 



302 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. its part : and on the other, looking from the parts to 
_ — _ their whole, to say, — What makes up all the parts con- 
stitutes the whole ; and what does not make up all the 
parts does not constitute the whole. Now, these two 
applications of the principles of Identity and Contra- 
diction, as we look from one term of the relation of 
whole and part, or from the other, determine two dif- 
ferent kinds of reasoning. For if we reason down- 
wards, from a containing whole to a contained part, 
we shall have one sort of reasoning which is called 
the Deductive ; whereas, if we reason upwards, from 
the constituent parts to a constituted whole, we shall 
have another sort of reasoning, which is called the 
Inductive. This I shall briefly express in the follow- 
ing paragraph. 

f LVIII. Categorical Syllogisms are Deductive, 
if, on the principles of Identity and Contradic- 
tion, we reason downwards, from a containing 
whole to a contained part ; they are Inductive, 
if, on these principles, we reason upwards, from 
the constituent parts to a constituted whole. 


P»r. LVIII. 

Categorical 
Syllogisms 
divided iuto 
Deductive 
and Indue* 
tive. 


i. Dc<itic- This is sufficient at present to afford you a general 
pridi^'i- conception of the difference of Deductive and Induc- 
ugisnu. £j ve Categoricals. The difference of these two kinds 
of reasoning will be properly explained, when, after 
having expounded the nature of the former, we proceed 
to consider the nature of the latter. We shall now, 
therefore, consider the character of the deductive pro- 
cess, — the process which has been principally and 


certainly most successfully analysed by logicians ; for 
though their treatment of deductive reasoning has 
been one-sided and imperfect, it is not positively 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


303 


erroneous : whereas their analysis of the inductive lect. 

. XVI 

process is at once meagre and incorrect. And, first, — - — 1— 
of the proximate canons by which Deductive Cate- 
goricals are regulated. 

LIX. In Deductive Categoricals the uni-Par.Lix. 
versal laws of Identity and Contradiction take Catcgori- 0 
two modified forms, according as these syllo- canons, 
gisms proceed in the quantity of Comprehen- 
sion, or in that of Extension. The peculiar 
canon by which Intensive Syllogisms of this 
class are regulated, is, — What belongs to the 
predicate belongs also to the subject; what is 
repugnant to the predicate is repugnant also to the 
subject. The peculiar canon by which Extensive 
Syllogisms of this class are regulated, is, — What 
belongs to the genus belongs to the species and 
individual ; what is repugnant to the genus is 
repugnant to the species and individual. Or, 
more briefly, What pertains to the higher class, 
pertains also to the lower. 

Both these laws are enounced by Aristotle,® and Ex P iic»- 
both, from him, have passed into the writings of ' 01i ‘ 
subsequent logicians. The former, as usually ex- 
pressed, is, — Prcedicatum prcedicati esl etiam prcedi- 
catwn subjecti; or, Nota notes est etiam nota rei ipsius. 

The latter is correspondent to what is called the 
Dicta de Omni et de Nullo ; the Dictum de Omni , 
when least ambiguously expressed, being, — Qnicquid 
de omni valet , valet etiam de quibusdam et singulis ; — 
and the Dictum de Nullo being, — Quicquid de nullo 
valet , nec de quibusdam nec de singulis valet. But as 

a Cat eg., c. 3. Anal. Prior., i. 1 . — Ed. 


304 - 


lectures ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVI. 


Connect ion 
of the pro- 
positions 
ami terms 
of the Cate- 
gorical Syl- 
logism illus- 
trated by 
sensible 
symbols. 


logicians have altogether overlooked the reasoning in 
Comprehension, they have, consequently, not perceived 
the proper application of the former canon ; which, 
therefore, remained in their systems either a mere hors 
(T oeuvre, or else was only forced into an unnatural 
connection with the principle of the syllogism of ex- 
tension. 

Before stating to you how the preceding canons are 
again, in their proximate application to categorical 
syllogisms, for convenience sake, still more explicitly 
enounced in certain special rules, it will be proper to 
show you the method of marking the connection of the 
propositions and terms of a categorical syllogism by 
sensible symbols. Of these there are various kinds, 
but, as I formerly noticed, the best upon the whole, 
because the simplest, is that by circles . 0 According 
to this method, syllogisms with affirmative and nega- 
tive conclusions would be thus represented ^ : — 

AFFIRMATIVE. 

Int. Ext. 

S p 

M M 

P S 


sion all co-ordinate species, in com- 
prehension all the immediate attri- 
butes.] [For the author’s final scheme 
of notation, seo Tabular Scheme at 
end of Volume II. — Ed.] 

jB See above, p. 256. Cf. Krug, 
Logikj § 79, p. 245 . — Ed. 


Ext. Int. 



a [An objection to the mode of syl- 
logistic notation by circles is, that we 
cannot, by this mode, show that the 
contained exhausts the containing ; 
for we cannot divide the area of a 
circle between any number of con- 
tained circles, representing in exten- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


305 


Ext. 


NEGATIVE. 

Int. 



LF.CT. 

XVI. 


You are now prepared for the statement and illus- Pr0liniaUj 
tration of the various proximate rules by which all 
categorical syllogisms are regulated. And, first, in j yl p £ i *”‘- 
regard to these rules in relation to the reasoning of ,iTC - 
Extension. 

“ Aldrich,” says Dr Whately, “ has given twelve 
rules, which I find might be more conveniently re- 
duced to six. No syllogism can be faulty which 
violates none of these rules.”® This reduction of the 
syllogistic rules to six is not original to Dr Whately ; 
but had he looked a little closer into the matter, he 
might have seen that the six which he and other 
logicians enumerate, may, without any sacrifice of 
precision, and with even an increase of perspicuity, be 
reduced to three. I shall state these in a paragraph, 
and then illustrate them in detail. 


IF LX. An Extensive Categorical Syllogism, Pw } 
if regularly and fully expressed, is governed by 
the three following rules : — E*um»iyo 

° Categorical 

I. It must have three, and only three. Terms, Byiiogiam. 
constituting three, and only three, Propositions. 

a Klnmfutt nf Ijogir, B. it c. iii. § 2, p. 85, 8th edit. — E d. 

VOL. I. U 


 


30G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. II. Of the premises, the Sumption must in 

— quantity be Definite (i.e. universal or singular), 

and the Subsumption in quality Affirmative. 

III. The Conclusion must correspond in Quan- 
tity with the Subsumption, and in Quality with 
the Sumption.® 

illustration. These three simple laws comprise all the rules which 
logicians lay down with so confusing a minuteness, p 
The first is : — A categorical syllogism, if regular and 
perfect, must have three, and only three, propositions, 
made up of three, and only three, terms. “ The neces- 
sity of this rule is manifest from the very notion of a 
categorical syllogism. In a categorical syllogism the 
relation of two notions to each other is determined 
through their relation to a third ; and, consequently, 
each must be compared once with the intermediate 
notion, and once with each other. It is thus mani- 
fest that there must be three, and cannot possibly be 
more than three, terms ; and that these three terms 
must, in their threefold comparison, constitute three, 
ilriy'toC’ an< ^ onl y three, propositions. It is, however, to be 
M observed, that it may often happen as if, in a valid 
syllogism, there were more than three principal notions, 
— three terms. But, in that case, the terms or notions 
are only complex, and expressed by a plurality ol 
words. Ilence it is, that each several notion extant 
in a syllogism, and denoted by a separate word, is not 
on that account to be viewed as a logical term or 

a Krug, Logit, § 80. — Ed. [Cf. p. 187. Esser, Logit, §§ 88, 89. 
Alexiuider Aphrodimensis, In An. Schulze, Logit, § 79. Fries, Logit, 
Prior., L. I., f. 17, Aid. Derodon, § 55, p. 224.] 

Logica Rest i tula, p. 639 tt seq. Hoff- 0 See Scheibler, Opera Logica, pars, 
bauer, Anfangggriinde der Logit , § iv., p. 516. Keckermann, Syttcma Lo- 
317, p. 164. Bachmnnn, Logit, § 122, giat Minus, Opera , t. i. f p. 239 . — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


307 


terminus, but only those which, either singly or in lect. 
connection with others, constitute a principal momen- _ — _ 
turn of the syllogism.”” Thus, in the following syllo- 
gism, there are many more than three several notions 
expressed by three several words, but these, we shall 
find, constitute in reality only three principal notions 
or logical terms : — 

Sumption. He who conscientiously perform* hi* duty is a 

truly good man ; 

Subsumption... Socrates conscientiously perform s hi s duty ; 

Conclusion Therefore, Socrates is a trtdy good man. 

Here there are in all seven several notions denoted 
by seven separate words: — 1. Conscientiously, 2. Per- 
forms, 3. Duty, 4. Truly, 5. Good, 6. Man , 7. Socrates ; 
but only three principal notions or logical terms, — viz., 

1. Conscientiously performs his duty, 2. Trtdy good 
man, 3. Socrates. 

“ When, on the other hand, the expression of the Quatcmw 
middle term in the sumption and subsumption is used rum. 
in two significations, there may, in that case, appear 
to be only three terms, while there are in reality four ; 
or, as it is technically styled in logic, a quatemio ter- 
minorum.P On this account, the syllogism is vicious 
in point of form, and, consequently, can afford no in- 
ference, howbeit that the several propositions may, in 
point of matter, be all true. And why? — because there 
is here no mediation, consequently no connection be- 
tween the different terms of the syllogism. For ex- 
ample : — 

The animals are void of reason ; 

Man is an animal ; 

Therefore, man is void of reason. 

a Krug, Loyil, § 80, p. ‘246. Amn. S [Cf. Fonaeca, [Instil. Dial., L. vi. 

1. — Ed. c. 20, p. 859 — Ed.] 


 



308 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. “ Here the conclusion is invalid, though each propo- 

— sition, by itself, and in a certain sense, may be true. 

For here the middle term animal is not taken in the 
same meaning in the major and minor propositions. 
For in the former it is taken in a narrower significa- 
tion, as convertible with brute, in the latter in a 
wider signification, as convertible with animated or- 
ganism" « 

Second The second rule is : — Of the premises, the sumption 
must in quantity be definite, (universal or singular), 
the subsumption must in quality be affirmative. — The 
sumption must in reference to its quantity be definite ; 
because it affords the general rule of the syllogism. 
For if it were indefinite, that is, particular, we should 
have no security that the middle term in the sub- 
sumption comprised the same part of the sphere 
which it comprised in the sumption, p 
Tlius : — M , 

Some M are P ; 

All S are M ; 

All S are P. 

Or, in a concrete example : — 

Same works of art are cubical ; 

All pictures are works of art ; 

Therefore, all pictures are cubical. 

In regard to the subsumption, this is necessarily 
affirmative. The sumption is not limited to either 
quality, because the proposition enouncing a general 
rule may indifferently declare All M is P, and No M 
is P. The assumption is thus indeterminate in regard 
to quality. But not so the proposition enouncing the 
application pf a general rule. For it must subsume, 

a Krug, Logit, p. 247 . — Ed. 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


309 


that is, it must affirm, that something is contained lect. 
undei a condition ; and is, therefore, necessarily affir- XV1 ‘ 
mative. We must say S is M. But in respect of 
quantity it is undetermined, for we can either say All 
S ts M, or Some S is M. If the subsumption is nega- 
tive, there is no inference ; for it is not necessary that 
a genus should contain only things of a certain species. 

This is shown in the following example : — 

All men arc animals ; 

Mo horse is a man ; 

Therefore, no luirse is an aninutl. 

Or, as abstractly expressed, — 

* 

All M are P; 

But no S is it ; 

Mo S is P. 

Ihus it is, that in a regular extensive categorical 
syllogism, the sumption must be always definite in 
quantity, the subsumption always affirmative in 
quality. 0 

I have, however, to add an observation requisite to Mi««n«>p. 
prevent the possibility of a misconception. In stating 
it as a rule of extensive categoricals, that the sumption 0“™“” 
must be definite, (universal or singular), if you are at ™° n Y!X 
all conversant with logical books, you will have noticed obT14t * d ' 
that this rule is not in unison with the doctrine therein 
taught, and you may, accordingly, be surprised that I 
should enounce as a general rule what is apparently con- 
tradicted by the fact that there are syllogisms, — valid 
syllogisms, — of various forms, in which the sumption is 
a particular, or the subsumption a negative, proposi- 
tion. In explanation of this, it is enough at present 
to say, that in these syllogisms the premises are trans- 

0 Krug, Logit, p. 248. Bachmann, Logit, § 124.— Ed. 


 



310 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVI. 


The mere 
order of 
enunciation 
docs not 
constitute 
the sump- 
tion or sub- 
sumption 
in a reason- 
ing. 


What truly 
constitutes 
the sump- 
tion and 
subsump- 
tion in a 
reasoning. 


posed in the expression. You will, hereafter, find that 
the sumption is not always the proposition which 
stands first in the enunciation, as the conclusion is not 
always the proposition which stands last. Such trans- 
positions are, however, only external accidents, and 
the mere order in which the premises and conclusion 
of a syllogism are enounced, no more changes their 
nature and their necessary relation to each other, than 
does the mere order in which the grammatical parts 
of a sentence are expressed, alter their essential char- 
acter and reciprocal dependence. In the phrases vir 
bon us and bonus vir , — in both, the vir is a substantive 
and the bonus an adjective. In the sentence variously 
enounced, — Alexander Darium vicit , — Alexander 
vicit Darium , — Darium Alexander vicit , — Darium 
vicit Alexander, — Vicit Alexander Darium , — Vicit 
Darium Alexander : — in these, a difference of order 
may denote a difference of the interest we feel in the 
various constituent notions, but no difference of their 
grammatical or logical relations. It is the same with 
syllogisms. The mere order of enunciation does not 
change a sumption into a subsumption, nor a sub- 
sumption into a sumption. It is their essential rela- 
tion and correlation in thought which constitutes the 
one proposition a major, and the other a minor pre- 
mise. If the former precede the latter in the expres- 
sion of the reasoning, the syllogism is technically 
regular ; if the latter precede the former, it is techni- 
cally irregular or transposed. This, however, as you 
will hereafter more fully see, has not been attended 
to by logicians, and in consequence of their looking 
away from the internal and necessary consecution of 
the premises to their merely external and accidental 
arrangement, the science has been deformed and per- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


311 


plexed by the recognition of a multitude of different lect. 

forms, as real and distinct, which exist only, and are — 

only distinguished, by certain fortuitous accidents of 
expression. This being understood, you will not mar- 
vel at the rule in regard to the quantity of sumptions 
in extensive syllogisms, (which, however, I limited to 
those that were regularly and fully expressed), — that 
it must be definite. Nor will you marvel at the 
counter canon in regard to the quality of sumptions 
in intensive syllogisms, — that it must be affirmative.® 

The necessity of the last rule is equally manifest as 
that of the preceding. It is : — The conclusion must Third Rule, 
correspond in quantity with the subsumption, and in 
quality with the sumption. “ This rule is otherwise 
enounced by logicians : — The conclusion must always 
follow the weaker or worser part, — the negative and 
the particular being held to be weaker or worser in 
relation to the affirmative and universal. The con- 
clusion, in extensive categoricals, (with which we are 
at present occupied), is made up of the minor term, 
as subject, and of the major term, as predicate. Now 
as the relation of these two terms to each other is de- 
termined by their relation to the middle term, and as 
the middle term is compared with the major term in 
the sumption ; it follows that the major term must 
hold the same relation to the minor in the conclusion 
which it held to the middle in the sumption. If then 
the sumption is affirmative, so likewise must be the 
conclusion ; on the other hand, if the sumption be 
negative, so likewise must be the conclusion. In the 


a [See Bachmann, Loyik, § 124, pp. Loyik, § 82, p. 249. Cf. § 83, p. 264, 
192,194. Anm. 3. Drobisch, Loyik, and § 109, p. 362. Facciolati, Jtudi- 
§ 73, p. 65, §§ 42, 44, pp. 34, 36. menta Loyica, P. iii. c. iii. p. 91.] 
Schulze, Logit t, § 79, p. 114. Krug, 


 


312 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVI. 


subsumption, the minor term is compared with the 
middle ; that is, the minor is affirmed as under the 
middle. In the conclusion, the major term cannot, 
therefore, be predicated of more things than were 
affirmed as under the middle term in the subsumption. 
Is the subsumption, therefore, universal, so likewise 
must be the conclusion ; on the contrary, is the 
former particular, so likewise must be the latter.” 0 

a Krug, Loyik, § SO, p. 250-1 .— Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


313 


LECTURE XVII. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECT. II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS. — THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 
INTERNAL FORM. 

A. SIMPLE. — CATEGORICAL — II. DEDUCTIVE IN COMPRE- 
HENSION — III. INDUCTIVE IN EXTENSION AND COM- 
PREHENSION. — B. CONDITIONAL. — DISJUNCTIVE. 

In my last Lecture, after terminating the considera- LKCT- 
tion of the constituent elements of the Categorical XML 
Syllogism in general, whether in the quantity of Com- 
prehension or of Extension, I stated the subdivision 
of Categorical Syllogism into Deductive and Induc- 
tive, — a division determined by the difference of 
reasoning from the whole to the parts, or from the 
parts to the whole. Of these, taking the former, — the 
Deductive, — first into consideration, I was occupied, 
during the remainder of the Lecture, in giving a view 
of the laws which, in their higher or lower universality, 

— in their remoter or more proximate application, 
govern the legitimacy and regularity of Deductive 
Categorical Syllogisms. Of these laws, the highest 
are the axioms of Identity and Contradiction, by which 
all Categorical Syllogisms are controlled. These, when 
proximately applied to the two forms of Deductive 
Oategoricals, determined by the two quantities of 


 



LECT. 

XVII. 


2. The In- 

tonnive 

Categorical 

Deductive 

Syllogism. 


3U LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

Comprehension and Extension, constitute two canons, 
— the canon of the Intensive Syllogism being, — What 
belongs to the predicate belongs also to the subject, — 
what is repugnant to the predicate is repugnant also 
to the subject; — the canon of the Extensive Syllogism 
being, — What belongs to the genus belongs also to 
the species and individual, — what is repugnant to the 
genus is repugnant also to the species and individual. 
Each of these, however, in its more proximate appli- 
cation, is still further developed into a plurality of 
more explicit rules. In reference to Extensive Syllo- 
gism, the general law, or the Dictum da Omni et de 
Nullo, (as it is technically called), is evolved into a 
series of rules, which have been multiplied to twelve, 
are usually recalled to six, but which, throwing out 
of account irregular and imperfect syllogism, may be 
conveniently reduced to three. These are, I. An Ex- 
tensive Categorical Deductive Syllogism must have 
three, and only three, terms, — constituting three, and 
only three, propositions. II. The sumption must in 
quantity be definite, ( i.e . universal or singular) ; the 
subsumption must in quality be affirmative. III. The 
conclusion must correspond in quantity with the sub- 
sumption, and in quality with the sumption. The 
Lecture concluded with an explanation of these rules 
in detail. 

We have now, therefore, next to consider into what 
rules the law of Intensive or Comprehensive Syllogism 
is developed, in its more proximate application. Now, 
as the intensive and extensive syllogisms are always 
the counterparts of each other, the proximate rules of 
the two forms must, consequently, be either precisely 
the same, or precisely the converse of each other. 
Accordingly, taking the three rules of extensive syllo- 
gisms, we find that the first law is also, without dif- 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


315 


ference, a rule of intensive syllogisms. But the second lf.ct. 
and third, to maintain their essential identity, must XV11 ' 
be externally converted ; for to change an extensive 
syllogism into an intensive, we must transpose the 
order or subordination of the two premises, and re- 
verse the reciprocal relation of the terms. The three 
general rules of an Intensive Categorical Deductive 
Syllogism will, therefore, stand as follows : — 


1 LXI. An Intensive Categorical Deductive p*r. lxi. 
Syllogism, that is, one of Depth, if regularly and intamiv. ' 
fully expressed, is governed by the three follow- Deduct?™ 1 

• i Syllogism. 

mg rules. 

I. It must have three, and only three, terms, 

— constituting three, and only three, propositions. 

II. Of the premises, the Sumption must in 
quality be Affirmative, and the Subsumption 
in quantity Definite, (that is, universal or sin- 
gular). 

III. The Conclusion must not exceed the Sump- 
tion in Quantity, and in Quality must agree with 
the Subsumption. 


In regard to the first of these rules, — the rule which Expiic- 
is identical for syllogisms whether extensive or inten- Rulo 
sive, it is needless to say anything; for all that I 
stated in regard to it under the first of these forms, 
is valid in regard to it under the second. 

I proceed to the second, which is, — The sumption s«on<t 
must in quality be affirmative, the subsumption must Rul °' 
in quantity be definite, (that is, universal or singular). 

And, here, we have to answer the question, — Why in 
an intensive syllogism must the sumption be affirma- 
tive in quality, the subsumption definite in quantity \ 

Let us take the following syllogism as explicated : — 


 



316 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVII. 


Grounds of 
the rules 
regarding 
Sumption 
and Sub- 
sumption in 
Extensi ve 
and Com- 
prehensive 
Syllogisms. 


»S comirreheiuls M ; 

M does not comprehend P ; 

Therefore , S does not comprehend P. 

Prudence: comprehends virtue ; 

But virtue docs not comprehend blameworthy ; 

Therefore , priulencc does not comprehend blameworthy. 

Here all goes on regularly. We descend from the major 
term prudence to the middle term virtue , and from 
the middle term virtue to the minor term blameworthy. 
But let us reverse the premises. We at once see that 
though there is still a discoverable meaning, it is not 
directly given, and that we must rectify and restore 
in thought what is perverse and preposterous in ex- 
pression. In the previous example, the sumption is 
affirmative, the subsumption negative. Now let us 
take a negative sumption : — 

S does not comprehend M ; 

But M comprehends P. 

Here there is no conclusion competent, for we can 
neither say S comprehends P, nor S does not compre- 
hend P. Or to take a concrete example, — 

Prudence does not comprehend learning ; 

But learning comprehends praiseworthy. 

We can draw, it is evident, no conclusion ; for we 
can neither say, from the relation of the two proposi- 
tions, that Prudence comprehends praiseworthy , nor 
that Prudence does not comprehend praiseworthy. 

The reason why an extensive syllogism requires a 
universal sumption, and an intensive syllogism an 
affirmative, and why the one requires an affirmative 
and the other a definite subsumption, is the following. 
The condition common to both syllogisms is that the 
sumption should express a rule. But in the extensive 
syllogism this law is an universal rule, that is, a rule 


 


317 


LECTURES ON LOGIC*. 


to which there is no exception ; but then it may be 
expressed either in an affirmative or in a negative 
form, whereas in the intensive syllogism this law is 
expressed as a position, — as a fact, and, therefore, 
admits only of an affirmative form, but, as it is not 
necessarily universal, it admits of limitations or ex- 
ceptions. This opposite character of the sumptions 
of the two forms of syllogisms is correspondent to the 
opposite character of their subsumptions. In the 
extensive syllogism, the subsumption is, and can only 
be, an affirmative declaration of the application of 
the sumption as a universal rule. In the intensive 
syllogism, the subsumption is either an affirmation or 
a negation of the application of the sumption as a 
positive law. Hence it is that in an intensive syllo- 
gism the major premise is necessarily an affirmative, 
while the minor may be either an affirmative or a 
negative proposition. 

In regard to the second clause of the second rule, 
the reason why the subsumption in an intensive syllo- 
gism must be definite in quantity, is because it would 
otherwise be impossible to affirm or deny of each other 
the minor and the major terms in the conclusion. 
For example : — 


LECT. 

XVII. 


Sumption Prudence is a virtue , i. e. Prudence comprehends 

virtue ; 

Subsumption . . . Some virtue is praiseworthy , i. o. Some virtue 
comprehends praiseworth y. 


From these we can draw no conclusion, for the inde- 
finite some virtue does not connect the major term 
prudence and the minor term praiseworthy into the 
necessary relation of whole and part. 

In regard to the third rule — The conclusion must Thini Rule, 
be correspondent in quantity with the sumption, and 
in quality with the subsumption, — it is not necessary 


 


318 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVII. 


II. Induc- 
tive Catc- 

i jorical Syl- 
ogisms. 


Par. LX II. 
Inductive 
Categorical 
Syllogism, 
— what. 


to say anything. Here, as in the extensive syllogism, 
the conclusion cannot be stronger than the weakest 
of its antecedents, that is, if any premise be negative 
the conclusion cannot but be negative also ; and if 
any premise be particular, the conclusion cannot be 
but particular likewise, and as a w r eaker quality is 
only foimd in the subsumption and a weaker quantity 
in the sumption, it follows that, (as the rule declares), 
the conclusion is regulated by the sumption in re- 
gard to its quantity, and by the subsumption in 
regard to its quality. It is, however, evident, that 
though warranted to draw a universal conclusion from 
a general sumption, it is always competent to draw 
only a particular. 

So much for the proximate laws by which Cate- 
gorical Deductive Syllogisms are governed, when con- 
sidered as perfect and regular in external form. We 
shall, in the sequel, have to consider the special rules 
by which the varieties of Deductive Categorical Syl- 
logisms, as determined by their external form, are 
governed ; but at present we must proceed to the 
general consideration of the other class of categorical 
syllogisms afforded by their internal form, — I mean 
those of Induction, the discussion of which I shall 
commence by the following paragraph. 

If LXII. An Inductive Categorical Syllogism 
is a reasoning in which we argue from the notion 
of all the constituent parts discretively, to the 
notion of the constituted whole collectively. Its 
general laws are identical with those of the 
Deductive Categorical Syllogism, and it may 
be expressed, in like manner, either in the form 
of an Intensive or of an Extensive Syllogism. 


^ 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


319 


We shall, in the sequel, have to consider more lect. 

1 ... . XVII. 

particularly the nature and peculiarities of Logical L 

Induction, when we come to treat of the Figure of 
Syllogism, and when we consider the nature of Logical [Kituro 
or Formal, in contrast to Philosophical or Peal Indue- jnduSJ 
tion, under the head of Modified Logic. At present, erroneoU8 * 

I shall only say, that all you will find in logical works 
of the character of logical induction is utterly erro- 
neous ; for almost all logicians, except Aristotle, 
consider induction, not as regulated by the necessary 
laws of thought, but as determined by the probabilities 
and presumptions of the sciences from which its matter 
has accidentally been borrowed. They have not con- 
sidered it, logically, in its formal, but only, extra- 
logically, in its material conditions. Thus, logicians 
have treated in Logic of the inductive inference from 
the parts to the whole, not as exclusively warranted 
by the law of Identity, in the convertibility of the 
whole and all its parts, but they have attempted to 
establish an illation from a few of these parts to the 
whole ; and this, either as supported by the general 
analogies of nature, or by the special presumptions 
afforded by the several sciences of objective existence.® 

Logicians, with the exception of Aristotle, who is, The charac- 
however, very brief and unexplicit in his treatment of cal or For- 
this subject, have thus deformed their science, andRcaiOT dof 
perplexed the very simple doctrine of logical induction, iidSm. 
by confounding formal with material induction. All 
inductive reasoning is a reasoning from the parts to 
the whole ; but the reasoning from the parts to the 
whole in the various material or objective sciences, is 
very different from the reasoning from the parts to 


o Compare Discn«*ion*, p. 159 . — Ed. 


320 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVII. 


the whole in the one formal or subjective science of 
Logic. In the former, the illation is not simply 
founded on the law of Identity, in the convertibility 
of a whole and all its parts, but on certain presump- 
tions drawn from an experience or observation of the 
constancy of nature ; so that, in these sciences, the 
inference to the whole is rarely from all, but generally 
from a small number of, its constituent parts ; conse- 
quently, in them, the conclusion is rarely in truth an 
induction properly so called, but a mixed conclusion, 
drawn on an inductive presumption combined with a 
deductive premise. For example, the physical philo- 
sopher thus reasons : — 

This, that, and the other magnet attract iron ; 

But this, that, and the other magnet represent all magnets ; 

Therefore, all magnets attract iron , 

Now, in this syllogism, the legitimacy of the minor 
premise, This, that, and the other magnet represent all 
magnets, is founded on the principle, that nature is 
uniform and constant, and, on this general principle, 
the reasoner is physically warranted in making a few 
parts equivalent to the whole. But this process is 
wholly incompetent to the logician. The logician 
knows nothing of any principles except the laws of 
thought. He cannot transcend the sphere of neces- 
sary, and pass into the sphere of probable, thinking ; 
nor can he bring back, and incorporate into his own 
formal science, the conditions which regulate the 
procedure of the material sciences. This being the 
case, induction is either not a logical process different 
from deduction, for the induction of the objective 
philosopher, in so far as it is formal, is in fact deduc- 
tive ; or there must be an induction governed by 
other laws than those which warrant the induction of 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


321 


the objective philosopher. Now, if logicians had lect. 
looked to their own science, and not to sciences with _ X Y11 1. 
which, as logicians, they had no concern, they would 
have seen that there is a process of reasoning from d*Jcti“ d Syl- 
the parts to the whole, as well as from the whole to f “. 
the parts, that this process is governed by its own m * L 
laws, and is equally necessary and independent as 
the other. The rule by which the Deductive Syllo- 
gism is governed is, — What belongs, or does not 
belong, to the containing whole, belongs, or does not 
belong, to each and all of the contained parts. The 
rule by which the Inductive Syllogism is governed 1 
is, — What belongs, or does not belong, to all the 
constituent parts, belongs, or does not belong, to 
the constituted whole. These rules exclusively deter-/ 
mine all formal inference ; whatever transcends or 
violates them, transcends or violates Logic. Both are 
equally absolute. It would be not less illegal to infer 
by the deductive syllogism, an attribute belonging 
to the whole of something it was not conceived to 
contain as a part ; than by the inductive, to conclude 
of the whole what is not conceived as a predicate of 
all its constituent parts. In either case, the con- 
sequent is not thought as determined by the ante- 
cedent ; — the premises do not involve the conclusion.” 



illustration of a material or philosophical induction ; — iu»tn»tcd. 
it would be thus expressed as a formal or logical : — 

This, that, awl the other magnet attract iron ; 

But this, that, and the other magnet are all magnets ; 

Therefore, all magnets attract iron. 

a [Cf. Krug, Logik, §§ 166, 167. alis, §§ 477, 478. ScotuB. [Quvttionn 
Sanderson, Compendium Log. Artis, in An. Prior., L. ii. q. viii. p. 816, ed. 

L. iii. c. x. p. 112. Wolf, Phil. Ration- 1610. — Ed.] 

VOL. I. X 


 



322 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Here the inference is determined exclusively by a law 
XV1L - of thought. In the subsumption, it is said, — This , 
that, and the other magnet , &c., are all magnets. This 
means, This , that, and the other magnet are, that is, 
constitute, or rather, are conceived to constitute, all 
magnets , that is, the whole, — the class , — the genus 
magnet. If, therefore, explicitly enounced, it will be 
as follows : — This, that, and the other magnet are con- 
ceived to constitute the whole class magnet. The con- 
clusion is — Therefore, all magnets attract iron. This, 
if explicated, will give — Therefore the whole class 
magnet is conceived to attract iron. The whole syllo- 
gism, therefore, as a logical induction, will be : — 

This, that, and the other magnet attract iron ; 

But this, that, and the other magnet, §c., are conceived to consti- 
tute the genus magnet ; 

Therefore, the genus magnet attracts iron. 

Objection It is almost needless to advert to an objection, which, 
I see, among others, has misled Whately. It may be 
said, that the minor, This, that, and the other magnet are 
all magnets, is manifestly false. This is a very super- 
ficial objection. It is very true that neither here, nor 
indeed in almost any of our inductions, is the state- 
ment objectively correct, — that the enumerated parti- 
culars are really equivalent to the whole or class which 
they constitute, or in which they are contained. But 
as an objection to a logical syllogism, it is wholly 
incompetent, as wholly extralogical. For the logician 
has a right to suppose any material impossibility, any 
material falsity ; he takes no account of what is ob- 
jectively impossible or false, and has a right to assume 
what premises he please, provided that they do not 
involve a contradiction in terms. In the example in 
question, the subsumption, — This, that, and the other 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


323 


magnet are all magnets , — has been already explained lect. 

to mean not that they really are so, but merely that — 

they are so thought to be. It is only on the supposi- Formui® 
tion of this, that , and the other magnet , &c., being tivo Syiio- 
conceived to constitute the class magnet , that theCompwhen- 
inference proceeds, and, on this supposition, it will not Extennion. 
be denied that the inference is necessary. I stated 
that an inductive syllogism is equally competent in 
comprehension and in extension. For example, let us 
suppose that x, y, z represent parts, and the letters 
A and B wholes, and we have the following formula 
of an inductive syllogism in Comprehension : — 


x, y, z constitute A ; 

A comprehends B ; 

Therefore, x, y, z comprehend B. 


This, if converted into an extensive syllogism, by 
transposing the premises and reversing the copula, 
gives : — 

A is contained under B ; 

x, y, z constitute A ; 

Therefore, x, y, z are contained under B. 

But in this syllogism, it is evident that the premises 
are in an unnatural order. We must not, therefore, here 
transpose the premises, as we do in converting a de- 
ductive categorical of comprehension into one of ex- 
tension. We may obtain an inductive syllogism in 
two different forms, and in either comprehension or 
extension, according as the parts stand for the major, 
or for the middle term. If the minor term is formed 
of the parts, it is evident there is no induction ; for in 
this case they only constitute that quantity of the 
syllogism which is always a part, and never a whole. 
Let x, y, z represent the parts ; where not superseded 
by x, y, z, S will represent the major term in a com- 


32 * 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

XVII. 


Whately 

and others 

erroneously 

make the 

Inductive 

Syllogism 

Deductive. 


Doctrine of 
tho older lo- 
gicians. 


prehensive, and the minor term in an extensive, syllo- 
gism ; P will represent the major term in an exten- 
sive, and the minor term in a comprehensive, syllogism ; 
and M the middle term in both. I shall, first, take 
the Inductive Syllogism of Comprehension. 


First Case, — (The parts hold- Second Case, — (The parts hold- 


ing tho place of the major 
term S). 

x, y, z constitute M ; 

M comprehends P ; 

Therefore, x, y, z comprehend P. j 


ing the place of the middle 
term). 

i comprehends x, y, z ; 

:, y, z constitute P ; 

Therefore, S comjrrehends P. 


Again, in the Inductive Syllogism of Extension : — 


First Case, — (The parts holding 
the place of the major term P). 
x, y, z constitute M ; 

S is contained under M ; 
Therefore, S is contained under 
x, y, z. 


Second Case, — (The parts hold- 
ing the place of the middle 
term). 

x, y, z are contained under P ; 
x, y, z constitute S ; 

I Therefore, S is contained unde.rV. 


Before leaving this subject, I may notice that the 
doctrine of logical induction maintained by Whately 
and many others, diverges even more than that of the 
older logicians from the truth, inasmuch as it makes 
this syllogism a deductive syllogism, of which the 
sumption, which is usually understood and not ex- 
pressed, is always substantially the same — viz., “What 
belongs, (or does not belong), to the individuals we 
have examined belongs, (or does not belong), to the 
whole class under which they are contained.” This 
doctrine was first, I think, introduced by Wolf,® for 

o [Cf. Wolf, Philotophia Rational is, petit toti ; in isto (Enthymemate) vel 
§ 479, first ed. 1728. So, before Wolf, major vel minor pnemissarum, in hoc 
Schramm, Aristot. Philos. Principia, (Inductione) semper major propositio 
p. 27, ed. Helmst., 1718. “Indue- subintelligitur.'* Refers as follows — 
tioue ex multis &ingularibus colligi- u De Inductions, Philo*. A l tor f., Disp. 
tur universale supposito loco majoris xxiv. p. 252 et seq." See also Crakan- 
propositionis hoc canone Quicquid thorpe, Logica, c. xx. p. 217, ed. 1677. 
corapetit omnibus partibus, hoc coni- [Cf. Discussions, p. 170, note. — E d.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


325 


the previous logicians viewed the subsumption as the lect. 
common, and, therefore, the suppressed premise, this — 1- 
premise always stating that the individuals or parti- 
culars enumerated made up the class under which 
they were severally contained.® For example, in the 
instance from the magnet we have already taken, the 
subsumption would be, — This , that , and the other mag- 
net and so forth , are the whole class magnet This Correct a« 
doctrine of the older logicians is correct as far as it goes, 
goes ; and to make it absolutely correct, it would only 
have been necessary to have established the distinc- 
tion between the logical induction as governed by the 
a priori conditions of thought, and philosophical in- 
duction as legitimated by the a posterioi'i conditions 
of the matter, about which the inquiry is conversant. 

This, however, was not done, and the whole doctrine 
of logical induction was corrupted and confounded by 
logicians introducing into their science the considera- 
tion of various kinds of matter, and admitting as 
logical an induction supposed imperfect, that is, one 
in which there was inference to the whole from some 
only of the constituent parts. This Imperfect Induction Doctrine of 
they held in contingent matter to be contingent, — iIIcS. 
in necessary matter to be necessary ; as if a logical 
inference were not in all cases necessary, and only 
necessary as governed by the necessary laws of 
thought. This misapprehension of the nature of logi- Bacon at 
cal or formal induction, and its difference from criticism of 
philosophical or material, has been the reason why doctrine of 
Bacon is at fault in his criticism of Aristotle’s doc- 

o [On Induction in general, see iii. c. xx. p. 254. Keckermann, Opera, 

Zabarella, Tabula; in An. Prior, p. t. i. pp. 259, 763. Lambert, Neuen 
\70 et seq., 0]>era Lor/ica, ( Appendix) Orrjanon, i. §§ 286, 287, p. 183. Euge- 
Molinaius, EUmcnta Logica, L. i.c.ii. p. nios, AoynO), p. 410. Jo. Fr. Picus 
99. Isendooru, Cursus Logicu . *, L. iii. Mirandulunus.] [Opera, Examcn Doct. 
q. ii. p. 361. Crellius, Juagogc , L. Vanit. Gent. L. v. p. 746 ct seq. — Ed.] 


326 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVII. 


B. Condi- 
tional Syllo- 

f inui. 

Pisjunc- 

tive. 


trine of induction. For, looking only at the doctrine 
of the inductive syllogism given by Aristotle in the 
Organon, and not perceiving that the question there 
was only concerning the nature of induction as gov- 
erned by the laws of thought, he forthwith assumed 
that this was the induction practised by the Stagirite 
in his study of nature, and, in the teeth both of the 
precept and practice of the philosopher, condemned 
the Aristotelic induction in the mass, as flying at once 
to general principles from the hasty enumeration of a 
few individual instances. Induction, as I mentioned, 
will, however, once and again, engage our attention 
in the sequel ; but I have thought it proper to be some- 
what explicit, that you might carry with you a clearer 
conception of the nature of this process, as contrasted 
with the process of the Deductive Syllogism. 

Having terminated the general consideration of 
Categorical Syllogisms, Deductive and Inductive, I 
now proceed to the next class of Reasonings afforded 
by the internal form ; I mean the class of Disjunctive 
Syllogisms. 


p^-Lxiii. T LXIII. A Disjunctive Syllogism is a reason- 

A Diijunc- . . . ° 

tive »yiio- iiig, whose form is determined by the law of 

gism, — ^ ^ 

» h » t - Excluded Middle, and whose sumption is accord- 

ingly a disjunctive proposition, either of Con- 
tradiction (as, A is either B or not B) — or of 
Contrariety (as, A is either B, or C, or D). In 
such a judgment it is enounced, that B or 
not B, or that B, C, or D, as opposite notions 
taken together and constituting a totality, are 
each of them a possible, and one or other of 
them a necessary, predicate of A. To determine 
which of these belongs, or does not belong to A, the 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


327 


subsumption must either affirm one of the predi- lect. 

A XVII 

cates, and the conclusion, eo ipso, consequently, - 

deny the other or others ; or it must deny one or 
more of them, and thus necessitate in the conclu- 
sion, either the determinate affirmation of the 
other, or the indeterminate affirmation of the 
others. A Disjunctive Syllogism is thus either 
Affirmative, constituting the Modus ponens , or 
Modus ponendo tollcns , or Negative, constituting 
the Modus tollens , or Modus tollendo ponens. 

In each of these modes there are two cases, 
which I comprehend in the following mnemonic 
verses : — 

(A) Affirmative, or Modus tonendo tollexs : — 

1. Fallen’s out fallor ; fallor ; non fallens ergo. 

2. Fattens out fallor ; in fattens ; ergo ego nedum. 

(L») Negative, or Modus tollendo ponens : — 

1. Fattens a at fallor ; non fallor ; fattens ergo.a 

2. Fattens ant fallor ; non fattens ; ergo ego fallor. 


In illustration of this paragraph, I have defined a Expiica- 
disjunctive syllogism, one whose form is determined tlon * 
by the law of Excluded Middle, and whose sumption 
is, accordingly, a disjunctive proposition. 1 have not, A syllogism 
as logicians in general do, defined it directly, — a syllo- junctive, 

• « • •• • major pr©- 

gism whose major premise is a disjunctive proposition. mi»e u not 
For though it be true that every disjunctive syllogism a disjunctive 
has a disjunctive major premise, the converse is not 
true ; for every syllogism that has a disjunctive 
sumption is not, on that account, necessarily a dis- 
junctive syllogism. For a disjunctive syllogism only 
emerges, when the conclusion has reference to the 
relation of reciprocal affirmation and negation subsist- 


ed This line is from Purchot, Instit. others are the Author's own. — E d. 
Philos., Logica, t. 1, p. 184. The 


328 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. ing between the disjunct members in the major pre- 

1 mise, — a condition not, however, contained in the 

mere existence of the disjunctive sumption.® For 
example, in the syllogism : — 

13 is either C or I) ; 

But A is 13 ; 

Therefore , A is either C or I). 


This syllogism is as much a reasoning determined, 
not by the law of Excluded Middle, but solely by the 
law of Identity, as the following : — 

B is C. 


A is 13. 

Therefore , A is C. 


1°. General 
view of the 
Disjunctive 
Syllogism. 


For in both we conclude, — C (in one, C or r>) is an 
attribute of B ; but B is an attribute of A ; therefore , 
C (C oi' D) is an attribute of A, — a process, in either 
case, regulated exclusively by the law of Identity/ 

This being premised, I now proceed to a closer con- 
sideration of the nature of this reasoning, and shall, 
first, give you a general notion of its procedure ; then, 
secondly, discuss its principle ; and, thirdly, its con- 
stituent parts. 

1°. The general form of the Disjunctive Syllogism 
may be given in the following scheme, in which you 
will observe there is a common sumption to the nega- 
tive and affirmative modes : — 


a. Formula 
for a Syllo- 
gism with 
two disjunct 
members. 


A is either B or C. 


Affirmative, or Modus ton- 
ex do tollexs — 

Now A is B ; 


Negative, or Modus tollendo 

POXEXS 

Now A is not B ; 


Therefore , A is not C. 


Therefore , A is C. 


o Cf. Scheiblor, Opera Loffica, tione.” — Ei>. 

Purs. iv. p. 553. “ Ncque onim syllo- $ Sigwart, pp. 154, 1 57. [JlaniVmch 
glsnius disjunctus semper est, cum zur Vorlcsungeti iiber die Logik, von 
propositio cst disjunctiva, sed cum //. C. W. Sigicnrt , 3d ed., Tubingen, 
tota quiostio disponitur in proposi- 1835, §§ 245, 248. — El) J 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


320 


Or, in a concrete example : — 

Sempronius is cither honest or dishonest. 


LECT. 

XVII. 


Affirmative, or Modus pon- 


Negative, or Modus to llendo 
ponens — 


ENDO TOLLENS — 

Note Sempronius is honest ; 
Therefore , Sempronius is not 


Therefore , Sempronius is dis- 
honest. 


Now Sempronius is not honest; 


dishonest. 


“ This formula is, however, only calculated for the b. Formula 
case in which there are only two disjunct members, ^LnwiuT 
that is, for the case of negative or contradictory op- two disjunct 
position ; for it the disjunct members are more than 
two, that is, if there is a positive or contrary opposi- 
tion, there is then a twofold or manifold employment 
of the Modus ponendo toUens and Modus tollendo 
ponens, according as the affirmation and negation is 
determinate or indeterminate. If, in the Modus po- 
nendo tollens, one disjunct member is determinately 
affirmed, then all the others are denied ; and if several 
disjunct members are indeterminately affirmed except 
one, then only that one is denied. If, in the Modus 
tollendo ponens , a single member of the disjunction be 
denied, then some one of the others is indetermin- 
ately affirmed ; and if several be denied, so that one 
alone is left, then this one is determinately affirmed.”* 

This will appear more clearly from the following for- 
mulae. Let the common Sumption both of the Modus 
ponendo tollens and Modus tollendo ponens be : — 

A is cither B or C or I). 

I. The Modus Ponendo Tollens — 

First Case. A is either B or C or D ; 

Now A is B ; 

Therefore , A is neither C nor I). 


a Esscr, Logik, § 03, p. 180 . — Ed. 


330 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVII. 


2°,Theprin 

ciple of the 
Disjunctive 
Syllogism. 


Second Case. A is either BorCwD; 

Now A is either B or C ; 

Therefore , A is not 1). 

II. The Modus Tollendo Ponens. 

First Case. A is cither B or C or D ; 

Now A is not B ; 

Therefore , A is either C or D. 

Second Case. A is either B or C or I) ; 

Now A is neither B nor C ; 

Therefore , A is D. 

Or, to take these in concrete examples, let the Com- 
mon Sumption be : — 

The ancients were in (jenius either siq>erior to the moderns , or 
inferior , or equal . 

I. The Modus Ponendo Toi.Lfexs. 

First Case. The ancients were in (jenius either superior to the 
moderns, or inferior , or equal ; 

Now the ancients were superior ; 

Therefore , the ancients were neither inferior nor 
equal. 

Second Case. The ancients were in genius either superior to the 
moderns , or inferior, or equal ; 

Now the ancients were either superior or equal ; 
Therefore, the ancients wei'e not inferior. 

II. The Modus Tollendo Ponens. 

First Case. The ancients were in genius either superior to the 
moderns, or inferior, or equal ; 

Now the ancients were not inferior; 

! Therefore , the ancients were either superior or equal. 

Second Case. The ancients were in genius either superior to the 
moderns, or inferior, or equal ; 

Now the ancients were neither inferior nor equal ; 
Therefore, the ancients were superior. 

Such is a general view of its procedure. Now, 2°, 
for its principle. 

“ If the essential character of the Disjunctive Syllo- 
gism consist in this, — that the affirmation or negation, 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


331 


v. 


or, what is a better expression, the position or subla- lect. 
tion, of one or other of two contradictory attributes — — — 
follows from the subsumption of the opposite ; — there 
is necessarily implied in the disjunctive process, that, 
when of two opposite predicates the one is posited or 
affirmed, the other is sublated or denied ; and that, 
when the one is sublated or denied, the other is 
posited or affirmed. But the proposition, — that of 
two repugnant attributes, the one being posited, the 
other must be sublated, and the one being sublated, 
the other must be posited, — is at once manifestly the 
law by which the disjunctive syllogism is governed, 
and manifestly only an application of the law of Ex- 
cluded Middle. For the Modus ponendo tokens there 
is the special rule, — If the one character be posited 
the other character is sublated ; and for the Modus tol- 
lendo ponens there is the special rule, — If the one 
character be sublated, the other character is posited. 

The law of the disjunctive syllogism is here enounced, 
only in reference to the case in which the members 
of disjunction are contradictorily opposed. An oppo- 
sition of contrariety is not of purely logical concern- 
ment ; and a disjunctive syllogism with characters 
opposed in contrariety, in fact, consists of as many 
pure disjunctive syllogisms as there are opposing pre- 
dicates .” 0 


3°. I now go to the third and last matter of con- 3 MV«cy e - 
sideration, — the several parts of a Disjunctive Syllo- a Dinjunc- 

• tivc Syllo- 
gism. gum. 

“ The question concerning the special laws of a dis- 
junctive syllogism, or, what is the same thing, what is 
the original and necessary form of a disjunctive 
syllogism, as determined by its general principle or 


a Essur, Logik , § 94. — Ed. 


 


332 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

XVII. 


IV. LXIV. 
The law* of 
the Diftiunc* 
live Svllo- 
giain. 


law, — this question may be asked, not only in refer- 
ence to the whole syllogism, but likewise in reference 
to its several parts. The original and necessary form 
of a disjunctive syllogism consists, as we have seen, 
in the reciprocal position or sublation of contradic- 
tory characters, by the subsumption of one or other. 
Hence it follows, that the disjunctive syllogism must, 
like the categorical, involve a threefold judgment — 
viz. 1°, A judgment in which a subject is determined 
by two contradictory predicates ; 2°, A judgment in 
which one or other of the opposite predicates is sub- 
sumed, that is, is affirmed, either as existent or non- 
existent ; and, 3°, A judgment in which the final 
decision is enounced concerning the existence or non- 
existence of one of the repugnant or reciprocally ex- 
clusive predicates. But in these three propositions, 
as in the three propositions of a categorical syllogism, 
there can only be three principal notions — viz. the 
notion of a subject, and the notion of two contradic- 
tory attributes, which are generally enounced in the 
sumption, and of which one is posited or sublated 
in the subsumption, in order that in the conclusion 
the other may be sublated or posited. The case of 
contrary opposition is, as we have seeu, easily re- 
conciled and reduced to that of contradictory oppo- 
sition.” ° The laws of the several parts of a disjunctive 
syllogism, or more properly the original and necessary 
form of these several parts, are given in the following 
paragraph : — 

1i LXIV. — 1°, A regular and perfect Disjunc- 
tive Syllogism must have three propositions, in 
which, if the sumption be simple and the disjunc- 

a E«scr, Loyik, § 95. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


333 


tion purely logical, only three principal notions 
can be found. 

2°, The Sumption, in relation to its quantity 
and quality, is always uniform, being Universal 
and Affirmative ; but the Subsumption is suscep- 
tible of various forms in both relations. 

3°, The Conclusion corresponds in quantity 
with the subsumption, and is opposed to it in 
quality." 


LECT. 

XVII. 


The first rule is, — A regular and perfect disjunctive Expiica- 
syllogism must have three propositions, in which, if Fir*t Rui®. 
the sumption be simple, and the disjunction purely 
logical, only three principal notions can be found. 

“Like the categorical syllogism, the disjunctive consists 
of a sumption, constituting the general rule ; of a 
subsumption, containing its application ; and of a 
conclusion, expressing the judgment inferred. Dis- 
junctive syllogisms are, therefore, true and genuine 
reasonings ; and if in the sumption the disjunction 
be contradictory, there are in the syllogism only three 
principal notions. In the case of contrary disjunc- 
tions, there may, indeed, appear a greater number 
of notions ; but as such syllogisms are in reality 
composite, and are made up of a plurality of syllo- 
gisms with a contradictory disjunction, this objection 
to the truth of the rule is as little valid as the cir- 
cumstance, that the subject in the sumption is some- 
times twofold, threefold, fourfold, or manifold ; as, for 
example, in the sumption — John , James , Thomas, are 
either virtuous or vicious. For this is a copulative 
proposition, which is composed of three simple pro- 
positions — viz. John is, &c. If, therefore, there be 

a E88er, /. c. Krug, Lojik, § 86.— Ed. 


33+ 


LECTURES ON LOO TO. 


lkct. such a sumption at the head of a disjunctive syllogism, 

— it is in this case, likewise, composite, and may be 

analysed into as many simple syllogisms with three 
principal notions, as there are simple propositions into 
which the sumption may be resolved”® 

Second Rule. The second rule is, — The sumption is, in relation to 
its quantity and quality, always uniform, — being 
universal and affirmative ; but the subsumption is 
susceptible of different forms in both relations. If 
we look, indeed, to the subject alone, it may seem to 
be possibly equally general or particular : for we can 
equally say of some as of all A that they are either 
B or C. But as all universality is relative, and as the 
sumption is always more extensive or more compre- 
hensive than the subsumption, it is thus true that the 
sumption is always general. Again, looking to the 
predicate, or, as it is complex, to the predicates alone, 
they, as exclusive of each other, appear to involve a 
negation. But in looking at the whole proposition, 
that is, at the subject, the copula, and the predicates 
in connection, we see at once that the copula is 
affirmative, for the negation involved in the predicates 
is confined to that term alone. P 
Third Rule. In regard to the third rule, which enounces, — That 
the conclusion should have the same quantity with the 
subsumption, but an opposite quality, — it is requisite 
to say nothing, as the first clause is only a special 
application of the rule common to all syllogisms, that 


o Krug, Logit , l. c. — Ed. 

0 See Krug, Lot jit, § 86, Anm. 2. 
Ed. — [Rachmann, Logit, § 141, p. 354. 
Contra : — Twee ten, Logit, §137, ed. 
1825, p. 119. Eaaer, Logit , § 95. 
Derodon, Logica Re*tituta, p. G76.] 


[“ Propositio Disjunctiva nullum habet 
quantitatem nisi suarum parti um 
. . . feicut Propositio Hypothetic^ 
habet tantum quantitatem suarum 
parti um." See above, p. 247, and 
note a.— E d.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


335 


the conclusion can contain nothing more than the lect. 

0 XVII. 

premises, and must, therefore, follow the weaker part; 


and the second is self-evident, as only a special appli- 
cation of the principle of Excluded Middle, for, on this 
law, if one contradictory be affirmed in the subsump- 
tion, the other must be denied in the conclusion, and 
if one contradictory be denied in the subsumption, 
the other must be affirmed in the conclusion. 

The Disjunctive, like every other species of syllo- The du- 
gism, may be either a reasoning in the quantity of Syllogism 
Comprehension, or a reasoning in the quantity of Ex- licnsion and 
tension. The contrast, however, of these two quan- 
tities is not manifested in the same signal manner in 
the disjunctive as in the categorical deductive syllo- 
gism, more especially of the first figure. In the cate- 
gorical deductive syllogism, the reasonings in the two 
counter quantities are obtrusively distinguished by a 
complete conversion, not only of the internal signifi- 
cance, but of the external appearance of the syllogism. 

For not only do the relative terms change places in 
the relation of whole and part, but the consecution of 
the antecedents is reversed ; the minor premise in 
the one syllogism becoming the major premise in the 
other. This, however, is not the case in disjunctive 
syllogisms. Here the same proposition is, in both 
quantities, always the major premise ; and the whole 
change that takes place in converting a disjunctive 
syllogism of the one quantity into a disjunctive syllo- 
gism of the other, is in the silent reversal of the copula 
from one of its meanings to another. This, however, 
as it determines no apparent difference in single pro- 
positions, and as the disjunctive sumption remains 
always the same proposition, out of which the sub- 


330 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVII. 


Examples. 


sumption and the conclusion are evolved, in the one 
quantity as in the other, — the reversal of the sumption, 
from extension to comprehension, or from compre- 
hension to extension, occasions neither a real nor an 
apparent change in the syllogism. Take, for example, 
the disjunctive syllogism : — 

Pluto is either learned or unlearned ; 

But Pluto is learned ; 

Therefore , Plato is not unlearned. 

Now let us explicate this into an intensive and into 
an extensive syllogism. As an Intensive Syllogism it 
will stand : — 

Pluto comprehends either the attribute learned or the attribute 
unlearned ; 

But Pluto comprehends the attribute learned ; 

Therefore , <fcc. 

As an Extensive Syllogism it will stand : — 

Plato is contained either under the class learned , or under the 
class unlearned ; 

But Plato is contained under the class learned ; 

Therefore , &c. 

From this it appears, that, though the difference of 
reasoning in the several quantities of comprehension 
and extension obtains in disjunctive, as in all other 
syllogisms, it does not, in the disjunctive syllogism, 
determine the same remarkable change in the external 
construction and consecution of the parts, which it 
does in categorical syllogisms. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


337 


LECTURE XVIII. 
STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS. — THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 

INTERNAL FORM. 


B. CONDITIONAL.- 


-HYPOTHETICAL AND H Y POTHETICO- 
DISJUNCTIVE. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


Having now considered Categorical and Disjunctive 
Syllogisms, the next class of Reasonings afforded by 
the difference of Internal or Essential Form is the 
Hypothetical ; and the general nature of these syllo- 
gisms is expressed in the following paragraph : — 


IF LXV. An Hypothetical Syllogism is a p ar . lxv. 
reasoning whose form is determined by the law fi’ c ” *>no- e 
of Re<oson and Consequent. It is, therefore, re-J^£T ,t8 
gulated by the two principles of which that law charactcr * 
is the complement, — the one, — With the reason, 
the consequent is affirmed; the other, — With the 
consequent, the reason is denied : and these two 
principles severally afford the condition of its 
Affirmative or Constructive, and of its Negative or 
Destructive form (Modus ponens et Modus tollens). 

The sumption or general rule in such a syllogism 
is necessarily an hypothetical proposition (If A 
is y then B is). In such a proposition it is merely 
VOL. i. y 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


Explica* 

tion. 


338 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

enounced that the prior member (A) and the 
posterior member (B) stand to each other in the 
relation of reason and consequent, if existing, but 
without it being determined whether they really 
exist or not. Such determination must follow 
in the subsumption and conclusion ; and that, 
either by the absolute affirmation of the ante- 
cedent in the subsumption, and the illative affir- 
mation of the consequent in the conclusion (the 
modus ponens) ; or by the absolute negation of 
the consequent in the subsumption, and the illa- 
tive negation of the antecedent in the conclusion 
(the modus tollens ) “ The general form of an hypo- 
thetical syllogism* 3 is, therefore, the following : — 

Common Sumption — If A is, then B is ; 

1 2 
Modus Ponens: Modus Tollens : 

But A is ; But B is not ; 

Therefore, B is. Therefore, A is not. 

Or, 

A B 

1 ) Modus Ponens — Si potcris possum ; sed tu]>otes; ergo ego possum. 

B A 

2) Modus Tollens — Si poteris jxmum ; non gmssum; nec jiotes ergo.y 

In illustrating this paragraph, I shall consider 1°, 
This species of syllogism in general ; 2°, Its peculiar 
principle ; and, 3°, Its special laws. 


a [For use of terms ponens and tol- 
lens, see Boethius, I)e Syllogismo Hyjio- 
thetico, Opera, p. 611. Wolf, Phil. 
Rat., § 406, 410. Mark Duncan uses 
the terms “ a position© ad positionem,” 
and “ a remotione ad remotionem." 
[Inst it ut tones Logical, L. iv. c. 6, § 4, p. 
240. Cf. p. 243, Salmurii, 1812 .— Ed.] 
& [On the Hypothetical Syllogism in 
general, see Ammonius, In De Interp ., 
Proccm., f. 3, Venetiis, 1546. Philopo- 
nua, In Anal. Prior., i. c. 23, f. 60, 


Venet., 1536. Magentinus, In Anal. 
Prior., f. 16 b. Alex. Aphrodisiensis, 
In Anal. Prior., ff. 87, 88, 109, 
130, Aid. 1520. In Topica, f. 65, 
Aid., 1513. Anonymous Author, On 
Syllogisms, f. 44, ed. 1536. Scheibler, 
Opera Logica, para iv. p. 548. Bol- 
zano, Wissenschaflslchre, Logik, ii. p. 
560. Waitz, Organon, In An. Prior., 
L c. 23.] 

y These lines ore the Author’s own. 
—Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


339 


1°, “Likeevery other species of simple syllogism lect. 
the Hypothetical is made up of three propositions, — XX 11L . 
a sumption, a subsumption, and a conclusion. There 
must, in the first place, be an hypothetical proposition ^'"1!“ 
holding the place of a general rule, and from this pro- thl^propo- 
position the other parts of the syllogism must be" 110 ”* - 
deduced. This first proposition, therefore, contains a 
sumption. But as this proposition contains a relative 
and correlative member, — one member, the relative 
clause, enouncing a thing as conditioning ; the other, 
the correlative clause, enouncing a thing as condi- 
tioned ; and as the whole proposition enounces merely 
the dependency between these relatives, and judges 
nothing in regard to their existence considered apart 
and in themselves, — this enouncement must be made in 
a second proposition, which shall take out of the 
sumption one or other of its relatives, and categori- 
cally enounce its existence or its non-existence. This 
second proposition contains, therefore, a subsumption ; 
and, through this subsumption, a judgment is likewise 
determined, in a third proposition, with regard to the 
other relative. This last proposition, therefore, con- 
tains the conclusion proper of the syllogism.” 

“ But as the sumption in an hypothetical syllogism in » fcjrpo- 
contains two relative clauses, — an antecedent and aeon- |ogi»m the™ 
sequent, — it, therefore, appears double; and as either ntw,,fJ,Ta 
of its two members may be taken in the subsumption, reasoning, 

* — the mo- 

there is, consequently, competent a twofold kind of <i«*ponen* 

. x J . . n 1 and modus 

reasoning. For we can either, in the first place, con- toiu**. 
elude from the truth of the antecedent to the truth of 
the consequent ; or, in the second place, conclude from 
the falsehood of the consequent to the falsehood of the 
antecedent. The former of these modes of hypotheti- 
cal inference constitutes what is sometimes called the 


 



340 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Constructive Hypothetical , but more properly the 
_*l n1, , Modus Ponens : — the latter what is sometimes called 
the Destructive Hypothetical , but more properly the 
Modus Tollens ”° As examples of the two modes : — 

Modus Ponens — If Socrates be virtuous , he merits esteem ; 

But Socrates is virtuous ; 

Therefore , he merits esteem. 

Modus Tollens — If Socrates be virtuous , he merits esteem ; 

But Socrates does not merit esteem ; 

Therefore , he is not virtuous f 

So much for the character of the Hypothetical Syllo- 
gism in general. I now proceed to consider its pecu- 
liar principle. 

2 °, it« pecu- 2°, “If the essential nature of an Hypothetical 
dpie,~the Syllogism consist in this, — that the subsumption 
bod and c affirms or denies one or other of the tw r o parts of a 
Consequent, bought, standing to each other in the relation of the 

thing conditioning and the thing conditioned, it will 
be the law of an hypothetical syllogism, that, — If 
the condition or antecedent be affirmed, so also must 
be the conditioned or consequent, and that if the con- 
ditioned or consequent be denied, so likewise must be 
the condition or antecedent. But this is manifestly 
nothing else than the law' of Sufficient Reason or of 


a Krug, Logik, § 81, Anm. 1, p. 
254. Compare Esser, Logik, § 90, p. 
172 .— Ed. 

P [Nomenclature of Theophrastus, 
Eudemus, and other Peripatetics, in 
regard to Hypothetical Syllogism, in 
contrast with that of the Stoics. 

Ylpdyyara, vohyara, (peeved (Peripa- 
tetic), are called by the Stoics re- 
spectively, rvyxdvovra, bupopued, \(K- 
rd. 

Tako this Hypothetical Syllogism: — 

If it be day, the sun is on the earth ; 

But it it day ; 

Therefore, the sun is on the earth. 


Here, If it be day is called to hyov- 
Hfvov , both by Peripatetics and by 
Stoics ; the sun is on the earth , is 
called rb lirdyevov by Peripatetics, rb 
\rjyov by Stoics. The whole, If it be 
day, the sun is on the earth, is called rb 
(rvvn/ipUvov by Peripatetics, rb rpovi- 
k6v by Stoics : But it is day, is y erd- 
Xrjtpis to Peripatetics, irp6ar\ij\pis to 
Stoics. Therefore the sun is on the 
earth is cvyirepaaya to Peripatetics, 
iv«popd to Stoics. See Philoponus, 
In Anal. Prior., L. i. c. 23, f. 60 a, 
ed. Yenet. 1536. Brandis, Scholia, p. 
169. Cf. Anonymous Author, On Syl- 
logisms, f. 44.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


341 


Reason and Consequent.” ° The principle of this 
syllogism is thus variously enounced, — Posita condi- 
tione y ponitur conditionatum ; sublato conditionato y 
tollitur conditio. Or otherwise, — A ratione ad ra- 
tionatum, a negatione rationati ad negationem rationis y 
valet consequentia. The one alternative of either rule 
being regulative of the modus ponens y the other of the 
modus fallens.? 

“ But here it may be asked, why, as we conclude 
from the truth of the antecedent to the truth of the 
consequent (a ratione ad rationatum) y and from the 
falsehood of the consequent to the falsehood of the 
antecedent (a negatione rationati ad negationem ra- 
tionis) y can we not conversely conclude from the truth 
of the consequent to the truth of the antecedent, and 
from the falsehood of the antecedent to the falsehood 
of the consequent ? In answer to this question, it is 
manifest that this could be validly done, only on the 
following supposition — viz., if every consequent had 
only one possible antecedent ; and if, from an ante- 
cedent false as considered absolutely and in itself, it 
were impossible to have consequents true as facts. 

“ Thus, in the first place, it is incompetent to con- 
clude, that because B exists, that is, because the con- 
sequent member of the sumption, considered as an 
absolute proposition, is true, therefore the supposed rea- 
son A exists, that is, therefore the alleged antecedent 
member must be true ; for B may have other reasons 
besides A, such as C or D. In like manner, in the 
second place, we should not be warranted to infer, that 
because the supposed reason A is unreal, and the 
antecedent member false, therefore the result B is also 
unreal, and the consequent member false ; for the 


LECT. 

XVIII. 

IIow 

enounced. 


Why we 
cannot con- 
clude from 
the truth of 
the conse- 
quent to the 
truth of the 
antecedent, 
and from the 
falsehood of 
the antece- 
dent to the 
falsehood of 
the conse- 
quent. 


a Esser, Loyik, § 91, p. 174. — @ See Kant, Loyik, §§ 75, 7G. Krug, 

Ed. Logik, § 82. — Ed. 


 


342 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


Conversion 
of Hypo- 
thetical to 
Categorical 
Syllogisms, 
is, 1°, Un- 
necessary. 


2°, Not 

always 

possible. 


existence of B might be determined by many other 
reasons than A.” a For example : — 

If there are sharpers in the company we ought not to gamble ; 

But there arc no sharpers in the company ; 

Therefore , we ought to gamble. 

Here the conclusion is as false as if we conversely in- 
ferred, that because we ought not to gamble , there are 
no sharpers in the room. 

“ Logicians have given themselves a world of pains 
in the discovery of general rules for the conversion 
of Hypothetical Syllogisms into Categorical ./ 3 But, in 
the first place, this is unnecessary, in so far as it is 
applied to manifest the validity of an hypothetical 
syllogism ; for the hypothetical syllogism manifests 
its own validity with an evidence not less obtrusive 
than does the categorical, and, therefore, it stands in 
no need of a reduction to any higher form, as if it 
were of this a one-sided and accidental modification. 
With equal propriety might we inquire, how a cate- 
gorical syllogism is to be converted into an hypo- 
thetical. In the second place, this conversion is not 
always possible, and, therefore, it is never necessary. 
In cases where the sumption of an hypothetical syllo- 
gism contains only three notions, and where of these 
three notions one stands to the other two in the 
relation of a middle term, — in these cases, an hypo- 
thetical syllogism may without difficulty be reduced 


a Krug, Logik, § 82, p. 256 . — Ed. 

/3 [For the reduction of hypotheti- 
cal^ see Wolf, Philos. Pat., § 412. 
Reusch, Si/stema Logician, § 563. Mol- 
imeus, Elemcnta Logica,h. i. tract, iii. 
c. 1, p. 95. Kockeraiann, Opera, t. i. pp. 
266, 767. Crellius, Isagoge, L. iii.c. 17, 
p. 243. Kiesewetter, A llgcmcinc Logik, 


L § 239, p. 1 15. Esser, Logik, §§ 99, 100. 
Against, Bee Krug, Logik, p. 356, and 
Lexikon, iii. p. 559. Fries, Logik, § 62, 
p. 267. Bachmann, Logik, § 89, Anm. 2. 
(In part), Aristotle, Anal. Prior., L. 
i. c. 44, p. 274, ed. Pacii. (In part), 
Pacius, In Arist. Organon, loc. cit., 
p. 194.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


343 


to categoricals. Thus, when the formula, — If A is, 
then B is, signifies, — If A is C, then A is also B, — 
that is, A is B, inasmuch as it is C ; — in this case 
the categorical form is to be viewed as the original, 
and the hypothetical as the derivative .” 0 For ex- 
ample : — 

If Cains be a man, then he is mortal ; 

But Caius is a man ; 

Therefore , he is mortal. 

Here the notion man is regarded as comprehending 
in it, or as contained under, the notion mortal ; and 
as being comprehended in, or as containing under 
it, the notion Caius : it can, therefore, serve as 
middle term in the categorical syllogism to connect 
the two notions Caius and mortal. Thus : — 

Man is mortal ; 

Caius is man; 

Therefore, Caius is mortal. 

“ In such cases it requires only to discover the 
middle term, in order to reduce the hypothetical 
syllogism to a categorical form ; and no rules are 
requisite for those who comprehend the nature of the 
tw r o kinds of reasoning. 

“ But in those cases where the sumption of an 
hypothetical syllogism contains more than three 
notions, so that the formula, If A is, then B is, 
signifies, If A is C, then is B also D, — in such 
cases, an easy and direct conversion is impossible, as 
a categorical syllogism admits of only three principal 
notions. To accomplish a reduction at all, we must 
make a circuit through a plurality of categorical syl- 
logisms before we can arrive at an identical con- 
clusion, — a process which, so far from tending to 

o Krug, Logilc, p. 258, Autn., 3 . — Ed. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


 


344 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


Hypotheti- 
cal »yIIo- 
gi»ms of 
one form 
easily con- 
vertible into 
that of an- 
other. 


simplify and explain, conduces only to perplex and 
obscure. a 

“ On the other hand, we can always easily convert 
an hypothetical syllogism of one form into another, — 
the modus ponens into the modus tollens , — the modus 
tollens into the modus ponens . This is done by a mere 
contraposition of the antecedent and consequent of 
the sumption. Thus, the Ponent or Constructive 
Syllogism : — 


If Socrates be virtuous , then lie merits esteem ; 
But Socrates is virtuous ; 

Therefore, he merits esteem , 


may thus be converted into a Tollent or Destructive 
syllogism : — 

If Socrates do not merit esteem , then he is not virtuous ; 
But lie is virtuous ; 

Therefore , lie merits esteem. 


“This latter syllogism, though apparently a Con- 
structive syllogism, is in reality a Destructive. For 
in modo ponente we conclude from the truth of the 
antecedent to the truth of the consequent ; but here 
we really conclude from the falsehood of the conse- 
quent to the falsehood of the antecedent.” £ This latter 
syllogism, if fully expressed, would indeed be as 
follow T s : — 


If Socrates do not merit esteem, lie is not virtuous ; 

But Socrates is not not virtuous ; 

Therefore, he does not not merit esteem. 

3°, I now go on to a statement and consideration 
of the special rules by which an hypothetical syllogism 
is governed. 

o Compare Mark Duncan, Inslit, cano, Wimnsckaftslehre, Logilc, ii. 
Log., L. iv., c. 6, § 4, p. 240 et scq. 260, p. 562.] 

DerodoD, Logica Restituta, Dc Argu - /9 Krug, Logik, p.259-260 . — Ed. 

mentationc , § 106, p. 672 . — Ed. [Bol- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


345 


II LX VI. The special rules by which an Hypo- 
thetical Syllogism is regulated are the follow- 


LF.CT. 

XVIII. 


Par. LXVI. 
3°. Special 


mg : 

I. A regular and perfect hypothetical syllogism of 
must have three propositions, in which, however, 

o' 


vpotheti- 
I Syllo- 


more than three principal notions may be found. 

II. The Sumption is, in regard to quantity and 
quality, uniform, being always Definite and Affir- 
mative ; whereas the Subsumption varies in both 
relations. 

III. The Conclusion is regulated in quantity and 
quality by that member of the sumption which is 
not subsumed ; in modo ponente, they are con- 
gruent ; in modo tollente , they are opposed.® 


“The question touching the special laws of theExpiica- 
hypothetical syllogism, or, what is the same thing, First Rule, 
the question touching the original and necessary form latcs the 
of the hypothetical syllogism as determined by its form of the 

l i-i /»t> i hypothetical 

general principle, — the law of Keason and Conse- syllogism, 
quent, — this question may be referred both to the 
whole reasoning and to its several parts. The ori- 
ginal and necessary form of the hypothetical syllo- 
gism, as determined by its general principle, we have 
already considered. From this, as already noticed, it 
follows, as a corollary, that the hypothetical, like every 
other syllogism, must contain a threefold judgment : 

1°, A judgment whose constituent members stand to 
each other in the relation of reason and consequent ; 

2°, A judgment which subsumes as existent or non- 
existent one or other of these constituent members, 
standing to each other in the relation of reason and 
consequent ; and, 3°, Finally, a judgment decisive of 

o Krug, Lo<jik, § 83. — Ed. 


346 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. tlie existence or non-existence of that constituent 
member which was not subsumed in the second judg- 
ment. In these three propositions, — sumption, sub- 
sumption, and conclusion, — there may, however, be 
found more than three principal notions ; and this is 
always the case when the sumption contains more 
than three principal terms, as is exemplified in a pro- 
position like the following : — If God reward virtue, 
then will virtuous men be also happy. Here, however, 
it must, at the same time, be understood, that this 
proposition, in which a larger plurality of notions than 
three is apparent, contains, however, only the thought 
of one antecedent and of one consequent ; for a single 
consequent supposes a whole antecedent, how complex 
soever it may be, and a single antecedent involves in 
it a whole consequent, though made up of any number 
of parts. Both of these possibilities are seen in the 
example, now adduced, of an hypothetical judgment, in 
which there occur more than three principal notions. 
Ground on If, however, an hypothetical proposition involve only 
Hvpotiieti- the thought of a single antecedent and of a single 
p.tn iJT consequent, it will follow that any hypothetical syllo- 
p»r.u, i a. gism consists not of more than three, but of less 

having only . . . , . , . 

two tcnn» than three, capital notions ; and, m a rigorous sense, 
positions. this is actually the case .” 0 On this ground, accord- 
ingly, some logicians of great acuteness have viewed 
the hypothetical syllogism as a syllogism of two 
terms and of two propositions. P This is, however, 
Thi. view erroneous ; for, in an hypothetical syllogism, there 
are virtually three terms. “ That under this form of 


a Easer, Logik , § 92, p. 175-6 . — Ed. of Kant is held by Weiss, Logit , §§ 
& See Kant, Logik, § 75. Kant's 210,251. Herbart, Logik, § 65. Fia- 
view is combated by Krug, Logik, § cher, Logik, § 100, p. 137.] 

83. — Ed. [A view similar to that 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


347 


reasoning a whole syllogism can be evolved out of lect. 

not more than two capital notions depends on this, — 1 

that the two constituent notions of an hypothetical 
syllogism present a character in the sumption alto- 
gether different from what they exhibit in the sub- 
sumption and conclusion. In the sumption these 
notions stand bound together in the relation of reason 
and consequent, without, however, any determination 
in regard to the reality or unreality of one or other ; 
if the one be, then the other is, is all that is enounced. 

In the subsumption, on the other hand, the existence 
or non-existence of what one or other of these notions 
comprises is expressly asserted, and thus the concept 
expressly affirmed or expressly denied manifestly 
obtains in the subsumption a wholly different signi- 
ficance from what it bore when only enounced as a 
condition of reality or unreality ; and, in like manner, 
that notion which the subsumption left untouched, 
and concerning whose existence or non-existence the 
conclusion decides, obtains a character altogether dif- 
ferent in the end from what it presented in the 
beginning. And thus, in strict propriety, there are 
found only three capital notions in an hypothetical 
syllogism — viz., l“, The notion of the reciprocal de- 
pendence of subject and predicate ; 2°, The notion of 
the reality or unreality of the antecedent ; and, 3°, 

The notion of the reality or unreality of the conse- 
quent.”* So much in explanation of the first special 
law, or that regulative of the general form of the 
hypothetical syllogism. 

The second law states the conditions of these two Second 
premises, — that the sumption, in reference to its quan- “ * 
tity and quality, is uniform, being always definite, that 

a Esrnjr, loc. cit. — Ed. 


 



348 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


That the 
sumption 
is always 
definite to 
be under- 
stood in a 
qualified 
sense. 


is, singular or universal, and affirmative ; while the 
subsumption, in both relations, remains free. 

In regard to the sumption, when it is said that it is 
always definite, that is, singular or universal, and 
affirmative, this must be understood in a qualified 
sense. Touching the former, it may indeed be said 
that quantity may be altogether thrown out of ac- 
count in an hypothetical syllogism.® For a reason 
being once supposed, its consequent is necessarily 
affirmed without limitation ; and, by the disjunction, 
the extension or comprehension of the subject is so 
defined, that the opposite determinations must to- 
gether wholly exhaust it. It may, indeed, sometimes 
appear as if what was enounced in an hypothetical 
sumption, were enounced only of an indefinite num- 
ber, — of some ; and it, consequently, then assumes the 
form of a particular proposition. For instance, If 
some men are virtuous , then some other men are 
vicious. But here it is easily seen, that such judg- 
ments are of an universal or exhaustive nature. In 
the proposition adduced the real antecedent is, If 
some men {only) are virtuous , — the real consequent is, 
then all other men are vicious. It would, perhaps, 
have been better had the relative totality of the major 
proposition of an hypothetical syllogism been ex- 
pressed by another term than universal .P For the 
same reason it is, that the difference of extensive and 
comprehensive quantity determines no external change 
in the expression of an hypothetical syllogism ; for 
every hypothetical syllogism remains the same, whether 
we read it in the one quantity or in the other. 

a [See Alexander Aphnnlisiensis, In pp. 267, 344. — Ed.] 

Anal. Pnor., f. 5 a. Scholia , cd. /3 See above p. 267. Compare Esser, 
Brandis, p. 144. Derodon, Loyica Loyik, § 92, p. 177.— Ed. 

Jlc8tiluta, p. 688.] [Compare above, 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


349 


111 regard to the other statement of the rule, — that lect. 

0 # XVIII 

the sumption of an hypothetical syllogism must be -I 1 

always affirmative, — this likewise demands a word of is 
illustration. It is true that the antecedent or the con- 
sequent of such a sumption may be negative as well 
as affirmative ; for example, If Caius be not virtuous , 
he is not entitled to respect ; If the sun be not risen , 
it is not day . But here the proposition, as an hypo- 
thetical judgment, is and must be affirmative. For 
the affirmative in such a judgment is contained in the 
positive assertion of the dependence of consequent or 
antecedent ; and if such a dependence be not affirmed, 
an hypothetical judgment cannot exist. 

In regard to what is stated in the rule concerning The »ui>- 
the conditions of the subsumption, — that this may 8umpllon * 
either be general or particular, affirmative or nega- 
tive, — it will not be requisite to say anything in illus- 
tration. For, as the subsumption is merely an abso- 
lute assertion of a single member of the sumption, and 
as such member may, as an isolated proposition, be of 
any quantity or any quality, it follows, that the sub- 
sumption is equally unlimited. 

In reference to the third rule, which states that the Third Rule, 
conclusion is regulated in quantity and quality by 
that member of the sumption which is not subsumed, 
and this in niodo ponente by congruence, in modo 
tollente by opposition, it will not be requisite to say 
much. 

“ In the conclusion, the latter clause of the sump- 
tion is affirmed in modo ponente , because the former 
is affirmed in the subsumption. In this case, the con- 
clusion has the same quantity and quality as the 
clause which it affirms. In modo tollente the ante- 
cedent of the sumption is denied in the conclusion ; 


350 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. because in the subsumption the consequent clause had 
xvm . 1 

1 been denied. There thus emerges an opposition be- 
tween that clause as denied in the conclusion, and 
that clause as affirmed in the sumption. The conclu- 
sion is thus always opposed to the antecedent of the 
sumption in quantity, or in quality, or in both together, 
according as this is differently determined by the differ- 
ent constitution of the propositions. For example : — 

If some men were omniscient, then would they he as Gods ; 

But no man is a God ; 

Therefore, some men are not omniscient, that is, no man is 
omniscient." « 

3. Hvpotho- I now proceed to the consideration of the last class 
^?active or of syllogisms afforded by the Internal Form, — the class 
Syllogisms, of Dilemmatic or Hypothetico-disjunctive Syllogisms, 
and I comprise a general enunciation of their nature 
in the following paragraph. 

LXVII. If the sumption of a syllogism be at 
once hypothetical and disjunctive, and if in the 
subsumption the whole disjunction, as a conse- 
quent, be sublated, in order to sublate the ante- 
cedent in the conclusion ; — such a reasoning is 
called an Hypothetico-disjunctive Syllogism, or a 
Dilemma. The form of this syllogism is the 
following : — 

If A exist, then either B or C exists ; 

But neither B nor C exists ; 

Therefore, A does not exist. $ 

Explica- We have formerly seen, that an hypothetical may 

a Krug, Logik , § 83, p. 265 . — Ed. Cf. Fries, Logik , § 60, p. 257. Aldrich, 
$ Krug, Logik, § 87. — Ed. [Contra, Rudimcnta Logic#, c. iv. § 3, p. 107, 
see Troxler, Logik , ii. p. 103 n*. That Oxford, 1852. Platuer, PhilotophUchc 
the Dilemma is a negative induction, Aphoritmcn , i. § 583, p. 280.] 
see Walh’a, Logica, L. iii. c. 19,p. 218. 


Par. LXVII. 
Hypothe- 
tico-disiunc- 
tive Syllo- 
gism or 
Dilemma. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


351 


be combined with a disjunctive judgment ; and if a lect. 

proposition of such a character be placed at the head L 

of a reasoning, we have the Hypothetico-disjunctive 
Syllogism or Dilemma. This reasoning is properly an 
hypothetical syllogism, in which the relation of the 
antecedent to the consequent is not absolutely affirm- 
ed, but affirmed through opposite and reciprocally ex- 
clusive predicates. If A exist, then either B or C 
exist. The sumption is thus at once hypothetical 
and disjunctive. The subsumption then denies the 
disjimctive members contained in the consequent or 
posterior clause of the sumption. But neither B nor 
C exist. And then the inference is drawn in the con- 
clusion, that the reason given in the antecedent or 
prior clause of the sumption must likewise be denied. 
Therefore A does not exist. ° For example : — 

If man be not a morally responsible being, he mist want either the. 
power of recognising moral good (as an intelligent agent), or 
the power of willing it (as a free agent) ; 

But man wants neither the power of recognising moral good (as an 
intelligent), nor the power of willing it (as a free agent)-, 

Therefore, man is a morally responsible being. 

“ An hypothetico-disjunctive syllogism is called the rk*ign». 
dilemma or homed, syllogism in the broader accept- li^othei.” 
ation of the term, ( dilemma , ceralinvs, comutus sc. t^eS^uol 
syllogismus). We must not, however, confound the 8 "”"' 
comutus and crocodilinus of the ancients with our 
hypothetico-disjunctive syllogism. The former were 
sophisms of a particular kind, which we are hereafter 
to consider ; the latter is a regular and legitimate 
form of reasoning. In regard to the application of 
the terms, it is called the comutus or homed syllogism, 
because in the sumption the disjunctive members of 

o Krug, loc. c it. — Ed. 


 



352 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


Rule* for 
sifting a 
proposed 
Dilemma. 


the consequent are opposed like horns to the assertion 
of the adversary ; with these, we throw it from one 
side to the other in the subsumption ; in order to toss 
it altogether away in the conclusion. If the disjunc- 
tion has only two members, the syllogism is then 
called a dilemma ( bicornis ) in the strict and proper 
signification, literally double sumption. Of this the 
example previously given is an instance. If it has 
three, four, or five members, it is called trilemma ( tri - 
cornis), tetralemma (quadricorim), pentalemma (quin- 
quecomis) ; if more than four it is, however, usually 
called polylemma ( multicornis ). But, in the looser 
signification of the word, Dilemma is a generic ex- 
pression for all or any of these.” “ 

“ Considered in itself, the hypothetico-disjunctive 
syllogism is not to be rejected, for in this form of 
reasoning we can conclude with cogency, provided we 
attend to the laws already given in regard to the 
hypothetical and disjunctive syllogisms. It is not, 
however, to be denied, that this kind of syllogism is 
very easily abused for the purpose of deceiving, 
through a treacherous appearance of solidity, and 
from terrifying a timorous adversary by its homed 
aspect. In the sifting of a proposed dilemma, we 
ought, therefore, to look closely at the three following 
particulars: — 1°, Whether a veritable consequence 
subsists between the antecedent and consequent of the 
sumption ; 2°, Whether the opposition in the conse- 
quent is thorough-going and valid ; and, 3°, Whether 
in the subsumption the disjunctive members are legi- 
timately sublated. For the example of a dilemma 
which violates these conditions, take the following : — 

a Krug, loc. cit. Anm., 2. — Ed. 268, 769.1 
[Cf. Keckermaim, Opera , t. L pp. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


353 


If virtue were a habit worth acquiring, it must insure either LECT. 
potcer, or wealth, or honour, or pleasure ; 

But virtue insures none of these ; 

Therefore, virtue is not a habit worth attaining. 

“ Here : — 1°. The inference in general is invalid; for 
a thing may be worth acquiring though it does not 
secure any of those advantages enumerated. 2°. The 
disjunction is incomplete; for there are other goods 
which virtue insures, though it may not insure those 
here opposed. 3°. The subsumption is also vicious ; 
for virtue has frequently obtained for its possessors 
the very advantages here denied.” 0 

Before leaving this subject, it may be proper toj**^? 
make two observations. The first of these is, that" 11 *"** - 

. Identity, 

though it has been stated that Categorical Syllogisms 
are governed by the laws of Identity and Contradic- 
tion, that Disjunctive Syllogisms are governed by the“;j*^ n 
law of Excluded Middle, and that Hypothetical Syllo- 1 0 *” 1 *-*™ 

V A ^ operative in 

gisms are governed by the law of Reason and Conse- form 

° ~ J of syllogism. 

quent, — this statement is not, however, to be under- 
stood as if, in these several classes of syllogism, no 
other law were to be found in operation, except that 
by which their peculiar form is determined. Such a 
supposition would be altogether erroneous, for in all 
of these different kinds of syllogism, besides the law 
by which each class is principally regulated, and from 
which it obtains its distinctive character, all the others 
contribute, though in a less obtrusive manner, to allow 
and to necessitate the process. Thus, though the laws Thisjiiu*. 
of Identity and Contradiction are the laws which per- i. in c»tc- 
manently regulate the Categorical Syllogism, — still 
without the laws of Excluded Middle, and Reason and 
Consequent, all inference in these syllogisms would be 

a Krug, Logik, § 87. Aum. 3, p. 281 .— Ed. 

VOL. I. Z 


 



354 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. impossible. Thus, though the law of Identity affords 
- XV1IL the basis of all affirmative, and the law of Contradic- 
tion the basis of all negative, syllogisms, still it is the 
law of Excluded Middle which legitimates the impli- 
cation, that, besides affirmation and negation, there 
is no other possible quality of predication. In like 
manner, no inference in categorical reasoning could 
be drawn, were we to exclude the determination of 
Reason and Consequent. For we only, in deductive 
reasoning, conclude of a part what we assume of a 
whole, inasmuch as we think the whole as the reason, 
— the condition, — the antecedent, — by which the part, 
as a consequent, is determined ; and we only, in induc- 
tive reasoning, conclude of the whole what we assume 
of all the parts, inasmuch as we think all the parts as 
the reason, — the condition, — the antecedent, — by which 
The law of the whole, as a consequent, is determined. In point 
maHy l ^ho° r of fact, logically or formally, the law of Identity and 
that of Rea- the law of Reason and Consequent in its affirmative 
consequent, form, are at bottom the same ; the law of Identity 
constitutes only the law of Reason and Consequent, — 
the two relatives being conceived simultaneously, that 
is, as subject and predicate ; the law of Reason and 
Consequent constitutes only the law of Identity, the 
two relatives being conceived in sequence, that is, as 
antecedent and consequent.® And as the law of 
Reason and Consequent, in its positive form, is only 
that of Identity in movement ; so, in its negative 
form, it is only that of Contradiction in movement. 

2 . in Din- In Disjunctive Syllogisms, again, though the law of 
J Syiio^mB. Excluded Middle be the principle which bestows on 
them their peculiar form, still these syllogisms are not 

a [Compare Koppen, DarsteU ring des der Philosophic, p. 102 et 

seq., Niirnberg, 1810.] 


 


LECTURES OS LOGIC. 


355 


independent of the laws of Identity, of Contradiction, lect. 

and of Reason and Consequent. The law of Excluded 1 

Middle cannot be conceived apart from the laws 
of Identity and Contradiction ; these it implies, and, 
without the principle of Reason and Consequent, no 
movement from the condition to the conditioned, that 
is, from the affirmation or negation of one contradic- 
tory to the affirmation or negation of the other, would 
be possible. 

Finally, in Hypothetical Syllogisms, though the law s. in Hyj»- 
of Reason and Consequent be the prominent and dis- } 
tinctive principle, still the laws of Identity, Contra- 
diction, and Excluded Middle are also there at work. 

The law of Identity affords the condition of Affirma- 
tive or Constructive, and the law of Contradiction of 
Negative or Destructive, Hypothetical ; while the law 
of Excluded Middle limits the reasoning to these two 
modes alone. 

The second observation I have to make, is one sug- Difficult _ in 
gested by a difficulty which has been proposed to me ,7,JHwi oe , 
in regard to the doctrine, that all reasoning is either ‘^Ln'iug 
from whole to part, or from the parts to the whole. The f' 0 ^ th „" 0 i e 
difficulty, which could only have presented itself to 
an acute and observant intellect, it gave me much 
satisfaction to hear proposed ; and I shall have still obv, * tod - 
greater gratification, if I should be able to remove it, 
by showing in what sense the doctrine advanced is to 
be understood. It was to this effect : — In Categorical 
Syllogisms, deductive and inductive, intensive and 
extensive, the reasoning is manifestly from whole to 
part, or from the parts to the whole, and, therefore, 
in regard to the doctrine in question, as relative to 
categorical reasoning, there was no difficulty. But 
this was not the case in regard to Hypothetical Syllo- 


 



3oG LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

lf.ct. gisms. These are governed by the law of Reason and 
1 Consequent, and it does not appear how the antece- 
dent and consequent stand to each other in the rela- 
tion of whole and part. 

This aim. In showing how the reason and the consequent are 
.Moral with to be viewed as whole and part, it is necessary, first, to 
n^mthrti- repeat, that the reason or antecedent means the condi- 

Cftl syllo- . • • 

gisma. tion, that is, the complement of all without which 

ami cotwe- something else would not be ; and the consequent 
means the conditioned, that is, the complement of all 
that is determined to be by the existence of something 
else. You must further bear in mind, that we have 
nothing to do with things standing in the relation of 
reason and consequent, except in so far as they are 
thought to stand in that relation ; it is with the ratio 
cognoscendi, not with the ratio essendi, that we have 
to do in Logic ; the former is, in fact, alone properly 
denominated reason and consequent, while the latter 
ought to be distinguished as cause and effect. The 
ratio essendi, or the law of Cause and Effect, can 
indeed only be thought under the form of the ratio 
cognoscendi, or of the principle of Reason and Conse- 
quent ; but as the two are not convertible, inasmuch 
as the one is far more extensive than the other, it is 
proper to distinguish them, and, therefore, it is to be 
recollected, that Logic is alone conversant with the 
ratio cognoscendi, or the law of Reason and Conse- 
quent, as alone conversant with the form of thought. 

This being understood, if the reason be conceived as 
that which conditions, in other words, as that which 
contains the necessity of the existence of the conse- 
coiucqucnt. q Uen |.. evident that it is conceived as containing 
the consequent. For, in the first place, a reason is 
only a reason if it be a sufficient reason, that is, if it 


qucnt arc 
equal to 
Condition 
and Con- 
ditioned. 




Hcneo the 
reason or 
condition 
must con- 
tain the 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


357 


comprise all the conditions, that is, all that necessitates lect. 

1 m xvill 

the existence, of the consequent ; for if all the con- J 1. 

ditions of anything are present, that thing must neces- 
sarily exist, since, if it do not exist, then some con- 
dition of its existence must have been wanting, that 
is, there was not a sufficient reason of its existence, 
which is contrary to the supposition. In the second 
place, if the reason, the sufficient reason, be conceived 
as comprising all the conditions of the existence of 
the consequent, it must be conceived as comprising 
the consequent altogether ; for if the consequent be 
supposed to contain in it any one part not conceived 
as contained in the reason, it may contain two, three, 
or any number of parts equally uncontained in the 
reason, consequently it may be conceived as altogether 
uncontained in the reason. But this is to suppose, 
that it has no reason, or that it is not a consequent ; 
which again is contrary to the hypothesis. The law ti, c l»w of 
of Reason and Consequent, or of the Condition and the Consequent 
Conditioned, is only in fact another expression ofwpr^bn* 
Aristotle’s law, — that the whole is necessarily con- Jotie’Tiaw, 
ceived as prior to the part — totum parte prim esse , whole is 
necesse est. a It is, however, more accurate ; for conceived 
Aristotle’s law is either inaccurate or ambiguous. the part. 
Inaccurate, for it is no more true to say, that the 
whole is necessarily prior in the order of thought to CI8CtL 
the parts, than to say that the parts are necessarily 
prior in the order of thought to the whole. Whole 


a Mctaphysic s, iv. 11. Aristotle, 
however, allows a double relation. 
The whole, when conceived as actu- 
ally constituted, must be regarded as 
prior to the parts ; for the latter only 
exist as parts in relation to the whole. 
Potentially, however, the parts may 
be regarded as prior ; for the whole 


might be destroyed as a system with- 
out the destruction of the parts. 
Where the whole is not conceived as 
actually constituted, this relation is 
reversed. Thus Aristotle’s rule may 
bo regarded as coextensive with that 
given in the text. Sec the next note. 
— Ed. 


 


358 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


Whole and 
Parts re- 
spectively 
may be 
viewed 
in thought 
either as the 
conditioning 
or as the 
conditioned. 


and parts are relatives, and as such are necessarily 
coexistent in thought. But while each implies the 
other, and the notion of each necessitates the notion 
of the other, we may, it is evident, view either, in 
thought, as the conditioning or antecedent, or as the 
conditioned or consequent. Thus, on the one hand, 
we may regard the whole as the prior and determining 
notion, as containing the parts, and the parts, as the 
posterior and determined notion, as contained by the 
whole. On the other hand, we may regard the parts 
as the prior and determining notion, as constituting 
the whole, and the whole as the posterior and deter- 
mined notion, as constituted by the parts." In the 
former case, the whole is thought as the reason, the 
parts are thought as the consequent ; in the latter, the 
parts are thought as the reason, the whole is thought 
as the consequent. Now in so far as the whole is 
thought as the reason, there will be no difficulty in 
admitting that the reason is conceived as containing 
the parts. But it may be asked, how can the parts, 
when thought as the reason, be said to contain the 
whole 1 To this the answer is easy. All the parts 
contain the whole, just as much as the whole contains 
all the parts. Objectively considered, the whole does 
not contain all the parts, nor do all the parts contain 
the whole, for the whole and all the parts are precisely 
equivalent, absolutely identical. But, subjectively 
considered, that is, as mere thoughts, we may either 
think the whole by all the parts, or think all the parts 

a This is substantially expressed by parts are only potentially, existent ; 
Aristotle, l. c., whose distinction is while, on the other hand, Kara <p9op<iy 
applicable either to the order of (L e., regarded os disorganised elo- 
th ought or to that of existence. Kark mente), the parts exist actually, the 
yjvtaiv (*. t. regarded as a complete whole only potentially. — E d. 
system), the whole is actually, the 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


359 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


’plication 

this doc- 


by the whole. If we think all the parts by the whole, 
we subordinate the notion of the parts to the notion 
of the whole ; that is, we conceive the parts to exist, as 
we conceive their existence given through the existence 
of the whole containing them. If we think the whole 
by all the parts, we subordinate the notion of the 
whole to the notion of the parts ; that is, we conceive 
the whole to exist, as we conceive its existence given 
through the existence of the parts which constitute it. 

Now, in the one case, we think the whole as con- 
ditioning or comprising the parts, in the other, the 
parts as conditioning or comprising the whole. In 
the former case, the parts are thought to exist, because 
their whole exists ; in the latter, the whole is thought 
to exist, because its parts exist. In either case, the Aj 
prior or determining notion is thought to comprise trine to ih 0 
or to contain the posterior or determined. To apply the difficulty 
this doctrine : — On the one hand, every science is true, iu^d. u,ly 
only as all its several rules are true ; in this instance 
the science is conceived as the determined notion, 
that is, as contained in the aggregate of its constituent 
rules. On the other hand, each rule of any science is 
true, only as the science itself is true ; in this instance 
the rule is conceived as the determined notion, that 
is, as contained in the whole science. Thus, every 
single syllogism obtains its logical legitimacy, because 
it is a consequent of the doctrine of syllogism; the 
latter is, therefore, the reason of each several syllogism, 
and the whole science of Logic is abolished, if each 
several syllogism, conformed to this doctrine, be not 
valid. On the other hand, the science of Logic, as a 
whole, is only necessary inasmuch as its complementary 
doctrines are necessary ; and these are only necessary 
inasmuch as their individual applications are neces- 


 



360 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


sary ; if Logic, therefore, as a whole be not necessary, 
the necessity of the parts, which constitute, determine 
and comprehend that whole, is subverted. In one 
relation, therefore, reason and consequent are as the 
whole and a contained part, in another, as all the parts 
and the constituted or comprised "whole. But in both 
relations, the reason, — the determining notion, is 
thought, as involving in it the existence of the conse- 
scquent or determined notion. Thus, in one point of 
view, the genus is the determining notion, or reason, 
out of which are evolved, as consequents, the species 
and individual ; in another, the individual is the deter- 
mining notion or reason, out of which, as consequents, 
are evolved the species and genus.® In like manner, 
if we regard the subject as that in which the attri- 
butes inhere, — in this view the subject is the reason, 
that is, the whole, of which the attributes are a part ; 
whereas if we regard the attributes as the modes 
through which alone the subject can exist, in this 
view the attributes are the reason, that is, the whole, 
of which the subject is a part. In a word, whatever 
we think as conditioned, we think as contained by 
something else, that is, either as a part, or as a con- 
stituted whole ; whatever we think as conditioning, 
we think either as a containing whole, or as a sum of 
constituting parts. What, therefore, the sumption of 
an hypothetical syllogism denotes, is simply this : — 
If A, a notion conceived as conditioning, and, there- 
fore, as involving B, exist, then B also is necessarily 
conceived to exist, inasmuch as it is conceived as fully 
conditioned by, or as involved in, A. I am afraid 
that what I have now said may not be found to have 

a This is expressly allowed l>y Aris- from him by Sir W. Hamilton him* 
totle, Mctajih., iv. 25, and is quoted self, Discussion s, p. 173 . — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 3G1 

removed the difficulty, but if it suggest to you a train 
of reflection which may lead you to a solution of the 
difficulty by your own effort, it will have done better. 

So much for Hypothetico-disjunctive syllogisms, the 
last of the four classes determined by the internal 
form of reasoning. In these four syllogisms, — the 
Categorical, the Disjunctive, the Hypothetical, and the 
Hypothetico-disjunctive, all that they exhibit is con- 
formable to the necessary laws of thought, and they 
are each distinguished from the other by their essential 
nature ; for their sumptions, as judgments, present 
characters fundamentally different, and from the sump- 
tion, as a general rule, the validity of syllogisms pri- 
marily and principally depends. 


LECT. 

XVIII. 


362 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECTURE XIX. 
STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS. — THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 

EXTERNAL FORM. 

A. COMPLEX, — EPICHEIREMA AND SORITES. 

lect. In our treatment of Syllogisms, we have hitherto 

— taken note only of the Internal, or Essential Form 

S -th°cTr S Ex’. °f Reasoning. But besides this internal or essential 
tomaiForm. £ orm ^hcre j s another, — an External or Accidental 

Form ; and as the former was contained in the recip- 
rocal relations of the constituent parts of the syl- 
logism, as determined by the nature of the thinking 
subject itself, so the latter is contained in the outer 
expression or enouncement of the same parts, whereby 
the terms and propositions are variously affected in 
respect of their number, position, and order of conse- 
cution. The varieties of Syllogism arising from their 
external form may, I think, be conveniently reduced to 
the three heads expressed in the following paragraph : — 

H LXVIII. Syllogisms, in respect of their Ex- 
ternal Form, admit of a threefold modification. 
For while, as pure, they are at once Simple , and 
Complete , and Regular , so, as qualified, they are 


Par. LXVIII. 
Division of 
Syllogisms 
according 
to External 
Form. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


363 


either Complex, or Incomplete, or Irregular: lect. 
the two former of these modifications regarding X1X — 
the number of their parts, as apparently either 
too many or too few ; the last regarding the 
inverted order in which these parts are enounced. 

I shall consider these several divisions in their order ; Expiic*- 
and, first, of the syllogisms which vary from the simple a. complex 
form of reasoning by their apparent complexity. s>u°g>m»- 
But before touching on the varieties of syllogism Relation of 
afforded by their complexity of composition, it may 
be proper to premise a few words in regard to the 
relation of syllogisms to each other. “ Every syllogism 
may be considered as absolute and independent, inas- 
much as it always contains a complete and inclusive 
series of thought. But a syllogism may also stand to 
other syllogisms in such a relation that, along with 
these correlative syllogisms, it makes up a greater or 
lesser series of thoughts, all holding to each other the 
dependence of antecedent and consequent. And such 
a reciprocal dependence of syllogisms becomes neces- 
sary, when one or other of the predicates of the prin- 
cipal syllogism is destitute of complete certainty, and 
when this certainty must be established through one or 
more correlative syllogisms.” “ “A syllogism, viewed cia»e. and 
as an isolated and independent whole, is called a of wS 
Monosyllogism (monosyllogismus), that is, a single Mono^iio- 
reasoning ; — whereas, a series of correlative syllogisms, R ’ m ' 
following each other in the reciprocal relation of 
antecedent and consequent, is called a Polysyllogism Poiyiyiio- 
( polysyllogismus ), that is, a multiplex or composite of 
reasoning, and may likewise be denominated a Chain 
of Reasoning ( series syllogistica). Such a chain, — 

a EaHer, Logik, § 104 — Ed. 


 



3G4 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIX. 


This Ana- 
lytic and 
Synthetic. 


Prosyllo- 

gitttn. 


Episyllo- 

gitra. 


such a series, may, however, have such an order of 
dependence, that either each successive syllogism is 
the reason of that which preceded, or the preceding 
syllogism is the reason of that which follows. In the 
former case, we conclude analytically or regressively ; 
in the second, synthetically or progressively. That 
syllogism in the series which contains the reason of 
the premise of another, is called a Prosyllogism ( pro - 
syUogismus) ; and that syllogism which contains the 
consequent of another, is called an Episyttogism (ejri- 
syllogismus). Every Chain of Reasoning must, there- 
fore, be made up both of Prosyllogisms and of Epi- 
syllogisms ” a “ When the series is composed of more 
than two syllogisms, the same syllogism may, in differ- 
ent relations, be at once a prosyllogism and an epi- 
syllogism ; and that reasoning which contains the 
primary or highest reason is alone exclusively a pro- 
syllogism, as that reasoning which enounces the last 
or lowest consequent is alone exclusively an episyllo- 
gism. But this concatenation of syllogisms, as ante- 
cedents and consequents, may be either manifest, or 
occult, according as the plurality of syllogisms may 
either be openly displayed, or as it may appear only 
as a single syllogism. The polysyllogism is, therefore, 
likewise either manifest or occult. The occult poly- 
syllogism, with which alone we arc at present con- 
cerned, consists either of partly complete and partly 
abbreviated syllogisms, or of syllogisms all equally 
abbreviated. In the former case, there emerges the 
complex syllogism called Epicheirema ; in the latter, 
the complex syllogism called Sorites”? Of these in 
their order. 


a Krug, Ixtgik, § 111. — Ed. Reusch, Sgttema Logic urn, § 578, p. 

(3 Esser, Logik, § 104. — Ed. [Cf. C64, Icme, 1741.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


305 


^ LXIX. A syllogism is now vulgarly called 
an Epicheirema (imxeLprjua), when to either of 
the two premises, or to both, there is annexed a 
reason for its support. As : — 

B is A ; 

But Ci«B; for it is D ; 

Therefore, C is also A. a 
Or, 

All rice is odious ; 

But avarice is a vice; for it makes men slaves ; 

Therefore, avarice is odious.p 

In illustration of this paragraph, it is to be observed, 
that the Epicheirema, or Reason-rendering Syllogism, 
is either single or double, according as one or both of 
the premises are furnished with an auxiliary reason. 
The single epicheirema is either an epicheirema of the 
first or second order, according as the adscititious pro- 
position belongs to the sumption or to the subsump- 
tion. There is little or nothing requisite to be stated 
in regard to this variety of complex syllogism, as it 
is manifestly nothing more than a regular episyllo- 
gism with an abbreviated prosyllogism interwoven. 
There might be something said touching the name, 
which, among the ancient rhetoricians, was used now in 
a stricter, now in a looser, signification . 7 This, how- 
ever, as it has little interest in a logical point of view, 
I shall not trouble you by detailing ; and now pro- 
ceed to a far more important and interesting subject. 


a In full, — 

C is D ; 

DtiB; 

Therefore , CwB. 

P In full, — 

What makes men slaves is a vice ; 
But avarice makes men slaves ; 
Therefore , avarice is a vice. 


y For some notices of tliese varia- 
tions, see Quintilian, Inst. OraL, v. 
10, 2, r. 14, 5. Compare also Schweig- 
hauser on Epictetus, i. 8 ; Tren- 
delenburg, Elementa Loyiccs Aristote - 
Zicar, § 33 ; Facciolati, Acroases, De 
Epichiremate, p. 127 et seq. In Aris- 
totle tho term is used for a dialectic 
syllogism. See Topica , viil 11 . — Ed. 


LF.CT. 

XIX. 


Par. LXIX. 
Tho Epi- 
cheirema. 


Explica- 

tion. 


 



366 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. — the second variety of complex syllogisms, — the 
— Sorites. 


1 LXX. When, on the common principle of 
all reasoning, — that the part of a part is a part 
of the whole, — we do not stop at the second gra- 
dation, or at the part of the highest part, and 
conclude that part of the whole, — as All B is a 
part of the ichole A, ancl all C is a part of the 
part B, therefore all C is also a part of the whole 
A, — but proceed to some indefinitely remoter 
part, as D, E, F, G, H, &c., which, on the general 
principle, we connect in the conclusion with its 
remotest whole, — this complex reasoning is called 
a Chain-Syllogism or Sorites. If the whole from 
which we descend be a comprehensive quantity, 
the Sorites is one of Comprehension ; if it be an 
extensive quantity, the Sorites is one of Exten- 
sion. The formula of the first will be : — 


1) E Is I) ; that is, E comprehends I); 

2) IJ is C ; that is, D comprehends C ; 

3) C is I! ; that is, C comprehends B; 

4) B is A ; that is, B comprehends A ; 

Therefore, E is A ; in other words, E comprehends A. 

The formula of the second will be : — 


1) Bt* A; that is, A contains under it B; 

2) C is B ; that is, B contains under it C ; 

3) I) is C ; that is, C contains under it D ; 

4) E is D ; that is, D contains under it E ; 

Therefore, E is A ; in other words, A contains under it E. 

These reasonings are both Progressive, each in its 
several quantity, as descending from whole to part. 
But as we may also, arguing back from part to whole, 
obtain the same conclusion, there is also competent in 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


367 


either quantity a Regressive Sorites. However, the 
formula of the Regressive Sorites in the one quantity, 
will be only that of the Progressive Sorites in the 
other.® 


1 


2 


3 







As a concrete example of these : — 

I. Progressive Comprehensive Sorites. 


Bucephalus is a lwrse ; 

A horse is a quadruped ; 

A quadruped is an animal ; 

An animal is a substance ; 

Therefore . , Bucephalus is a substance. 


a [On the Sorites in general, see 
Crakanthorpe, Logica , L. iii. c. 22, p. 
219. Valla, Dialect ., L. iii. c. 54, fol. 
38, ed. 1509. M. Duncan, Jnstit. 
Log ., L. iv. c. vii. § 6, p. 255. Faccio 
lati, Acroasis, De Sorite, p. 15 et seq. 
Melanchthon, Erotem. Dial., L. iii. 
De Sorite, p. 743. Wolf, Phil. Rat., § 
466, et seq. Walch, Lexikon, v. u Sor- 
ites.” Fries, Logik, § 64.] 

$ Diagrams Nos. 1 and 2 represent 
the Affirmative Sorites in the case in 


which the concepts are coextensive. 
— See above, p. 189, Diagram 2. Dia- 
grams Nos. 3 and 4 represent the Affir- 
mative Sorites, in the case in which 
the concepts are subordinate. — See 
above, p. 189, Diagram 3. Diagram 
No. 5, taken in connection with No. 
3, represents the Negative Sorites. 
Thus, to take the Progressive Com- 
prehensive Sorites E is D, D is C, 
C is B, B is A, no A is P; therefore, no 
E is P. — Ed. 


LECT. 

XIX. 


Explica- 

tion. 

Concrete 
examples 
of Sorites. 


368 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. Or as explicated : — 
xix. 1 

The representation of the individual Bucephalus comprehends 
or contains in it the notion horse ; 

The notion horse comprehends the notion quadruped ; 

The notion quadruped comprehends the notion animal ; 

The notion animal comprehends the notion substance ; 
Therefore, (on the common principle that the part of a part 
is a part of the whole J, the representation of the indi- 
vidual, Bucephalus, comprehends err contains in it the 
notion substance. 

IT. Regressive Comprehensive Sorites. 

An animal is a substance ; 

A quadruped is an animal ; 

A horse is a quadruped ; 

Bucephalus is a horse ; 

Therefore, Bucephalus is a substance. 

Or as explicated : — 

The notion animal comprehends the notion sidistance ; 

The notion quadruped comprehends the notion animal ; 

The notion horse comprehends the notion quadruped ; 

The. representation, Bucephalus, comprehends the tuition horse; 
Therefore, (on the common principle, fyc.) the representation, 
Bucephalus, comprehends the tuition substance. 

III. Progressive Extensive Sorites, (which is, as enounced 
by the common copula, identical in expression with the 
Regressive Comprehensive Sorites, No. II.) 

An animal is a substance ; 

A quadruped is an attuned ; 

A horse is a quadruped ; 

Bucepihalus is a horse ; 

Therefore, Bucephalus is a stibsfanco. 


Or as explicated : — 

The notion anittud is contained under the notion substance ; 
The notion quadruped is contained tinder the notion animal ; 
The notion horse is contained under the notion quadrujied ; 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


3G9 


The represent at ion Bucephalus is contained under the nofioti LECT. 
horse ; 

Therefore , ( on the common principle , tyc.) the representation 
Bucephalus is contained under the notion substance. 

IV. The Regressive Extensive Sorites, (which is, as expressed 
by the ambiguous copula, verbally identical with the 
Progressive Comprehensive Sorites, No. I.) 

Bucephalus is a horse ; 

A horse is a quadruped ; 

A quadruped is an animal ; 

An animal is a substance ; 

Therefore , Bucephalus is a substance. 

Or as explicated : — 

The representation Bucephalus is contained under the notion 
horse ; 

The notion horse is contained under the notion quadruped ; 

The notion, quadruped is contained under the notion animal ; 

The notion animal is contained under the notion substance; 

Therefore , the representation Bucephalus is contained under 
the notion substance. 


There is thus not the smallest difficulty either in 
regard to the peculiar nature of the Sorites, or in re- 
gard to its relation to the simple syllogism. In the 
first place, it is evident that the formal inference in 
the Sorites is equally necessary and equally manifest 
as in the simple syllogism, for the principle, — the part 
of a part is a part of the whole, — is plainly not less 
applicable to the remotest, than to the most proximate 
link in the subordination of whole and part. In the 
second place, it is evident that the Sorites can be 
resolved into as many simple syllogisms as there are 
middle terms between the subject and predicate of the 
conclusion, that is, intermediate wholes and parts be- 
tween the greatest whole and the smallest part, which 
the reasoning connects. Thus, the concrete example 
VOL. i. 2 a 


1. The for- 
mal infer- 
ence in Sori- 
tes equally 
necessary 
os in simple 
syllogism. 


2. Sorites 
resolvable 
into simple 
syllogisms. 


370 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIX. 


This illus- 
trated. 


of a Sorites, already given, is virtually composed of 
three simple syllogisms. It will be enough to show 
this in one of the quantities ; and, as the most perspi- 
cuous, let us take that of Comprehension. 

The Progressive Sorites in this quantity was as fol- 
lows, (and it is needless, I presume, to explicate it) : — 

Bucephalus is a horse ; 

A horse, is a quadruped ; 

A quadruped is an animal ; 

An animal is a substance ; 

Therefore, Bucephalus is a substance. 

Here, besides the major and minor terms, (. Buce- 
phalus and substance), we have three middle terms, — 
horse, — quadruped, — animal. We shall, conse- 
quently, have three simple syllogisms. Thus, in the 
first place, we obtain from the middle term horse, the 
following syllogism, concluding quadruped of Buce- 
phalus : — 

L — Bucephalus is a horse : 

But a horse is a quadruped ; 

Therefore, Bucephalus is a quadruped. 

Having thus established that Bucephalus is a 
quadruped, we employ quadruped as a middle term 
by which to connect Bucephalus with animal. We, 
therefore, make the conclusion of the previous syllo- 
gism (No. I.) the sumption of the following syllogism 
(No. II.) 

1 1 . — Bucephalus is a quadruped ; 

But a quadruped is an animal ; 

Therefore, Bucephalus is an animal. 

Having obtained another step, we, in like manner, 
make animal, w 7 hich was the minor term in the pre- 
ceding syllogism, the middle term of the following ; 
and the conclusion of No. II. forms the major premise 
of No. III. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


371 


ITT . — Bucephalus is an animal ; LECT. 

But an animal is a substance ; xtx - 

Therefore, Bucephalus is a substance. 


In this last syllogism, we reach a conclusion identi- 
cal with that of the Sorites. 

In the third place, it is evident that the Sorites is 3. Soriu* 
equally natural as the simple syllogism ; and, as the n»t»rai 

. . A J' ° as simple 

relation is equally cogent and equally manifest be- »yiiogi»m. 
tween a whole and a remote, and a whole and a proxi- 
mate, part, that it is far less prolix, and, consequently, 
far more convenient. What is omitted in a Sorites is 


only the idle repetition of the same self-evident prin- 
ciple, and as this can without danger or inconvenience 
be adjourned until the end of a series of notions in 
the dependence of mutual subordination, it is plain 
that, in reference to such a series, a single Sorites is as 
much preferable to a number of simple syllogisms, as 
a comprehensive cypher is preferable to the articulate 
enumeration of the units which it collectively repre- 
sents. 


Before proceeding to touch on the logical history of 
this form of syllogism, and to comment on the doc- 
trine in regard to it maintained by all logicians, I shall 
conclude what it is proper further to state concerning 
its general character. 


IT LXXI. A Sorites may be either Categorical Par. lxxi. 
or Hypothetical ; and, in both forms, it is governed cw^/ricai 
by the following laws : — Speaking of the Com- “aicJ 1 ’ 0 
mon or Progressive Sorites, (in which reasoning 
you will observe the meaning of the word pro- 
gressive is reversed), which proceeds from the 


individual to the general, and to which the other 
form may be easily reduced : — 1°. The number 


 



372 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. of the premises is unlimited. 2°. All the pre- 
— mises, with exception of the last, must be affirm- 
ative, and, with exception of the first, definite. 
3°. The first premise may be either definite or 
indefinite. 4°. The last may be either negative 
or affirmative. 

Explica- I have already given you examples of the categori- 
Formuia of cal Sorites. The following is the formula of the hypo- 

Hvpothcti- ... 65 J 1 

caiBoritw. thetical : — 


Progressive. 

If D is, C is ; 

If C is, H is ; 

If B is, A is ; 

(In modo jxmente), 
Now D is; 
Therefore, A is also. 
(Or in modo tollente), 
Now A is not ; 
Therefore, D is not. 


Regressive. 

If B is, A is ; 

If C is, li is ; 

If D is, C is ; 

(In modo ponente), 
Now D is ; 
Therefore, A is. 

(Or in modo tollente), 
Now A is not ; 
Therefore, D is not. 


Or to take a concrete example : — 

Progressive. 

If II nr pay on he avariciotts, he is intent on gain ; 
If intent on gain , he is discontented ; 

If discontented, he is unhappy ; 

Nmo Harpagon is avaricious ; 

He is, therefore, unhappy. 

Regressive. 

If Harpagon he discontented, he is unhappy ; 

If intent on gain, he is discontented ; 

If avaricious, he is intent on gain ; 

Note Harpagon is avaricious ; 

Therefore, he. is unhappy. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


373 


In regard to the resolution of the Hypothetical lect. 
Sorites into simple syllogisms, it is evident that in X1X ~ 
this Progressive Sorites we must take the two first RCToiulion 

. . . of Hypo- 

propositions as premises, and then in the conclusion ‘ hc * ical . 

. A Sorites into 

connect the antecedent of the former proposition with "‘“p 1 ® v 1 * 

r r logisnu. 

the consequent of the latter. Thus : — h 

¦ive Sorites. 

h If Harpagon be avaricious, he is intent on gain ; 

If intent on gain , he is discontented; 

Therefore, if Harpagon he avaricious, he is discontented. 

We now establish this conclusion, as the sumption 
of the following syllogism : — 

II - — If Harpagon be avaricious, he is discontented ; 

If discontented , he is unhappy ; 

Therefore, if Harpagon be avaricious, he is unhappy. 

In like manner we go on to the next syllogism : — 

HI - — If Harpagon be avaricious, he is unhappy ; 

Now Harpagon is avaricious ; 

Therefore, he is unhappy. 

In the Regressive Sorites, we proceed in the same n. Regrw 
fashion ; only that, as here the consequent of the 
second proposition is the antecedent of the first, we 
reverse the consecution of these premises. Thus : — 

I . — If Harpagon be intent on gain, he is discontented ; 

If discontented, he is unhappy ; 

Therefore, if Harpagon be intent on gain, he is unhappy. 

We then take the third proposition for the sump- 
tion of the next, — the second syllogism, and the 
conclusion of the preceding for its subsumption : — 

II. — If Harpagon be avaricious, he is intent on gain ; 

If intent on gain, he is unhappy; 

Therefore, if Harpagon be avaricious, he is unhappy. 


 



374 * 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. We now take this last conclusion for the sumption 
XIX - of the last syllogism : — 

III . — If Harpagon be avaricious , he is unhappy ; 

Now Harpagon is avaricious ; 

Therefore , he is unhappy. 


Disjunctive But it may be asked, can there be no Disjunctive 
Sorites \ To this it may be answered, that in the 
sense in which a categorical and hypothetical syllo- 
gism is possible, — viz., so that a term of the preceding 
proposition should be the subject or predicate of the 
following, — in this sense, a disjunctive sorites is im- 
possible : since two opposing notions, whether as con- 
traries or contradictories, exclude each other, and can- 
not, therefore, be combined as subject and predicate. 
But when the object has been determined by two 
opposite characters, the disjunct members may be 
amplified at pleasure, and there follows certainly a 
correct conclusion, provided that the disjunction be 
logically accurate. As : — 


A is either B or C. 


B is either I) or E ; 
D is either H or I ; 
E is either K or L. 


Now, 

C is either F or G ; 
F is either M or N ; 
G is either 0 or P. 


Therefore , A is either H, or I, or K, or L, or M, or N, or O, or P. 


Complex Although, therefore, it be true that such a Sorites 
viceabit^ r is correct ; still, were we astricted to such a mode of 
reasoning, thought would be so difficult, as to be 
almost impossible. But we never are obliged to 
employ such a reasoning ; for when we are once 
assured that A is either B or C, and assured we are 
of this by one of the fundamental laws of thought, 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


375 


we have next to consider whether A is B or C, and lect. 

if A is B, then all that can be said of C, and if A is — 

C, then all that can be said of B, is dismissed as wholly 
irrelevant. In like manner, in the case of B, it must 
be determined whether it is D or E, and in the case 
of C, whether it is F or G ; and this being determined, 
one of the two members is necessarily thrown out of 
account. And this compendious method we follow in 
the process of thought spontaneously, and as if by a 
natural impulsion. 

So much for the logical character of the Sorites. 

It now remains to make some observations, partly 
historical, partly critical, in connection with this sub- 
ject. 

In regard to the history of the logical doctrine of Historic*! 

. . _ ° . . . . . . notice of the 

this form of reasoning, it seems taken for granted, in io*icai doc- 
all the systems of the science, that both the name Sorites. 
Soi'ites, as applied to a chain -syllogism, and the 
analysis of the nature of that syllogism, are part and 
parcel of the logical inheritance bequeathed to us by 
Aristotle. Nothing can, however, be more erroneous. Neither 
The name Sorites does not occur in any logical treatise doctrino 
of Aristotle ; nor, as far as I have been able to dis- Aristotle, 
cover, is there, except in one vague and cursory allu- 
sion, any reference to what the name is now employed 
to express.® Nay, further, the word Sorites is never, 

I make bold to say, applied by any ancient writer 
to designate a certain form of reasoning. On the 


a The passage referred to is pro- Aristotle's rule, Categ , c. 2. “ Prsedi- 
bably Anal. Prior., i 25. But there catum pnedicati est pnedicatum sub- 
was no need of a special treatment of jecti.” See also, Aval. Poll., I. 23 et 
the Sorites, as it is merely a combine- uq. Cl. Pacius, Comment., p. 1 59. 
tion of ordinary syllogisms, and subject Bertius, Logica Ptripalelica, L. iii. 
to the samo rules. — E d. [The prin- Appendix, p. 179.J 
ciple of the Sorites is to be found in 


 


37G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. contrary, Sorites, though a word in not unfrequent 
employment by ancient authors, nowhere occurs in 


XIX. 


authors, 
used to de- 
signate a 
particular 
Kind of 
sophism. 


sophism. 


wdth^mcient an y other logical meaning than that of a particular 
kind of sophism, of which the Stoic Chrysippus was 
reputed the inventor.® Scjpos, you know, in Greek, 
means a heap or pile of any aggregated substances, 
as sand, wheat, &c. ; and Sorites, literally a heaper , 
was a name given to a certain captious argument, 
which obtained in Latin from Cicero the denomi- 
Tho nature nation of acervalis 'J* The nature of the argument 
was this : — You were asked, for example, whether a 
certain quantity of something of variable amount were 
large or small, — say a certain sum of money. If you 
said it was small, the adversary went on gradually 
adding to it, asking you at each increment whether it 
were still small ; till at length you said that it was 
large. The last sum which you had asserted to be 
small, was now compared with that which you now 
asserted to be large, and you were at length forced 
to acknowledge, that one sum which you main- 
tained to be large, and another which you maintained 
to be small, differed from each other by the very 
pettiest coin, — or, if the subject were a pile of wheat, 
by a single corn. This sophism, as applied by Eubu- 
lides, (who is even stated by Laertius 7 to be the 
inventor of the Sorites in general), took the name of 
<f)a\a.Kpbs, calvus, the hold. It was asked, — was a man 
bald who had so many thousand hairs ; you answer, 


a Persius, Sat. vi. 80. 

“ Inventus, Chrysippe, tui fiuitor 
acervi.” — Ed. 

[Cicero applies Sorites to an argu- 
ment which we would call a Sorites , 
but it could also be a Chrysippean. 
I>e Finibus, L. iv.c. 18.] 


3 De Divinatione, iL 4. “ Quem- 
adinodum Soriti reeistas ? quem, si 
necesse sit. Latino verbo liceat aeer- 
valem appellare.” Cf. Facciolati, 
A cr oasis, ii. p. 17 ct seq . — Ed. 
y L. ii. § 108. — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


377 


No : the antagonist goes on diminishing and dimin- lect. 

o o o 

ishing the number, till either you admit that he who 

was not bald with a certain number of hairs, becomes 
bald when that complement is diminished by a single 
hair ; or you go on denying him to be bald, until 
his head be hypothetically denuded. Such was the 
quibble which obtained the name of Sorites, — acerva- 
lis, climax, gradatio, &c. This, it is evident, had no 
real analogy with the form of reasoning now known 
in logic under the name of Sorites. 

But when was the name perverted to this, its 
secondary signification \ Of this I am confident, r° 
that the change was not older than the fifteenth cen- p««nt 

0 . . . acceptation. 

tury. It occurs in none of the logicians previous 
to that period. It is to be found in none of the 
Greek logicians of the Lower Empire ; nor is it to be 
met with in any of the more celebrated treatises on 
Logic by the previous Latin schoolmen. The earliest 
author to whose writings I have been able to trace it, 
is the celebrated Lauren tius Valla, whose work on 
Dialectic was published after the middle of the 
fifteenth century. He calls the chain-syllogism — 

“ coacervatio syllogismorum (quem Graeci ocopov vo- 
caut.)”“ I may notice that in the Dialectica of his 
contemporary and rival, George of Trebisond, the pro- 
cess itself is described, but, what is remarkable, no 
appropriate name is given to itfi In the systems of 
Logic after the commencement of the sixteenth cen- 
tury, not only is the form of reasoning itself described, 
but described under the name it now bears. 

I have been thus particular in regard to the history The doctrine 

A 0 •'of logicians 

a Dialectics Disputations, Lib. iii. Dialectica Libdlus, Coloni®, 1533, f. re S* rt ^ n 8 
c. 12. See Laurentii Yallcc Opera, 60*. Cf. the Scholia of Neomagua, 

Baailwc, 1540, p. 742 . — Ed. ibid. f. 67 b . — E d. 

0 See Georgii Trapezuntii Dt Re 


 


378 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIX. 


the Sorites 
illustrates 
their one- 
sided view 
of tho 
nature of 
reasoning 
in general. 


Logicians 
lmvo over- 


of the Sorites, — word and thing, — not certainly on 
account of the importance of this history, considered 
in itself, but because it will enable you the better to 
apprehend what is now to be said of the illustration 
which the doctrine, taught by logicians themselves 
of the nature of this particular process, affords of the 
one-sided view which they have all taken of the nature 
of reasoning in general. 

I have already shown, in regard to the simple syllo- 
gism, that all deductive reasoning is from whole to 
part ; that there are two kinds of logical whole and 
two kinds of logical part, — the one in the quantity of 
comprehension, the other in the quantity of extension ; 
— and that there are consequently two kinds of reason- 
ing corresponding to these several quantities. I fur- 
ther showed that logicians had in simple syllogisms 
marvellously overlooked one, and that the simplest 
and most natural, of these descriptions of reasoning, — 
the reasoning in the quantity of comprehension ; and 
that all their rules were exclusively relative to the 
reasoning which proceeds in the quantity of extension. 
Now, in to-day’s Lecture, I have shown that, as in 
simple syllogisms, so in the complex form of the 
Sorites, there is equally competent a reasoning in com- 
prehension and in extension, — though undoubtedly, 
in the one case as in the other, the reasoning in com- 
prehension is more natural and easy in its evolution 
than the reasoning in extension, inasmuch as the 
middle term, in the former, is really intermediate in 
position, standing between the major and the minor 
terms, whereas, in the latter, the middle term is not 
in situation middle, but occupies the position of one 
or other of the extremes. 

Now, if in the case of simple syllogisms, it be mar- 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


379 


vellous that logicians should have altogether over- lect. 

looked the possibility of a reasoning in comprehension, — 

it is doubly marvellous that, with this their prepos- 
session, they should, in the case of the Sorites, have Extcnalon * 
altogether overlooked the possibility of a reasoning in 
extension. But so it is. a They have all followed 
each other in defining the Sorites, as a concatenated 
syllogism in which the predicate of the proposition 
preceding is made the subject of the proposition fol- 
lowing, until we arrive at the concluding proposition, 
in which the predicate of the last of the premises is 
enounced of the subject of the first. This definition 
applies only to the Progressive Sorites in comprehen- 
sion, and to the Regressive Sorites in extension : but 
that they did not contemplate the latter form at all is 
certain, both because it is not lightly to be presumed 
that they had in view that artificial and recondite 
form, and because the examples and illustrations they 
supply positively prove that they had not. 


To the Progressive Sorites in extension, and to the Different 
Regressive Sorites in comprehension, this definition is twofomw 
inapplicable ; for in these, the subject of the premise 
preceding is not the predicate of the premise following. 

But the difference between the two forms is better 
stated thus : — 111 the Progressive Sorites of compre- 
hension and the Regressive Sorites of extension, the 
middle terms are the predicates of the prior premises, 
and the subjects of the posterior ; the middle term 
is here in position intermediate between the extremes. 

On the contrary, in the Progressive Sorites of exten- 
sion and in the Regressive Sorites of comprehension, 


a [Ridiger notices the error of those 343 n., § 6.] [“ Errant vulgo Peripatc- 
who make Sorites of comprehensive tici, et cum hiaGassendus, qui Soritem 
whole. See hiB Dc Sensu Vert et solum ad pnedicatum pertinere exia- 
Falti, L. ii. c. 10, § 5, p. 400. Cf. p. tirnat.” — E d.] 


380 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIX. 


Probable 
reason why 
logicians 
overlooked, 
in the case 
of simple 
syllogisms, 
tfie reason- 
ing in Com' 
prehension. 


the middle terms are the subjects of the prior pre- 
mises and the predicates of the posterior ; the middle 
term is here in position not intermediate between the 
extremes. 

To the question, — why, in the case of simple syllo- 
gisms, the logicians overlooked the reasoning in com- 
prehension, and, in the case of the Sorites, the reason- 
ing in extension, it is perhaps impossible to afford a 
satisfactory explanation. But we may plausibly con- 
jecture, what it is out of our power certainly to prove. 
In regard to simple syllogisms, it was an original 
dogma of the Platonic school, and an early dogma of 
the Peripatetic, that philosophy, — that science, strictly 
so called, — was only conversant with, and was exclu- 
sively contained in, universals; and the doctrine of 
Aristotle, which taught that all our general know- 
ledge is only an induction from an observation of 
particulars, was too easily forgotten or perverted by 
his followers. It thus obtained almost the force of an 
acknowledged principle, that everything to be known 
must be known under some general form or notion. 
Hence the exaggerated importance attributed to defi- 
nition and deduction : it not being considered, that 
we only take out of a general notion what we had 
previously placed therein ; and that the amplification 
of our knowledge is not to be sought for from above 
but from below, — not from speculation about abstract 
generalities, but from the observation of concrete par- 
ticulars. But however erroneous and irrational, the 
persuasion had its day and influence ; and it perhaps 
determined, as one of its effects, the total neglect of 
one half, and that not the least important half, of the 
reasoning process. For while men thought only of 
looking upwards to the more extensive notions, as the 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


381 


only objects and the only media of science, they took lect. 

little heed of the more comprehensive notions, and — 

absolutely contemned individuals, as objects which 
could neither be scientifically known in themselves, 
nor supply the conditions of scientifically knowing 
aught besides. The logic of comprehension and of 
induction was, therefore, neglected or ignored, — the 
logic of extension and deduction exclusively culti- 
vated, as alone affording the rules by which we might 
evolve higher notions into their subordinate concepts. 

This may help to explain why, subsequently to Aris- 
totle, Logic was cultivated in so partial a manner ; but 
why, subsequently to Bacon, the logic of comprehen- 
sion should still have escaped observation and study, 

I am altogether at a loss to imagine. But to the And why, 
question, — why, when reasoning in general was viewed of the son. 
only as in the quantity of extension, the minor form overlooked 
of the Sorites should have been viewed as exclusively m R in Ex- 
in that of comprehension, may perhaps be explained un "“ n ' 
by the following consideration : this form was not 
originally analysed and expounded by the acuteness 
of Aristotle. But it could not escape notice that there 
was a form of reasoning, of very frequent employment 
both byphilosophers and rhetoricians, in which a single 
conclusion was drawn from a multiplicity of premises, 
and in which the predicate of the foregoing premise 
was usually the subject of the following. Cicero, for 
example, and Seneca, are full of such arguments ; and 
the natural and easy evolution of the reasoning is 
indeed peculiarly appropriate to demonstration. Thus, 
to prove that every body is movable, we have the 
following self-evident deduction. Every body is in 
space ; what is in space is in some one part of space ; 
what is in one part of space may be in another ; what 


 


382 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XIX. 


Example 
of the Sori- 
tes in Com- 


may be in another part of space may change its space ; 
what may change its space is movable ; therefore, 
every body is movable. When, therefore, Valla, or 
whoever else has the honour of first introducing the 
consideration of this form of reasoning into Logic, was 
struck with the cogency and clearness of this com- 
pendious argumentation, he did not attempt to reduce 
it to the conditions of the extensive syllogism ; and 
subsequent logicians, when the form was once intro- 
duced and recognised in their science, were, as usual, 
content to copy one from another, without subjecting 
their borrowed materials to any original or rigorous 
criticism. 

Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere ; — nemo ! 

Sed pnecedenti spectator mantica tergo.o 

Accordingly, not one of them has noticed, that the 
Sorites of their systems proceeds in a different quantity 
from that of their syllogisms in general, — that their 
logic is thus at variance with itself ; far less did any 
of them observe, that this and all other forms of 
reasoning are capable of being drawn in another 
quantity from that which they all exclusively contem- 
plated. And yet, had they applied their observation 
without prepossession to the matter, they would easily 
have seen that the Sorites could be cast in the quan- 
tity of extension, equally as common syllogisms, and 
that common syllogisms could be cast in the quantity 
of comprehension, equally as the Sorites. I have 
already shown that the same Sorites may be drawn 
either in comprehension or in extension ; and in both 
quantities proceed either by progression or by regres- 
sion. But the example given may perhaps be viewed 
as selected. Let us, therefore, take any other ; and 

a Persius, iv. 23 . — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


383 


the first that occurs to my recollection is the following lect. 
from Seneca,® which I shall translate : — XIX ‘ 

prehension 

He who in prudent in temperate ; lu " i Lxu>u- 

He who is temperate is constant ; 

He who is constant is unperturbed ; 

He who is unperturbed is without sorrow ; 

He who is icithout sorrow is happy ; 

Therefore, the prudent man is happy. 


In this Sorites everything slides easily and smoothly 
from the whole to the parts of comprehension. But, 
though the process will be rather more by hitches, the 
descent under extension will, if not quite so pleasant, 
be equally rapid and certain. 


He who is without sorrow is happy ; 

He who is unperturbed is without sorrow ; 
He who is constant is unperturbed ; 

He who is temperate is constant ; 

He who is prudent is temperate ; 
Therefore, the prudent man is happy. 


I do not think it necessary to explicate these two 
reasonings, which you are fully competent, I am sure, 
to do without difficulty for yourselves. 

What renders it still more wonderful that the logi- The Oocic- 
cians did not evolve the competency of this process in Sont<M 
either quantity, and thus obtain a key to the opening 
up of the whole mystery of syllogistic reasoning, is 
this ; — that it is now above two centuries since the 
Inverse or Regressive Sorites in comprehension was 
discovered and signalised by Rodolphus Goelenius, a 
celebrated philosopher of Marburg, in which university 
he occupied the chair of Logic and Metaphysics.* 


aEpItl., 85. — Ed. Ed. [For the Goclenian Sorites be- 

ll Oocknii hagoge in Organ urn fore Goelenius, see Pacius, Comment. 
Aristotelis, Franco!., 1598, p. 255. — f» Anal. Prior., i. 25, p. 159.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


384 

lect. This Sorites has from him obtained the name of Goc- 
XIX ' lenian ; while the progressive Sorites has been called 
the common or Aristotelian. This latter denomina- 
tion is, as I have previously noticed, an error : for 
Aristotle, though certainly not ignorant of the process 
of reasoning now called Sorites, does not enter upon 
its consideration, either under one form or another. 
This observation by Goclenius, of which none of our 
British logicians seem aware, was a step towards the 
explication of the whole process ; and we are, there- 
fore, left still more to marvel how this explication, so 
easy and manifest, should not have been made. Before 
terminating this subject, I may mention that this form 
of syllogism has been sometimes styled by logicians 
not only Sorites, but also coacervatio, congeries, gra- 
datio, climax, and de primo ad ultimum. The old 
name before Valla, which the process obtained among 
the Greek logicians of the Lower Empire, was the 
vague and general appellation of complex syllogism , — 
CTvXXoyicr/xos o~uv0er6<;. a 

Epicure- So much for the two forms of reasoning which may 

Hitt and m ® ^ 

Sorite., m be regarded as composite or complex, and which logi- 

(p*n«, com- cians have generally considered as redundant. But 

paratively J 

aimpic, and here it is proper to remark, that if m one point, that 

not pleon- . 1 1 , m f A 

«tic. is, as individual syllogisms, the Epicheirema and 
Sorites may be viewed as comparatively complex, in 
another, that is, as polysyllogisms, they may be viewed 
as comparatively simple. For resolve a Sorites into 
the various syllogisms afforded by its middle terms, 
and compare the multitude of propositions through 
which the conclusion is thus tediously evolved, with 
the short and rapid process of the chain-syllogism 
itself, and, instead of complexity, we should rather be 

a [Blemtnidas. Epitome Logica, c. 31.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


385 


disposed to predicate of it extreme simplicity.® In 
point of fact, we might arrange the Epicheirema and 
Sorites with far greater propriety under elliptical 
syllogisms, than, as is commonly done by logicians, 
under the pleonastic. This last classification is, 
indeed, altogether erroneous, for it is a great mistake 
to suppose that in either of these forms there is aught 
redundant. 

o [See Leibnitz, Nouveau -x Essais, cd. Raspe.] 

L. iv. c. xvii. § 4, pp. 445, 446, 448, 


VOL. I. 


2 B 


LECT. 

XIX. 


 


38G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECTURE XX. 
STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION H. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS. — THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 

EXTERNAL FORM. 

B. DEFECTIVE, — ENTHYMEME. 

C. REGULAR AND IRREGULAR, — FIGURE AND MOOD. 

lect. I proceed now to the Second Class of Syllogisms, — 
— - X ‘ - those, to wit, whose External Form is defective. This 
tfitmiH defcc- class I give in conformity to the doctrine of modern 

tivc in Kx- i • • i • •• . i i*at 

tcmai Form, logicians, whose unanimous opinion on the subject 1 
shall comprehend in the following paragraph. 

H LXXII. According to logicians, in general, a 
defective syllogism is a reasoning in which one 
only of the premises is actually enounced. It is, 
therefore, they say, called an Enthymeme (bOv- 
/uLTj/za), because there is, as it were, something held 
back in the mind (b Ovfjicp). But as it is possible 
to retain either the sumption or the subsumption, 
the Enthymeme is thus of two kinds : — an Enthy- 
meme of the First, and an Enthymeme of the 
Second, Order. The whole distinction is, how- 
ever, erroneous in principle, and, even if not 


Par. LXXII. 
Tlio Enthy- 
meme. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


387 


erroneous, it is incomplete ; for a Third Order of lect. 
Enthymemes is competent by the suppression of . — li- 
the conclusion. 

Such, as it is stated in the former part of the para- Explication, 
graph, is the doctrine you will find maintained with mon doc- 
singular unanimity by modern logicians ; and, with Enthymcmo 
hardly an exception, this classification of syllogisms is cm'raioiwiy 
stated not only without a suspicion of its own cor- u> Arctic, 
reetness, but as a division established on the authority 
of the great father of logic himself. In both asser- 
tions they are, however, wrong, for the classification 
itself is futile, and Aristotle affords it no countenance ; 
while, at the same time, if a distinction of syllogisms 
is to be taken from the ellipsis of their propositions, 
the subdivision of enthymemes is not complete, inas- 
much as a syllogism may exist with both premises 
expressed, and the conclusion understood. 

I shall, therefore, in the first place, show that the 
Enthymeme, as a syllogism of a defective enounce- 
ment, constitutes no special form of reasoning ; in the 
second, that Aristotle does not consider a syllogism of 
such a character as such a special form ; and, in the 
third, that, admitting the validity of the distinction, 
the restriction of the Enthymeme to a syllogism of 
one suppressed premise cannot be competently main- 
tained. 

“I. In regard then to the validity of the distinction. L The e b - 
This is disproved on the following grounds : First of not a ppo- 
all, the discrimination of the Enthymeme, as a syllo- reasoning, 
gism of one suppressed premise, from the ordinary 
syllogism, would involve a discrimination of the rea- 
soning of Logic from the reasoning in common use ; 

a Compare Ditcumont, p. 153 el $eq. — Ed. 


 


388 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. for, in general reasoning, we rarely express all the 

- propositions of a syllogism, and it is almost only in 

the treatises on Abstract Logic, that we find examples 
of reasoning, in which all the members are explicitly 
enounced. But Logic does not create new forms of 
syllogism, it merely expounds those which are already 
given ; and while it shows that in all reasoning there 
are, in the mental process, necessarily three judgments, 
the mere non-expression of any of these in language, 
no more constitutes in Logic a particular kind of syl- 
logism, than does the ellipsis of a term constitute in 
Grammar a particular kind of concord or government. 
But, secondly, Syllogism and Enthymeme are not dis- 
tinguished as respectively an intralogical and an extra- 
logical form ; both are supposed equally logical. 
Those who defend the distinction are, therefore, neces- 
sarily compelled to maintain, that Logic regards the 
accident of the external expression, and not the essence 
of the internal thought, in holding that the Enthy- 
meme is really a defective reasoning.® 

It thus appears, that to constitute the Enthymeme 
as a species of reasoning distinct from Syllogisms 
Proper, by the difference of perfect and imperfect, is 
of all absurdities the greatest. — But is this absurd- 
ity the work of Aristotle % — and this leads us to the 
second head. 

ii. The di«- II. Without entering upon a regular examination 
the Enthv- of the various passages of the Aristotelic treatises rela- 
& rpeeiai tive to this point, I may observe, in the first place, 
reasoning that Aristotle expressly declares in general, that a 
ArisLoiie. by syllogism is considered by the logician, not in rela- 
tion to its expression ( ov 7 rpo? top efo> \6yov ), but 

a [That Syllogism and Enthymeme reasoning, see Derodon, Logica Retti- 
a re not properly distinct species of tuta, Pars V. tract, i. c. 1 , p. 602.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


389 


exclusively as a mental process (aXXa. npbs r'ov ev rfj lf.ct. 
'b'XU Xdyov).“ The distinction, therefore, of a class of xx ' 
syllogisms, as founded on a verbal accident, he thus of 
course, implicitly and by anticipation, condemns. But 
Aristotle, in the second place, does distinguish the The Enthy- 
Enthymeme as a certain kind of syllogism, — as a syl- “StL,— 
logism of a peculiar matter, — as a syllogism from signs 
and likelihoods/ Now if, having done this, it were 
held that Aristotle over and above distinguished the 
Enthymeme also as a syllogism with one suppressed 
premise, Aristotle must be supposed to define the 
Enthymeme by two differences, and by two differences 
which have no mutual analogy ; for a syllogism from 
signs and likelihoods does not more naturally fall into 
an elliptical form than a syllogism of any other matter. 

Yet this absurdity has been and is almost universally 
believed of the acutest of human intellects, and on 
grounds which, when examined, afford not the slight- 
est warrant for such a conclusion. On the criticism 
of these grounds it would be out of place here to 
enter. Suffice it to say, that the texts in the Organon 
and Rhetoric, which may be adduced in support of the 
vulgar opinion, will bear no such interpretation ; — 
that in one passage, where the word areX^s ( imper- 
fect ), is applied to the Enthymeme, — this word, if 
genuine, need signify only that the reasoning from 
signs and probabilities affords not a perfect or neces- 
sary inference ; but that, in point of fact, the word 
areX^s is there a manifest interpolation, made to 
accommodate the Aristotelic to the common doctrine 
of the Enthymeme, for it is not extant in the oldest 
manuscripts, and has, accordingly, without any refer- 

a Anal.Potl., i. 10. — Ed. & Anal. Prior., ii. 27. Rhet., i. 2. — Ed. 


 



390 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


Applica- 
tions of the 
term Eh- 
t Ji g in cWC. 


By Diony- 
sius Hali- 
carnassus. 
Author of 
Rhetoric, to 
Alexander. 
Sop a ter. 
Aulus Gel- 
lius. 

Cicero. 

Quintilian. 


ence to tlie present question, been ejected from the 
best recensions, and, among others, from the recent 
edition of the works of Aristotle by the Academicians 
of Berlin, — an edition founded on a collation of the 
principal manuscripts throughout Europe." It is not, 
however, to be denied that the term Enthymeme was 
applied to a syllogism of some unexpressed part, in 
very ancient times ; but, along with this meaning, it 
was also employed by the Greek and Roman rheto- 
ricians for a thought in general, as by Dionysius the 
1 lalicarnassian,' 3 and the author of the Rhetoric to 
Alexander, attributed to Aristotle, 7 — for an acute 
dictum, as by Sopater® and Aulus Gellius/ — for a 
reasoning from contraries or contradictories, as by 
Cicero/ Quintilian gives three meanings of the term ; 
in one sense, signifying “ omnia mente concepta” 
in another, “ sententia cum ratione,” in a third, “ argu- 
menti conclusio, vd ex consequentibus vel ex repug- 
nantibus.” v 


a For a fuller history of this inter- 
polation, see Discussions, p. 154. — 
Ed. [F»r the correct doctrine of the 
Ariatotelic Enthymeme, see Mariotte, 
[Essay dc Logique , P. ii. disc. iii. p. 
163, Paris, 1678 . — Ed.] 

$ Ej i in tola ad Cn. Pompcium dc pnz- 
cipuis Uistoricis , c. 5. Tfjr pirrot ko\- 
\i\oyias tKtlyov irol rov nXolrrov rwy 
iyQvuTjpArwv Kara iroXu fore pet. The 
expression irAoOro* lyOvprjpdruy is ren- 
dered by J. C. T. Ernes ti, Oedanken 
Fikllt ; see his Lexicon Technologur. 
Gracvrum RJiCtorieiv, v. Mvp-qpa. The 
sarno sentence is repeated in nearly 
tho same words by Dionysius, in his 
Vctcrum Scriplorum Centura, iii. 2. — 
Ed. 

y The author of the Rhetorics ad 
Alexandrum, c. 8, classes tho enthy- 
memc among proofs (wlarus), and in 
c. 11, defines it as n proof, drawn 


from any kind of opposition. *E yOvpfa 
para 5' 4<rrly ov p6yov rh rip X6ytp iced 
rp irpd{(i iyatniovpeva , aAAa sal roTs 
&XXois Sirairiy. This work is attributed 
by Victorius to Anaximenes of Lamp- 
sacus, and this conjecture is adopted 
by tho latest editor, Spengel. — E d. 

8 Sopatri A panic nuris Prolegomena 
in A ristidem. A rintidi* Op. Omn., 
ed. Jebb, vol. i. f. d. 3. Kal rr) r&y 
iydvprjpdruy irvKyArijri 8rjpo<r0(yl{tt. 
In Canters Prolegomena this expres- 
sion is rendered sententia rum densitas, 
and the word ty0vpi\pariK6s in the 
same passage by argutus in argumentis. 
But compare Discussions, p. 157 . — Ed. 

« Node* A tticce, vl 13. “Qiuereban- 
tur autem non gravia ncc reverenda, 
sed Iy0vp4\para qutedam lepida et min- 
uta." — E d. 

C Topica, c. 13. — Ed. 

ti Inst. Orat.y v. 10, 1 . — Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


391 


Among the ancients, who employed the term for a 
syllogism with some suppressed part, a considerable 
number held, with our modern logicians, that it was a 
syllogism deficient of one or other premise, as Alexan- 
der the Aphrodisian, Ammonius Hermiae, Philoponus,“ 
&c. Some, however, as Pachymeres,* 3 only recognised 
the absence of the major premise. Some, on the con- 
trary, thought, like Quintilian, 1 ' that the suppressed 
proposition ought to be the conclusion ; — nay, Ulpian 
the Greek commentator of Demosthenes, and the 
scholiast on Hermogenes the Rhetorician, 8 absolutely 
define an Enthymeme — “ a syllogism, in which the 
conclusion is unexpressed.”* 

III. This leads us to the third head ; for on no 
principle can it be shown, that our modern logicians 
are correct in denying or not contemplating the possi- 
bility of the reticence of the conclusion. The only 
principle on which a syllogism is competent, with one 
or other of its propositions unexpressed, is this, — that 
the part suppressed is too manifest to require enounce- 
ment. On this principle, a syllogism is not less pos- 
sible with the conclusion, than with either of the pre- 
mises, understood ; and, in point of fact, occurs quite 
as frequently as any other. The logicians, therefore. 


LECT. 

xx. 

Denoted, 
with somo 
of the an- 
cients. a 
syllogism 
with sumo 
suppressed 
part. 

The Aphro- 
disian. 
Ammonius. 
Philoponus. 
Pachy- 
meres. 
Quintilian. 
Ulpian. 
Scholiast on 
Hermo- 
genea. 


III. Admit- 
ting tho 
validity of 
the discri- 
mination of 
the Enthy- 
memc, it 
cannot bo 
restricted to 
a syllogism 
of one sup- 
pressed pro- 


-r 


a Sec Alexander, In Topica, pp. 
6, 7, ed. Aid., 1513. AmmoniuB, In 
Quinque Voces Porphyrii , f. 5 a, ed. 
Aid. 1546. Philoponus, In Anal. 
Post., f. 4 a, ed. Aid. 1534. These 
authorities are cited in the author's 
note, Discussions , p. 156 . — Ed. 

0 Epitome Loyices Aristotelis, Oxon., 
1666, p. 113. See also his Epitome in 
Universam Arista tel is Disserendi Ar- 
tem, appended to Rasarius’s translation 
of Ammonius on Porphyry, Lugd., 
1547, p. 244 .— Ed. 


y Inst. Oral., v. 14,1 . — Ed. 

8 Ulpian, Ad Demosth. Olynth., ii. 
f. 7 b, ed. Aid., 1527. Anonymi ad 
Hermogenem, De Inventions, lib. iv. 
See Rhetores Greed, ed. Aid. 1509, 
?ol. ii. p. 371. In the Bamework, p. 
365, the scholiast allows that either 
premise or conclusion may be omitted. 
—Ed. 

e An enlarged and corrected list of 
authorities on this question is given 
by the author, Discussions, p. 157. — 
Ed. 


 



392 


LECT0RES ON LOGIC. 


LF.crr. to complete their doctrine, ought to have subdivided 
. xx ~ — the Enthymeme not merely into Enthymemes of the 
r^Knih” first and second, but also into Enthymemes of the 
t'lie'iurtt! third order, according as the sumption, the subsump- 
Thirdf’ Mld tion, or the conclusion is suppressed.® As examples 
0rdcr ' of these various Enthymemes, the following may suf- 
fice : — 

The Explicit Syllogism. 

Every liar is a coward ; 

Caius is a liar; 

Therefore, Cains is a coward. 

I. Enthymeme of the First Order — ( the Sumption under- 
stood.) 

Caius is a liar ; 

Therefore, Caius is a coward. 

II. Enthymeme of the Second Order — (the Subsumption 
understood.) 

Every liar is a coward ; 

Therefore, Cairn is a coward. 

III. Enthymeme of the Third Order — (the Conclusion under- 
stood.) 

Every liar is a cmrard ; 

And Caius is a liar. 

Epi^m- In this last, you see, the suppression of the conclu- 

malic ex- 

ample of sion is not only not violent, but its expression is even 
memo with more superfluous than that of either of the premises. 

supprenscd 1 . 1 

conclusion. There occurs to me a clever epigram of the Greek An- 
thology, in which there is a syllogism with the con- 
clusion suppressed. I shall not quote the original. 


a [That the Enthymemo is of three rather of four orders, for there may be 
ordemaheld by Victorinus, (in Caaaio- an Enthymemo with only one propo- 
dorus, Opera, v ol. ii. p. 536, ed. 1729. sitioti enounced. See Victorinus, aa 
Jlhctore* Pithvi, p. 341, ed. 1599), or above.] 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


393 


but give you a Latin and English imitation, which 
will serve equally well to illustrate the point in ques- 
tion.® The Latin imitation is by the learned printer 
Henricus Stephanus, and he applies his epigram to a 
certain Petrus, who, I make no doubt, was the Fran- 
ciscan, Petrus a Cornibus, whom Buchanan, Beza, 
Rabelais, and others have also satirised/ It runs, as I 
recollect, thus : — 

“ Sunt monachi nequam ; nequam non onns et alter : 

Prater Petrum omnes : est sed et hie monachus." 

The English imitation was written hy Porson upon 
Gottfried Hermann, (when this was written, con- 
fessedly the prince of Greek scholars), who, when 
hardly twenty, had attacked Porson’s famous canons, 
in his work, De Metris Grcecorum et Romanorum. 
The merit of the epigram does not certainly lie in its 
truth. 

“ The Germans in Greek, 

Are sadly to seek ; 

Not five in five score, 

But ninety-five more ; 

All, save only Hermann, 

And Hermann’s a German.” 

In these epigrams, the conclusion of the syllogism 
is suppressed, yet its illative force is felt even in spite 


a The original is an epigram of 
Phocylidea, preserved by Strabo, B. 
x. p. 487, ed. Causaubon, 1620. Com- 
pare Anthologia Grteca, i. p. 54, ed. 
Brunck. Lips., 1794. Poetce Minorts 
Grad, ed. Gaisford, i. p. 444. 

Kol t6$c 4cwruA&ctt • A 4ptoi kokoI • 

obx & 

Tl&yrts, t\}jv UpoK\lovs' icol Upo- 
K\bjs Afpios. 

For the Latin imitation by Ste- 
phan ua, see Theod. Beza Poemata , 
item ex Georgio Buchanano, al Usque 
variis insignibus poetis excerpta cor* 


m in a. Exaidebat H. Stephanus , ex 
cujus etiam Epigrammatis Greed* et 
Latin is aliquot c ceteris adjccta sunt, 
1569, p. 217. 

The parody by Porson is given in A 
Short Account of the late Mr Richard 
Porson , M.A., p. 14, London, 1880. 
The original Greek, with Porson’s 
imitation, is also given in Dr Wel- 
lesley’s Anthologies Polyglotta, p. 433. 
— Ed. 

/3 See Buchanan, Frandscanus , L 
764. Beza, Poemata, p. 85, ed. 1569. 
Rabelais, L. iii. ch. 14 .— Ed. 


LECT. 

XX. 


 



394 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


C. Syllo- 
ginns, Re- 
gular ami 
Irregular. 


of the express exception ; nay, in really conquering 
by implication the apparent disclaimer, consists the 
whole point and elegance of the epigram. To put 
the former into a syllogistic shape, — 


Sumption — The monies , one and all, are good-for-nothing varlets, 
excepting Peter ; 

Subsumption — But Peter is a monk. 


Now, what is, what must be, understood to complete 
the sense ? — Why, the conclusion, — 


Therefore, Peter is a good-for-nothing varied like the rest. 


There is recorded, likewise, a dying deliverance of 
the philosopher Hegel, the wit of which depends 
upon the same ambiguous reasoning. “ Of all my 
disciples,” he said, “ one only understands my pliilo- 
sophy ; and he does not.”“ But we may take this 
for an admission by the philosopher himself, that the 
doctrine of the Absolute transcends human compre- 
hension. 

What has now been said, may suffice to show, not 
only that we may have entkymemes with any of the 
three propositions understood, but that the distinction 
itself of the enthymeme, as a species of syllogism, is 
inept. 

I now go on to the Third Division of Syllogisms, 
under the head of their External or Accidental form, 
— I mean the division of syllogisms into Regular and 
Irregular, — a distinction determined by the ordinary 
or extraordinary arrangement of their constituent 
parts. I commence this subject with the following 
paragraph. 

a See Liicustions, p. 788 . — Ed. 


 



LECTUHES ON LOGIC. 


395 


H LXXIII. A syllogism is Irregular by rela- j.kct. 
tion, — 1°. To the transposed order of its Proposi- — — — 
tions ; 2°. To the transposed order of its Terms ) Kinds of 
and, 3°. To the transposed order of both its Pro- 
positions and Terms. Of these in their order. 

1°. A syllogism in extension is Regular, in the 
order of its Propositions, when the subsumption 
follows the sumption, and the conclusion follows 
the subsumption. In this respect, (discounting 
the difference of the quantities of depth and 
breadth), it, therefore, admits of a fivefold irre- 
gularity under three heads, — for either, 1°. The 
two premises may be transposed ; or, 2°. The 
conclusion may precede the premises, and here, 
either the sumption or the subsumption may stand 
first ; or, 3°. The conclusion may be placed be- 
tween the premises, and here either the sumption 
or the subsumption may stand first. Thus, re- 
presenting the sumption, subsumption, and con- 
clusion by the letters A, B, C, we have, besides 
the regular order, 1°. B, A, C, — 2°. C, A, B, — 3°. 

C, B, A, — 4°. A, C, B,— 5 °. B, C, A. (This doc- 
trine of the logicians is, however, one-sided and 
erroneous.) 

2°. A syllogism is Regular or Irregular, in re- 
spect to the order of its Terms, according to the 
place which the middle term holds in the pre- 
mises. It is regular, in Comprehensive Quantity, 
when the middle term is the predicate of the 
sumption, and the subject of the subsumption; — 

'in Extensive Quantity, when the middle term is 
the subject of the sumption and the predicate 
of the subsumption. From the regular order of 
the terms there are three possible deviations, in 


 


396 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


either quantity. For the middle term may occur, 
1°. Twice as predicate ; 2°. Twice as subject ; 
and, 3°. In Comprehensive Quantity, it may in 
the sumption be subject, and in the subsumption 
predicate ; in Extensive Quantity, it may in the 
sumption be predicate, and in the subsumption 
subject. Taking the letter M to designate the 
middle term, and the letters S and P to designate 
the subject and predicate of the conclusion, the 
following scheme will represent all the possible 
positions of the middle term, both in its regular 
and its irregular arrangement. The Regular con- 
stitutes the First Figure; the Irregular order the 
other Three. 0 

A. — In Comprehension. 


L 


IL 

in. 

IV. 

S is M. 

S 

is M. 

M is S. 

M is S. 

M is P. 

P 

is M. 

M is P. 

P is M. 

S is P. 

s 

is P. 

S is P. 

S is P. 


B. 

—In 

Extension. 


i. 


ii. 

iii. 

IV. 

M is P. 

P 

is M. 

M is P. 

P is M. 

S is M. 

S 

is M. 

M is S. 

M is S. 

S is P. 

s 

is P. 

S is P. 

S is P. 


These relative positions of the middle term in 
the premises, constitute, I repeat, what are called 
the Four Syllogistic Figures (crxfifJLara, figures ) ; 
and these positions I have comprised in the two 
following mnemonic lines. 


a Cf. Krug, Loffik, § 104. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


397 


In Comprehension. 

Prce sub ; turn prce prce ; turn sub sub ; denique nub pros. 

In Extension. 

Sub prce ; turn prce prce ; turn sub sub ; denique pros sub. 


LECT. 

XX. 


Of these two kinds of irregularity in the exter- 
nal form of syllogisms, the former, — that of proposi- 
tions, — is of far less importance than the latter, — that 
of terms ; and logicians have even thrown it altogether 
out of account, in their consideration of Syllogistic 
Figure. They are, however, equally wrong in passing 
over the irregular consecution of the propositions of a 
syllogism, as a matter of absolutely no moment ; and 
in attributing an exaggerated importance to every 
variety in the arrangement of its terms. They ought 
at least to have made the student of Logic aware, that 
a syllogism can be perspicuously expressed not only 
by the normal, but by any of the five consecutions of 
its propositions which deviate from the regular order. 
For example, take the following syllogism : — 


Explication. 
Irregular- 
ity in the 
external 
form of syl- 
logism, aris- 
ing from 
transposi- 
tion of the 
Proposi- 
tions. 


That a syllo- 
gism can bo 
perspicu- 
ously ex- 
pressed by 
any of the 
five irregu- 
lar consecu- 
tions of its 
Proposi- 
tions. 


All virtue is praiseworthy ; 

But sobriety is a virtue; 

Therefore , sobriety is praiseworthy. 


This is the regular succession of sumption, sub- 
sumption, and conclusion, in a syllogism of extension; 
and as all that can be said, on the present question, 
of the one quantity, is applicable, mutatis mutandis , 
to the other, it will be needless to show articulately 
that a syllogism in comprehension is equally suscep- 


a This formula for Extension is ca, t. i. c. iii. p. 1 69. The other line 
taken from Purchot, Inst. Phil., Logi- is the Author’s own. — E d. 


308 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


tible of a transposition of its propositions as a syllo- 
gism in extension. Keeping the same quantity, to 
wit, extension, let us first reverse the premises, leaving 
the conclusion in the last place (B, A, C.) 


Sobriety is a virtue ; 

But all virtue is praiseworthy ; 
Therefore, sobriety is praiseworthy. 


This, it will be allowed, is sufficiently perspicuous. 
Let us now enounce the conclusion before the pre- 
mises ; and, under this head, let the premises be first 
taken in their natural order (C, A, B.) 

Sobriety is praiseworthy ; 

For all virtue is praiseworthy ; 

And sobriety is a virtue. 


Now let the premises be transposed (C, B, A.) 

Sobriety is pro isoworth y ; 

For sobriety is a virtue ; 

And all virtue is praiseworthy. 


The regressive reasoning in both these cases is not 
less manifest than the progressive reasoning of the 
regular order. 

In the last place, let us interpolate the conclusion 
between the premises in their normal consecution 
(A, C, B.) 


All virtue is praiseworthy ; 
Therefore , sobriety is praiseworthy ; 
For sobriety is a virtue. 


Secondly, between the premises in their reversed 
order (B, C, A.) 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


399 


Sobriety is a virtue ; LECT. 

Therefore, sobriety is praiseworthy ; xx - 

For all virtue is praiseworthy. a 


In these two cases the reasoning is not obscure, 
though perhaps the expression be inelegant ; for the 
judgment placed after the conclusion had probably 
been already supplied in thought on the enunciation 
of the conclusion, and, therefore, when subsequently 
expressed, it is felt as superfluous. But this is a cir- 
cumstance of no logical importance. 

It is thus manifest, that, though worthy of notice 
in a system of Logic, the transposition of the proposi- 
tions of a syllogism affords no modifications of form 
yielding more than a superficial character. Logicians, 
therefore, were not wrong in excluding the order of 
the propositions as a ground on which to constitute 
a difference of syllogistic form : but we shall see that 
they have not been consistent, or not sufficiently sharp- 
sighted, in this exclusion ; for several of their recog- 
nised varieties of form, — several of the moods of syllo- 
gistic figure, — consist in nothing but a reversal of the 
premises. 

In reality, however, there is no irregular order of True <i«- 
the syllogistic propositions, except in the single consecution, 
case where the conclusion is placed between the 
premises. For a syllogism may be either called Syllogism 
Synthetic, in which case the premises come first, and tlictic or 
the conclusion is last, — (the case alone contemplated Al ‘ d>ta ' 
by the logicians) ; or it may be called Analytic, the 
proposition styled the conclusion preceding, the pro- 
positions called the premises following, as its reasons, 

— (a case not contemplated by the logicians). The 


o Cf. Knig, Logit-, § 104, Anmerk, i. — E d. 


 



400 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


The na- 
tural and 
transposed 
order of tlio 
Syllogistic 
Terms. 


Figures of 
Syfiogiiira. 


Three fig- 
ures distin- 
guished by 
Aristotle. 


Fourth 
Figure attri 
buted to 
Galen, but 
on slender 
authority. 


Analytic and Synthetic syllogisms may again be each 
considered as in the quantity of Extension, or as in 
the quantity of Comprehension ; in which cases, we 
shall have a counter-order of the premises, but of 
which orders, as indeed of such quantities, one alone 
has been considered by the logicians. 

I now, therefore, go on to the second and more 
important ground of regularity and irregularity — the 
natural and transposed order of the Syllogistic Terms. 
The forms determined by the different position of the 
middle term by relation to the major and minor terms 
in the premises of a syllogism, are called Figures (07(17- 
fiara, figures ), — a name given to them by Aristotle.® 
Of these the first is, on the prevalent doctrine, not 
properly a figure at all, if by figure be meant in Logic, 
as in Grammar and Khetoric, a deviation from the 
natural and regular form of expression. Of these 
figures the first three were distinguished by Aristotle, 
who developed their rules with a tedious minuteness 
sometimes obscure, and not always in the best order, 
but altogether with an acuteness which, if ever equalled, 
has certainly never been surpassed. The fourth, which 
Whately, — at least in the former editions of his Ele- 
ments , — and other recent Oxford logicians seem to 
suppose to be, like the others, of Aristotelic origin, — 
we owe perhaps to the ingenuity of Galen. I say 
perhajis, for though in logical treatises attributed 
without hesitation to the great physician, as if a 
doctrine to be found in his works, this is altogether 
erroneous. There is, I am certain, no mention of the 
fourth figure in any writing of Galen now extant, and 

a Anal. Prior., i. 4. — Ed. [Cf. Pacius, Comment., pp. 118, 122.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


401 


no mention of Galen’s addition of that figure, by lect. 
any Greek or Latin authority of an age approximat- - . ‘ - 
ing to his own. The first notice of this Galenic cr'i^uo 
Figure is by the Spanish Arabian, Averroes of Cor- A S "cm« y 
dova, in his commentary on the Organon .“ Aver- 
roes flourished above a thousand yearn posterior to 
Galen ; and from his report alone, (as I have also 
ascertained), does the prevalent opinion take its rise, 
that we owe to Galen this amplification, (or corruption, 
as it may be), of the Aristotelic doctrines of logical 
figure. There has been lately published from manu- 
script, by Didot of Paris, a new logical treatise of 
Galen .* 3 In this work, in which the syllogistic figures 
are detailed, there is no mention of a fourth figure. 

Galen, therefore, as far as we know, affords no excep- 
tion to the other authors upon Logic. In these circum- 
stances, it is needless to observe how slender is the 
testimony in favour of the report; and this is one of 
many others in which an idle story, once told and 
retailed, obtains universal credit as an established fact, 
in consequence of the prevalent ignorance of the 
futility of its foundation. Of the legitimacy of the 
Fourth Figure I shall speak, after having shown you 
the nature of its reasoning. 

Before proceeding further in the consideration of Complex 
the Figure of Syllogism, it is, however, necessary to Sthe '** 1011 
state a complex modification to which it is subject, syfktfnn. 
and which is contained in the following paragraph. 

f LXXIV. The Figure of Syllogism is modi- Par. lxxiv. 
fied by the Quantity and Quality of the proposi- 

o Prior A nalytics, [B. i. ch. 8 . — Ed.] ir Haotcrup yupV (1844). — Ed. 

/3 raA 7} you Zltrayteyii AiaAcffTir^ — 

VOL. I. 2 C 


 


402 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

XX. 


tions which constitute the reasoning. As the 
combination of Quantity and Quality affords 
four kinds of propositions, — Universal Affirma- 
tive (A), Universal Negative (E), Particular 
Affirmative (I), Particular Negative ( 0 ) ; and 
as there are three propositions in each syllogism, 
there are consequently in all sixty-four arrange- 
ments possible of three propositions, differing in 
quantity and quality; — arrangements which con- 
stitute what are called the Syllogistic Moods , 
(rponoL, modi). I may interpolate the observa- 
tion The Greek logicians after Aristotle, looking 
merely to the two premises in combination, called 
these Syzygies y (av^vyiat, jiigaUones y conjugatio- 
nesy combinationes). Aristotle himself never uses 
Tpo7ro5 for either mood or modality specially ; 
nor does he use (rv^vyCa in any definite sense. 
His only word for mood is the vague expression 
syllogism. 

The greater number of these moods are, how- 
ever, incompetent, as cont radictory of the general 
rules of syllogism ; and there are in all only 
eleven which can possibly enter a legitimate 
syllogism. These eleven mopds again are, for the 
same reason, not all admissible in every figure, 
but six only in each, that is, in all twenty-four ; 
and again of these twenty-four, five are useless, 
and, therefore, usually neglected, as having a 
particular conclusion where a universal is compe- 
tent. The nineteen useful moods admitted by 
logicians, may, however, by the quantification of 
the predicate, be still further simplified, by super- 
seding the significance of Figure. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


403 


In entering on the consideration of the various lf.ct. 

° ... . . XX. 

Moods of the Syllogistic Figures, it is necessary that ’ — 

you recall to memory the three laws I gave you of the Km ' 1k ““ 0 '‘' 
Categorical Syllogism, and in particular the two clauses 
of the second law, — That the sumption must be defi- 
nite, (general or singular), and the subsumption affir- 
mative, — clauses which are more vaguely expressed 
by the two laws of the logicians, — that no conclusion 
can be drawn from two particular premises, — and 
that no conclusion can be drawn from two negative 
premises. This being premised ; you recollect that 
the four combinations of Quantity and Quality, com- 
petent to a proposition, were designated by the four 
letters, A, E, I, 0, — A denoting a universal affirma- 
tive ; — E, a universal negative ; — I, a particular affir- 
mative ; — 0, a particular negative. 


Assent A ; negat E ; verum nniversaliter ozubfe : 

Asserit I ; negat O ; sed particulariter ambo.a 

A, it affirms of this, these, all j 
As E denies of any : 

I, it affirms, as O denies, 

Of some, or few, or many. 

Thus A affirms what E denies, 

And definitely either ; 

Thus I affirms what O denies, 

But definitely neither.^ 

Now, as each syllogism has two premises, there are, Thopos- 

Bible com- 


et See above, p. 255 . — Ed. 

/3 [The following are previous Eng- 
lish metrical versions of these lines : — 

“ A doeth affirme, E doeth denigh, 
which are bothe universall : 

I doeth affirme, 0 doeth denigh, 
whiche wee particular call.” 


— Wilson, Rule of Reason, p. 27 a, 
1551. 

“ A says and E denies ; both to- 
tally. 

I says and 0 denies; both partially.” 

— Wallis, InMiluiio Logicoe , 1686, L. 
ii. c. 4, p. 105.] 


 


404 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


bin&tiona of 
premises. 


How many 
of these aro 
syllogisti- 
cally valid. 


consequently sixteen different combinations possible 
of premises differing in quantity and quality, — viz. : 


1) A A. 
A E. 
A I. 
A O. 


2) E A. 
E E. 
El. 
EO. 


3)1 A. 
I E. 
I I. 
I O. 


4)0 A. 
O E. 
O I. 
O O. 


Now the question arises, — are all of these sixteen 
possible combinations of different premises valid 
towards a legitimate conclusion \ In answer to this, 
it is evident that a considerable number of these are 
at once invalidated by the first clause of the second 
law of the categorical syllogism, in so far as recog- 
nised by logicians, by which all moods with two par- 
ticular premises are excluded, as in these there is no 
general rule. Of this class are the four moods, I I, 
I 0, 0 I, and 0 0. And the second clause of the 
same law, in so far as recognised by logicians, in- 
validates the moods of two negative premises, as in 
these there is no subordination. Of this class are the 
four moods EE, E 0, 0 E, and 0 0. Finally, by 
the two clauses of the second rule in conjunction, the 
mood I E is said to be excluded, because the particu- 
lar sumption contains no general rule, and the nega- 
tive subsumption no subordination. (This, I think, is 
incorrect.) These exclusions have been admitted to 
be valid for every Figure ; there, consequently, remain 
(say the logicians), as the possible modes of any legi- 
timate syllogism, the eight following — A A, A E, A I, 
A 0, E A, E I, 1 A, 0 A a ; but some of these, as appar- 
ently contradictory of the second rule in its more de- 
finite assertions, — that the sumption must be general 
and the subsumption affirmative, — I shall, after stating 

a Cf. Bacbmann. Logik, § 129 Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


405 


to you the common doctrine of the logicians, show to 
be really no exceptions. 

But whether each of the moods, though a 'priori 
possible, affords a proper syllogism in all the figures, 
— this depends on the definite relations of the middle 
term to the two others in the several figures. These, 
therefore, require a closer investigation. I shall con- 
sider them, with the logicians, principally in the 
quantity of extension, but, mutatis mutandis , all that 
is true in the one quantity is equally true in the other. 

Now if, in the first figure, we consider these eight 
moods with reference to the general rules, we shall find 
that all do not in this figure afford correct syllogisms ; 
but only those which are constructed in conformity to 
the following particular rules, which are, however, in 
this figure, identical with those we have already given 
as general laws of eveiy perfect and regular categori- 
cal syllogism. 

The symbol of the First Figure is, — 


LECT. 

XX. 


Whether 
each mood 
that is a 
jrriori pos- 
sible affords 
a proper syl- 
logism in all 
the figures. 


First 

Figure. 


}" ^ 0r Extension ; 


ension. 


The first rule is, — “ The sumption must be univer- 
sal. Were it particular, and, consequently, the sub- 
sumption universal, as : — 


Some M arc P ; 

But all S are M ; 

we could not know whether S were precisely the part 
of M which lies in P, and it might be altogether out 
of P. In that case, an universal negative conclusion 
would be the correct ; but this cannot be drawn, as 
there is no negative premise, and though accidentally 


40G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


Legitimate 
nmoda of 
Finit 
Figure. 


Their sym- 
bol.. 


perhaps true, still it is not a necessary consequence 
of the premises.” “ 

“ The second rule is, — The subsumption must be 
affirmative. Were it negative, and consequently the 
sumption affirmative, in that case S would be wholly 
excluded from the sphere of M ; and, consequently, 
the general rule under which M stands would not be 
applicable to S. Thus : — 

All M are P ; 

No S is M ; 

No S in P. 

Alt colours are physical phatuuniena ; 

No sound is a colour ; 

Therefore, no sound is a physical pluenomenon. 

“ Here the negative conclusion is false, but the affir- 
mative, which would be true, — all sounds are physical 
pheenomena,— cannot be inferred from the premises, 
and, therefore, no inference is competent at all.” P 

Thus, in this figure, of the eight moods generally 
admissible, I A and 0 A are excluded by the first ; 
A E and A 0 by the second rule. There remain, 
therefore, only four legitimate moods, A A, E A, A I, 
and E I. — The lower Greek logicians denoted them 
by the terms, — 

Tpappara, 0 Ey patfre, T paffiidi, Te^vixrk ;y 

the Latin schoolmen by the terms — 

Barbara, Cclarent, Darii, and Ferio. 


a Bachmonn, LogiJc , § 1 30, p. 203. 
— Bo. [So Hollmann, Phil. Rat ton- 
al in, t/iue Logica vulgo dicitur, § 461, 
Dotting®, 1746. Lovanienaos, Com- 
ment aria in Imp. Porjthyrii et in 
omnes Libras Arist. de DiaUctica, 
Anal. Prior, L. i. p. 215, Loranii, 
1547. Ulrich, Instil. Log. et Met., 
§ 191, Ion®, 1785. Fonaeca, Jnstit. 


Dial., L. vi. c. 21, p. 363.J 
£ Bachmann, an above. — E d. [Of. 
Derodon, Logica, Restitufa, P. iv. p. 
618. Ulrich, as above. Lovanien- 
ses, os above. Hollmann, Logica , 
§ 462.] 

y For an account of these mnemo- 
nics, see Discussions, p. 671, second 
edition. — E d. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 407 

In the Latin symbols, which are far more ingenious 
and complete, and in regard to the history of which 
I shall say something in the sequel, the vowels are 
alone at present to be considered, and of these the 
first expresses the sumption, the second the subsump- 
tion, and the third the conclusion. The correctness 
of these is shown by the following examples and de- 
lineations. 

“ The first mood of this figure : — 

l. Barbara. 

All M are P ; 

All S are M ; 

Therefore , all S are P. 

All that is composite is dissoluble ; 

All material things are composite ; 

Therefore , all material things are dissoluble 



II. Celarent. 


No M is P ; 

All 8 are M ; 

Therefore , no S is P. 

No finite being is exempt from error ; 
All men are finite beings ; 

Therefore, no man is exempt from error. 


© 

O 


III. Darii. 

All M are P ; 

Some S are M ; 

Therefore , some 8 are P. 

All virtues are laudable ; 

Some habits are virtues ; 

Therefore, some habits are laudable. 



LF.CT. 

XX. 


I. Barbara. 


II. Celar- 
ent. 


III. Darii. 


“ This diagram makes it manifest to the eye why 


408 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


IV. Ferio. 


Second 

Figure. 


lib rules. 


the conclusion can only be particular. As only a part 
of the sphere S lies in the sphere M, this part must 
lie in the sphere P, as the whole of M lies therein ; 
but it is of this part only that any thing can be 
affirmed in the conclusion. The other part of S can- 
either lie wholly out of P, or partly in P but out of M ; 
but as the premises affirm nothing of this part, the 
conclusion cannot, therefore, include it. 


IV. Ferio. 

No M is P ; 

Some S arc M ; 

Therefore , some S arc not P. 

No virtue is reprehensible ; 

Some habits are virtues ; 

Therefore, some habits are not reprehensible. 




“ The conclusion in this case can only be particular, 
as only a part of S is placed in the sphere of M. The 
other part of S may lie out of P or in P. But of this 
the premises determine nothing .” 0 

The symbol of the Second Figure is — 


PM, 
S M, 


i 


for Extension 


i 


S M, 
PM 


’ | for Comprehension. 


“ This figure is governed by the two following rules. 
Of these the first is — One premise must be negative.^ 
For were there two affirmative premises, as : — 


a Bnchounn, Logik, p. 204-206. — /9 [See Dercxlon, Logica Rcdituta, 

Ed. F. iv. p. 637. Hollmann, Logica , §§ 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


409 


All P arc M ; 

All S are M ; 

All metals are minerals ; 
All pebbles are minerals ; 



the conclusion would be — All pebbles are metals, which 
would be false. 

“ The second rule is : — The sumption must be uni- 
versal." Were the sumption particular, the subsump- 
tion behoved to be universal ; for otherwise no con- 
clusion would be possible. But in that case the sump- 
tion, whether affirmative or negative, would afford 
only an absurd conclusion/ 

“ If affirmative, as : — 

Some P ure M ; 

No SitM; 

Therefore, some S are not P. 

Some animals lay eggs, Le. are egg-laying things ; 

No horse lays eggs, i.e. is any egg-laying thing ; 

Therefore, some horses are not animals. 

“If negative, as : — 

Some P arc not M ; 

All S are M ; 

Therefore, some S are not P. 

Some minerals are not precious stones ; 

All topazes are precious stones ; 

Therefore, some topazes arc not minerals ; 

in both cases the conclusion is absurd. 


463, 464. Lovamenaes, Com. in 
Arise. Anal. Prior., L. i. p. 218. 
Scotus.] [Quastiones in Anal. Prior., 
L. i. q. 20, f. 268 .— Ed.) 


a See Hollmann, and Lovaniensee, 
as cited above. — E d. 

$ [Cf. Fonseca, Instil. Dial., L. vi. 
c. 21, p. 363.] 


LECT, 

XX. 


 


410 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX. 


I. Cesare. 


II. Comes- 
trot. 


III. Fea- 
tino. 


“ There thus remain,” say the logicians, “ only the 
moods Cesare, Camestres , Festino, Baroco. 


I. C ESA HE. 



No P is M ; 

All S are M ; 

Therefore , no S is P. 
Nothin'/ material has free will; 
All sjririts have free will; 
Therefore, no spirit is material. 



II. C'amehthkj. 

All P are M ; 

O No S is M ; 

Therefore, no S is P. 

All colours arc visible ; 

No sound is visible ; 

Therefore, no sound is a colour. 


III. Festino. 

No I’ is M ; | No vice is praiseworthy ; 

Some S are M ; j Sotne actions arc praiseworthy ; 

Therefore, some S are not P. | Therefore, some actions are not vices. 



“ The diagram here is alternative, for as the con- 
clusion can only comprise a part of S, as it is only 
the consequence of a partial subordination of S to M, 
the other parts of S which are out of M may either lie 
within or without P. — The conclusion can, therefore, 
only be particular. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


4 LI 


IV. Baroco. 


LECT. 

All P are M ; ^ 


XX. 

Some S are not M ; / M 


. IV. Baroco. 

Therefore , some S are not P. 1 | 

All hi rd8 are oviparous ; V 

Some animals are not oviparous ; ^ 

Therefore , some animals arc not birds.” * 

£ 

) 


a Bachman n, Loyik , as above. — E d. 


412 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXI. 


Recapitula- 

tion. 


Third 

Figure. 


It* rules. 


LECTURE XXI. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS, — THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 
EXTERNAL FORM. 

FIGURE — THIRD AND FOURTH. 

In out last Lecture, after terminating the general 
consideration of the nature of Figure and Mood in 
Categorical Syllogisms, we were engaged in a rapid 
survey of the nineteen legitimate and useful moods 
belonging to the four figures, according to the received 
doctrine of logicians, (consequently, exclusively in Ex- 
tension) ; and I had displayed to you the laws and 
moods of the First and Second Figures. Before, there- 
fore, proceeding to any criticism of this doctrine, it 
behoves us to terminate the view of the two remain- 
ing figures. 

To each of the first two figures, logicians attribute 
four moods ; to the third they concede six ; and to 
the fourth five. The scheme of the Third Figure, in 
Extension, is — 

M P, 

M S. 

This figure, (always in extension), is governed by 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


413 


the two following laws : — the first is, “ The subsump- 
tion must be affirmative.® Were the minor premise 
a negative, as in the syllogism, — 

All M are P ; All fiddles are musical instruments ; 

or * 

No M is S ; ’ But no fiddle is a flute ; 

here the conclusion would be ridiculous, — Therefore, 
no S is P, — Therefore, no flute is a musical instru- 
ment. For M and S can both exclude each other, 
and yet both lie within the sphere of P. 

“ The second law is, — The conclusion must be par- 
ticular, and particular although both premises are 
universal .* 5 This may be shown both in affirmative 
and negative syllogisms. In the case of affirmative 
syllogisms, as : — 

All M are. P ; 

But all M are S ; 

here, you will observe, M lies in two different 
spheres — P and S, and these must in the conclusion 
be connected in a relation of subordination. But S 
and P may be disparate notions , 7 and, consequently, 
not to be so connected ; an absurd conclusion would, 
therefore, be the result. For example, — 

All birds are animals with feathers ; 

But all birds are animals with a heart ; 

Therefore, all animals with a heart are animals 
with feathers. 

“ Again,” say the logicians, “ in regard to negatives : 
— In these only the sumption can be negative, as 

o [See Aristotle, Anal. Prior., i. 6, L. i. p. 220.] 

§§ 8, 16. Hollmann, Lorjica , § 466. y Disparate notion*, i.e. co-ordinate 
Lovanienses, In An. Prior., L. i. p. parte of the comprehension of their 
220.] common subject M. See above, p. 

/9 [But see Hollmann, Logiea , §§ 224. — Ed. 

332, 468. Lovanienses, In Anal. Prior., 


LECT. 

XXI. 


 



414 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. the subsumption, (by the first rule), must be affirma- 
— - 1 - - tive. Thus : — 


No M is P : No silver is iron ; 

or 

But all M arc S ; 1 But all silver is a mineral. 


“ Here the conclusion — No S is P , — No minei'cil is 
iron , would be false. 

“ Testing the eight possible moods in Extension by 
these special rules, there remain for this figure six, 
which by the Latin logicians have been named, Dar- 
apti, Felapton, Disamis , Dalisi , Bocardo , Ferison . — 
The first mood of this figure is : — 


I. Dnrapti. 



T. — Parapti.o 

All M are P ; 

But all M arc S ; 

Therefore , some S are P ; 
or, 

All gilding is metallic ; 

All gilding shines ; 

Therefore, some things that shine are 
metallic. 


“ Here it is manifest that M cannot at once lie in 
two different spheres, unless these partially involve, — 
partially intersect each other. But only partially ; 
for as both P and S are more extensive than M, and 
are both only connected through M, (i. e. through a 
part of themselves) ; they cannot, except partially, be 
identified with each other. 


o [Some of the ancient logicians, 
among others Porphyry, have made 
two moods of Darapti, as Aristotle 
himself does in Cesare and Camestres, 
in Disamis and Datisi. See Boethius, 
De Sylloyismo Cateyorieo, L. ii., Ojxra, 
p. 59-1 alibi. Cf. Zabarella, 0)>cra 


Logica , De Quart a Figura Syllog., pp. 
119, 120 et acq. Alex. Aphrodisiensis, 
In Anal. Prior., i. 5, ff. 23, 24, Aid. 
1531. Philoponus, In Anal. Prior., 
L. i. c. 5, f. 28 b. Apuleius, Dc Ha- 
bit ud. Doct. Plat., L. iii. Opera, p. 
37, 38, cd. Elmenhorst.] 


 


LKCTURE8 ON LOGIC. 


415 


“ The second mood of this figure is, — 

II. FeLAPTON.o 

No MinP; 

Hut all M are S ; 

Therefore, gome S are not P ; 
or, 

No material substance is a moral subject ; 

But all that is material is extended ; 

Therefore, something extended is not a moral subject. 



LF.OT. 

XXI. 


II. Kelap- 
ton. 


“ You will observe, that according to this diagram, 
the conclusion ought to be — No S is P, because the 
whole of S lies out of the sphere of P ; and as in the 
concrete example, the notion extended is viewed as 
out of the notion moral subject, w r e might conclude, — 
Nothing extended is a moral subject. But this con- 
clusion, though materially correct, cannot, however, 
be formally inferred from the premises. In the sump- 
tion, indeed, the whole of M is excluded from the 
sphere of P ; but in the subsumption M is included 
in the sphere S, that is, we think that the notion M 
is a part of the notion S. Now in the conclusion, S 
is brought under P, and the conclusion of a categori- 
cal syllogism, in reference to its quantity, is, as you 
remember, by the third general law regulated by the 
quality of the subsumption. But as in the present 
case the subsumption, notwithstanding the univer- 
sality of the expression, only judges of a part of S ; 

o [Aristotle gives Fapemo, Anal. Logictt, L. ii. c. 7, p. 169, Cantab., 
Prior, i. 7. (Burgersdyck, Instil. 1647.)] 


 



41 G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXI. 


III. Disa- 
rms. 


the conclusion can, in like manner, only judge of a 
part of S. Of the other parts of S there is nothing 
enounced in the premises. The relation between S 
and P could likewise be as follows : — 

No M is P; 

But nil M are S; 
or, 

No pigeon is a hawk ; 

But all jug eons are birds. 



“ Here the conclusion could not be a universal nega- 
tive, — Therefore , no S is P — Therefore , no bird is a 
hawk — for the sphere of S (bird) is greater than that 
of either M (pigeon) or P (hawk) ; it may, however, 
be a particular negative — Therefore , some S are not P, 
(< therefore , some birds are not hawks), — because the 
sumption has excluded M and P (pigeon and hand:) 
from each other’s sphere, and, consequently, the part 
of S which is equal to M is different from the part of S 
which is equal to P. — But if this be the case when the 
subsumption has an universal expression, the same, a 
fortioi'i , is true when it is particular. 

“ The third mood of this figure is : — 



III. D ISAM IS. 

Some M are P ; 

But all M arc S ; 

Therefore , some S are P ; 

or, 

Some acts of homicide are laudable ; 
But all acts of homicide are cruel ; 
Therefore , some cruel acts are laudable. 


 


LECTURES OX LOGIC. 


417 


“ The fourth mood of this figure is : — 


IV. Patisi. 

All M arc P ; 

But gome M are S ; 

Therefore, gome S are P. 

Or, 

All arts of homicide are cruel ; 

Si/me acts of homicide arc laudable, ; 
Therefore, some laudable acts are cruel. 



“ This diagram makes it manifest that more than a 
single case is possible in this mood. As the subsump- 
tion is particular, the conclusion can only bring that 
part of S which is M into identity with P ; of the 
other parts of P there can be nothing determined, and 
these other parts, it is evident, may either lie wholly 
out of, or partly within, P. 

“ The fifth mood of this figure is : — 


V. Bocardo. 

Some M are. not P ; 

But all M are S ; 

Therefore, some. S are not P. 

Or, 

Some syllogisms arc not regular ; 

But all syllogisms are things important ; 

Therefore, some important things are not things regular. 



“ The sixth mood of this figure is : — 

VI. Ferison. 

A To M is P ; 

But some M are S ; 

Therefore, some S are not P. 

VOL. I. 2D 


LF.CT. 

XXI. 


4. Patisi. 


5. Bocardo. 


6. Ferison. 


Digitized by Coogle 



418 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXI. 


Fourth 

Figure. 


Its laws. 


Or, 

jVo truth in without result ; 

Some truths are misunderstood ; 

Therefore, some thiiujs misuwlcrstood are not without result. 



“ Here, as in the premises, only that part of S which 
is M is excluded from P, consequently the other parts 
of S may either likewise lie wholly out of P, or par- 
tially in P.”“ 

So much for the moods of the third figure. 

“ The formula of the Fourth Figure is : — 

P M 

m a 

“ This figure is regulated by three laws. 

“ I. Of these the first is, — If the sumption be affir- 
mative, the subsumption must be universal. The 
necessity of this law is easily seen. For if we had the 
premises : — 

All P are M ; 

But some, M are S ; 

in this case, M may, or may not, be a notion superior 
to P. 

“ On the former alternative, if M be higher than P, 
and likewise higher than S, then the whole of S might 
be contained under P. — In this case, the proper eon- 


a BiiclinmnD, Loffil, § 132, p. 21 1-218.— Eu. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


419 


elusion would be a universal affirmative ; which, how- 
ever, cannot follow from the premises, as the subsump- 
tion, ex hypothesi, is particular. On the latter alter- 
native, even if M were not superior to S, still since P 
is only a part of M, we could not know whether a 
part of S were contained under P or not. For ex- 
ample : — 

All men are animals ; 

But gome animals are amphibious. 

“ From these premises no conclusion could be drawn. 

“ II. The second rale by which this figure is governed 
is — If either premise be negative, the sumption must 
be universal. 

Suppose we had the premises — 

Some P are not M ; 

But all M are 8 ; 

Therefore, some 8 are not P. 

Or, 

Some animals are not feathered ; 

But all feathered animals are birds ; 

Therefore, some birds are not animals. 

“ In this case the whole of S lies within the sphere 
of P ; there cannot, therefore, follow a particular 
negative conclusion, and if not that, no conclusion 
at all. The same would happen were the sumption a 
particular affirmative, and the subsumption a univer- 
sal negative. 

“ III. The third rule of the fourth figure is — If the 
subsumption be affirmative, the conclusion must be 
particular. This, (the logicians say), is manifest. For 
in this figure S is higher than M, and higher than P, 
consequently only a part of S can be P. 

“ If we test by these rales the eight possible moods, 
there are in this figure five found competent, which, 


LF.CT. 

XXI. 


 



420 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXI. 


among sundry other names, have obtained the follow- 
ing: Brcimantip , Camenes , Dimaris, Fesapo, Fresison . 
“ Of these moods the first is : — 


1. Braroan* 
tip. 


L Bramantip, otherwise Bamalip, &c. 
All V are M ; 

All M are S ; 

Therefore, some S arc P. 

Or, 

All greyhounds are dogs ; 

But all dogs are quadrupeds ; 

Therefore , some quadrupeds are greyhounds. 



“ The second mood is called : — 

2. CamcneB. II. C.YMEXES, CaLEMES, Or CaLENTES, &C. 

All P are M ; 

But no M is S ; 

Therefore, no S is P. 

Or, 

All ruminating animals have four 
stomachs ; 

But no animal with four stomachs is carnivorous ; 
Therefore , no carnivorous animal ruminates. 



“ The third mood in the fourth figure is variously 
denominated : — 


3. Dimaris. 


III. Dimaris, or Dimatis, or Dibatis, &c. 


Some P are M ; 

But all M are S ; 

Therefore, some S are P. 

Or, 

Some practically virtuous men are neces- 
sitarians ; 

All necessitarians speculatively subvert the distinction of vice and 



virtue ; 

Therefore , some who speculatively subvert the distinction of vice 
and virtue are practically virtuous men. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


421 


“ The fourth mood of this figure is : — 



IY. Fesafo. 

No P is M ; 

All M arc S ; 

Therefore, some S are not P. 


Or, 


No negro is a Hindoo ; 


But all Hindoos arc blacks ; 


Therefore, some blacks are not negroes. 


o 



“ According to the first of these diagrams, all S is 
excluded from P, and thus the conclusion would seem 
warranted that — No S is P. This conclusion cannot, 
however, be inferred ; for it would violate the third 
rule of this figure. For while we, in the sumption, 
have only excluded M, that is, a part of S, from P, and 
as the other parts of S are not taken into account, we 
are, consequently, not entitled to deny these of P. 
The first diagram, therefore, which sensualises only a 
single case, is not coadequate with the logical formula, 
and it is necessary to add the second in order to ex- 
haust it. The second diagram is, therefore, likewise a 
sensible representation of Fesapo ; and that diagram 
makes it evident that the conclusion can only be a 
particular negative. 

“ The fifth and last mood is : — 


V. Fresison. 

No P is M ; 

But some M are S ; 
Therefore, some S are not P. 


 


422 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXL 


Mood and 
Figure in 
Compre- 
hension. 


Or, 

No moral principle is an animal impulse ; 

But some animal impulses are principles of action ; 
Therefore, some principles of action are not moral principles. 



“ The demonstration is here the same as in the former 
mood. Since the subsumption only places a part of 
M in the sphere of S, the conclusion, whose quantity 
is determined by the subsumption, can only deny P of 
that part of S which is likewise a part of M.” ° 

Having thus concluded the exposition of the various 
Figures and Moods of Syllogisms, as recognised by 
logicians, in reference to Extensive Quantity, it will 
not be necessary to say more than a word in general, 
touching these figures and moods in reference to Com- 
prehensive Quantity. Whatever mood and figure is 
valid and regular in the one, is valid and regular in 
the other ; and every anomaly is equally an anomaly 
in both. The rules of the various figures which we 
have considered in regard to syllogisms in Extension, 
are all, without exception or qualification, applicable 
to syllogisms in Comprehension, with this single pro- 
viso, that, as the same proposition forms a different 
premise in the several quantities, all that is said of the 
sumption in extension, should be understood of the 
subsumption in comprehension, and all that is said of 
the sumption in comprehension, should be understood 

a Bachmann, Logik , § 133, p. 218-223. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


423 


of the subsumption in extension. What, therefore, lect. 

has hitherto been, or may hereafter be, stated of the — 

mood and figure of one quantity, is to be viewed as 
applicable, mutatis mutandis , to the other. This being 
understood, I proceed, in the first place, to show you Criticism of 
that the complex series of logical forms which I have in;; doctrino 
enumerated, may 1x3 considerably diminished, and the fon^.' ' l 
doctrine of syllogism, consequently, reduced to a higher 
simplicity. In doing this I shall consider, first, the 
Figures, and, secondly, their Moods. 

Now, as regards the number of the Figures, you are i. The 
aware, from what I formerly stated, that Aristotle lgurcs ' 
only contemplated the three first, and that the fourth, The Fourth, 
which is, by those who do not mistake it for an Aris- 
totelic form, referred with little probability to Galen, 
was wholly unnoticed until the end of the twelfth or 
the beginning of the thirteenth century, when it was 
incidentally communicated, as an innovation of the 
physician of Pergamus, by the celebrated Averroes, in 
his commentary on the Prior Analytics of Aristotle, 
but by Averroes himself rejected as an illegitimate 
novelty.® The notice of this figure by the commen- 
tator was, how T ever, enough ; and though repudiated 
by the great majority of the rigid Aristotelians, the 
authority of Scotus, by whom it was defended/ secured 
for it at last, if not an universal approval, at least a 
very general toleration, as a legitimate though an 

a In Anal. Prior., i. 8. 0/>eraAris- tio respoctu extremorum secundum 
totcli s, t. i. f. 78, Venetiis, 1560 . — Ed. subjectior.em et prgcdieationem ; igi- 

£ This statement is marked as tur tres cruntfigunc et non plures . . 
doubtful in the Author’s Common- . . . quia per solum transpositionem 
place Book. Scotus (Qtuest. in Anal, non pervenit diversitas alicujus prm- 
Pritrr., i. q. 34) expressly rejects the missa; nec conclusions : per conse- 
Fourth Figure. He eays, “ Solum quens nec diversitas figune.” 
tribua media potest fieri debits ortlina- The Fourth Figure is, however said 


 


424 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXL 


awkward form. The arguments indeed by which it 
was attempted to evince the incompetency of this 
figure, were not of a character calculated to enforce 
assent ; for its inference is not less valid than that of 
any other, — however tortuous and perverse it may be 
felt to be. In fact, the logicians, in consequence of 
their exclusive recognition of the reasoning in exten- 


Grotrads on 
which the 
Fourth 


sion, were not in possession of the means of showing, 
that this figure is a monster undeserving of toleration, 
far less of countenance and favour. I shall not, there- 
fore, trouble you with the inconclusive reasoning on 
the part either of those who have assailed, or of those 
who have defended this figure, but shall at once put 
you in possession of the ground on which alone, I 
think, its claim to recognition ought to be disallowed. 

In the first place, then, you are aware that all 
reasoning is either in the quantity of comprehension, 
ought to bo or in the quantity of extension. You are aware, in 
the second, that these quantities are not only different, 
but, as existing in an inverse ratio of each other, 
opposed. Finally, in the third place, you are aware 
that, though opposed, so that the maximum of the 
one is the minimum of the other, yet the existence of 
each supposes the existence of the other ; accordingly, 
there can be no extension without some comprehen- 
sion, — no comprehension without some extension. 
a cross This being the case, it is evident that, besides the 
jraaible definite reasoning from whole to part, and from parts 

sion to com- to whole, within the several quantities and in their 


by Ridiger, ( De Sensu Veri ct Falsi , p. butcs (erroneously) tho invention of 
337), to have been introduced by this figure to Scotus. Compare also 
Galen and Scotus. Hospinianus, ( Ik Noldius, Logica Recognita, c. xiii. § 4, 
Controvcrsiis Dialccticis, c. xix.), attri- p. 277 . — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


425 

perpendicular lines, there is also competent an indefi- lect. 
nite inference across from the one quantity to the — — — 
other. For if the existence of the one quantity be SSd’tST" 
only possible under the condition of the other, we may urM ’ 
always, it is self-evident, in the first place, from the 
affirmation of anything in extension, indefinitely affirm 
it in comprehension, as, reciprocally, from the affirma- 
tion of anything in comprehension, we may indefinitely 
affirm it in extension ; and, in the second place, from 
the negation of anything in extension, we may abso- 
lutely deny it in comprehension, as, reciprocally, from 
the negation of anything in comprehension, we may 
absolutely deny it in extension. 

Now, what has not been observed, such is exclu- Tin. the 
sively the inference in the Fourth Figure; its two last rnft^ce'iu 
rules are in fact nothing but an enunciation of those Figure .' 1 
two conditions of a cross inference from the one 
quantity to the other ; and the first rule will be 
hereafter shown to be only an error, the result of not 
observing that certain moods are only founded on the 
accident of a trausposed order of the premises, and, 
therefore, constitute no subject for a logical legisla- 
tion. 

To prove this statement of the nature of the infer- iv..ve,i 

. _ _ . . .. 1 . . illustrated 

ence in the fourth figure, it is only necessary to look 
at its abstract formula. In extension this is : — 

P w M ; 

MwS; 

8 is P. 

Here in the premises P is contained under M, and 
M is contained under S ; that is, in the premises S is 
the greatest whole and P the smallest part. So far, 


 


426 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXI. 


this syllogism in extension is properly a syllogism in 
comprehension, in which the subject of the conclusion 
is the greatest whole, and its predicate the smallest 
part. From such premises we, therefore, expect, that 
the conclusion carrying out what was established in 
the antecedent, should affirm P as the part of S. — In 
this, however, our expectation is disappointed ; for 
the reasoning suddenly turns round in the conclusion, 
and affirms S as a part of P. And how, it may be 
asked, is this evolution in the conclusion competent, 
seeing that it was not prepared, and no warrant given 
for it in the premises. To this the answer is prompt 
and easy. The conclusion in this figure is solely legi- 
timated by the circumstance, that from an identity 
between the two terms in one quantity, we may 
always infer some identity between them in the other, 
and from a non-identity between them in one quantity, 
we can always infer a non-identity in the other. And 
that in this figure there is always a transition in the 
conclusion from the one quantity, is evident ; for that 
notion which in the premises was the greatest whole, 
becomes in the conclusion the smallest part ; and that 
notion which in the premises was the smallest part, 
becomes in the conclusion the greatest whole. Now 
how is this manoeuvre possible ? — how are we entitled 
to say that because A contains all B, therefore B con- 
tains some A 1 Only it is clear, because there is here 
a change from the containing of the one quantity to 
the containing of the other ; and because, each quantity 
necessarily implying the indefinite existence of the 
other, we are consequently permitted to render this 
necessary implication the ground of a logical infer- 
ence. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


427 


It is manifest, however, in the first place, that such lkct. 

1 WI 

a cross and hybrid and indirect reasoning from the 
one quantity to the other, in the fourth figure, is 
wholly of a different character and account from the J; 1 rn “ Ul ' 
reasoning in the other three figures, in which all 
inference, whether upwards or downwards, is equable 
and homogeneous within the same quantity. The 
latter in short is natural and easy ; the former un- 
natural and perverse. 

In the second place, the kind of reasoning compe- 2. u*cie«. 
tent in the fourth figure, is wholly useless. The 
change from the one quantity to the other in the 
course of a syllogism is warranted by no necessity, by 
no expediency. The reasoning in each quantity is 
absolute and complete within itself, and all that can 
be accomplished in the one process can equally well 
be accomplished in the other. The jumping, therefore, 
from extension to comprehension, or from compre- 
hension to extension, in the conclusion of the fourth 
figure, is a feat about as reasonable and useful in 
Logic, as the jumping from one horse to another would 
be reasonable and useful in the race-course. Both are 
achievements possible ; but, because possible, neither 
is, therefore, a legitimate exercise of skill. 

We may, therefore, on the ground that the fourth 
figure involves a useless transition from one quantity 
to another, reject it as a logical figure, and degrade it 
to a mere logical caprice. 

But, in the third place, there is a better ground ; 3. Loyally 
the inference, though valid in itself, is logically, — is 
scientifically, invalid. For the inference is only legi- 
timated by the occult conversion of the one quantity 
into the other, which takes place in the mental process. 


 



4.28 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

XXI. 


There is thus a step taken in the reasoning, which is 
not overtly expressed. Were the whole process stated 
in language, as stated it logically ought to be, instead 
of a simple syllogism with one direct conclusion, we 
should have a complex reasoning with two conclusions; 
one conclusion direct and immediate, (the inference, 
to wit, of conversion), and from that immediate con- 
clusion another mediate and indirect, but which, as it 
stands, appears as the one sole and exclusive conclu- 
sion from the premises. This ground, on which I 
think the fourth figure ought to be specially abolished, 
is stated with the requisite details in the Logical 
Appendix contained in the second edition of my Dis- 
cussions on Philosophy* 

o P. 603.— Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


420 


LECTURE XXII. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS. — THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 
EXTERNAL FORM. 

C. REGULAR AND IRREGULAR. 

FIGURE — REDUCTION. 

In my last Lecture, after terminating the view of the lf.ct. 

nineteen Moods of the Four Syllogistic Figures, ac 

cording to the doctrine of logicians, I entered on the!i^ ai ’ llula 
consideration, — how far their doctrine concerning the 
number and legitimacy of these various figures and 
moods was correct. In the conduct of this discus- 
sion, I proposed, first, to treat of the Figures, and, 
secondly, to treat of the Moods. Commencing, then, 
with the Figures, it is manifest that no exception can 
possibly lie taken to the first, which is, in point of 
fact, no figure at all, but the one regular, — the one 
natural form of ratiocination. The other three figures 
divide themselves into two classes. The one of these 
classes comprehends the fourth ; the other, the second 
and third figures. The fourth figure stands, on the 
common doctrine of the logicians, in a more unfavour- 
able situation than the second and third. It was not 


 



430 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. recognised by Aristotle ; it obtained admission into 
— _ — 1_ the science at a comparatively recent period ; it has 
never in fact been universally recognised ; and its 
progress is manifestly more perverse, circuitous, and 
unnatural, than that of any other. 

In regard to this fourth figure, I stated that the 
controversy among logicians touching its legitimacy, 
had been without result ; its opponents failing to show 
that it ought to be rejected ; its defenders failing to 
show that it was deserving of recognition. I then 
stated that the logicians, in their one-sided view of 
the reasoning process, had let slip the one great prin- 
ciple on which the legitimacy of this figure was to be 
determined. I then explained to you that the pecu- 
liarity of the fourth figure consists in this, — that the 
premises are apparently the premises of a syllogism 
in one kind of quantity, 'while its conclusion is the 
converted conclusion of a syllogism in the other. It 
is thus in every point of view contorted and prepos- 
terous. Its premises are transposed, and the conclu- 
sion follows from these, not directly, but through the 
medium of a conversion. I showed how, and how far, 
this kind of reasoning was competent, and that though 
the inference in the fourth figure is valid, it is in- 
convenient and useless, and, therefore, that the form 
itself, though undoubtedly legitimate, is still only a 
legitimate monster. Herewith the Lecture termin- 
ated. 

General Now, looking superficially at the matter, it might 
the ^ecou seem, from what has now been said, that the fourth 
FoIinhFig- ought to be at once expunged from the series of 
logical figures. But a closer examination will show 
us that this decision would be rash. In point of fact, 
all figure properly so called, that is, every figure, with 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


431 


the exception of the first, must be rejected equally lect. 
with the fourth, and on the following ground, — that — — — 
they do not, in virtue of their own expressed pre- 
mises, accomplish their own inference, but that this 
is done by the mental interpolation of certain comple- 
mentary steps, without which no conclusion in these 
figures could be drawn. They are thus in fact reason- 
ings apparently simple, but in reality complex ; and 
when the whole mental process is expressed, they are 
found to be all only syllogisms in the first figure, with 
certain corollaries of the different propositions inter- 
mingled.® This doctrine corresponds with that of the 
logicians, in so far as they, after Aristotle, have allowed 
that the last three figures are only valid as reducible 
to the first ; and, to accomplish this reduction, they 
have supplied us with a multitude of empirical rules, 
and lavished a world of ingenuity in rendering the 
working of these complex rules more easy. From 
Whately and the common books on Logic, you are of Latin and 

(ircck 

course acquainted with the import of the consonants mnemonics, 
in the cabalistical verses, Barbara, Celarcnt , &c. ;P and authors, 
it must be confessed that, taking these verses on their 
own ground, there are few human inventions which 
display a higher ingenuity. Their history is ap- 
parently altogether unknown to logicians. They were, 
in so far as they relate to the three first or Aristotelic 
figures, the invention of Petrus Hispanus, who died in 
1277, Pope John XXII., (or as he is reckoned by some 
the XXI., and by others the XX). He was a native 
of Lisbon. It is curious that the corresponding Greek 
mnemonics were, so far as I can discover, the inven- 

o This doctrine of Figure, which is gutischen Flguren, 1762. Werke, i. p. 
developed in paragraph Ixxv., is mainly 55, ed. Roseukranz and Schubert. — 
taken from Kant. See his Essay, Die Ed. 

Fuhchc Spitzfindigkeit der rtVr Si/Uo- /3 See Dixcutsions, p. 666 . — Ed. 


432 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


i.F.rr. tion of his contemporary Nicephorus Blemmidas, who 
— 1 — - was designated Patriarch of Constantinople. 0 Between 
them, these two logicians thus divided the two highest 
places in the Christian hierarchy ; but as the one had 
hardly begun to reign when he was killed by the 
downfall of his palace,* 3 so the other never entered on 
his office, by accepting his nomination at all. The 
several works of the Pope and the Patriarch were for 
many centuries the great text-books of Logic, — the one 
in the schools of the Greek, the other in the schools 
of the Latin church. 

The Greek The Greek symbols are far less ingenious than the 
ingenious 58 Latin, as they only mark the consecution, quantity, 
LaUn. l c and quality of the different propositions of the various 
moods of the three generally admitted figures, without 
showing to what mood of the first the moods of the 
other two figures are to be reduced, far less by what 
particular process this is to be done. All this is ac- 
complished by the symbols of the Roman Pontiff. As 
to the relative originality, or the priority in point of 
date, of these several inventions, 1 am unable to speak 
with certainty. It is probable, however, that the 
Blemmidas was the first, both because his verses are 
the simpler and ruder, and because it is not known 
that he was acquainted with the writings of the 
Western logicians ; whereas I find that the Summulce 
of Ilispanus are in a great measure taken, not indeed 
from the treatise of Blemmidas upon Dialectic, but 
from the Synopsis of the Organon of his somewhat 
earlier contemporary Michael Psellus. 7 

a But see Discussions, p, 672 . — Ed. account ; the work which goes by tho 
/3 See Platina, [IJistoria dt Vitis name of Psellun being in all proba- 
Pontijicum Roma nor inn p. 181, ed. bility a translation from Hiapanus, the 
1 572 . — Ed.] mnemonics, with one exception, being 

y The reverse ia probably the truer omitted. See Discussions, p. 128 . — Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


433 


But the whole of the rules given by logicians for lf.ct. 
the Reduction of Syllogisms are unphilosophical, for 


they are merely the empirical statements of the opera- ofTo^daL 
tion of a principle in detail, which principle itself has J u r c Jj , 0 ° n ^J' 
been overlooked, but which, when once rationally ex- 2^“* 
plicated, supersedes the whole complex apparatus of“° I ' hical - 
rules for its mechanical application. 

If I succeed, therefore, in explaining to you how the Tfie l^t 
last three Figures are only the mutilated expressions Eipros 
of a complex mental process, I shall not ?only subvert mutilated 


their existence as forms of reasoning not virtually of a com- 
identical with the first figure, — I shall not only re- process, and 
lieve you from the necessity of studying the tedious identical 
and disgusting rules of their reduction, but in fact first, 
vindicate the great principles of reasoning from ap- 
parent anomaly. For, in the first place, if the three 
last figures are admitted as genuine and original forms 
of reasoning, the principle that all reasoning is the re- 
cognition of the relation of a least part to a greatest 
whole, through a lesser whole or greater part, is invali- 
dated. For, in the three latter figures, the middle term 
does not really hold the relation of an intermediate 
whole or part to the subject and predicate of the con- 
clusion ; for either, in the second figure, it contains 
them both, or, in the third, is contained by them both, 
or, in the fourth, at once contains the greatest whole, 

(that is, the predicate in extensive, the subject in com- 
prehensive, quantity), and is contained by the smallest 
part, (that is, the subject in extensive, the predicate 
in comprehensive, quantity). In the second place, if 
these three figures are admitted as independent and 
legitimate forms, the second general rule I gave you 
for categorical syllogisms, is invalidated in both its 
clauses. For it will not hold true, that every cate- 
vol. i. 2 E 


 


434 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. gorical syllogism must have an universal sumption 
XXIL . and an affirmative subsumption. The law of the 
universal quantity of the sumption is violated in the 
third figure, by Disarms and Bocardo, in the fourth, 
by Dimaris ; the law of the affirmative quality of 
the subsumption is violated, in the second figure, by 
Camestres and Baroco ; and, in the fourth, by Camenes. 
I, therefore, proceed to reconcile all these anomalies by 
the extinction of the three last figures, as more than 
accidental modifications of the first, and commence 
with the following paragraph. 

H LXXV. The three last, (that is, Second, Third, 
Fourth), Figures are merely hybrid or mixed rea- 
sonings, in which the steps of the process are 

are, in general, conversive inferences, which we 
are entitled to make, 1°, From the absolute nega- 
tion of a first notion as predicated of a second, 
to the absolute negation of the second notion as 
predicated of the first — if no A is B ; then no 
B is A ; 2°, From the total or partial affirmation 
of a lesser class or notion of a greater, to the 
partial affirmation of that greater notion of that 
lesser , — if all (or some) A is B ; then some B 
is A. 

Taking the figures and moods in their common 
fT^. order ; in the Second Figure the first mood is Cesare, 

1. Ccsarc. ^ ^ f ormu ] a Jg . 

No P is M ; 

But all S are M ; 

Therefore , no S is P. 

Here the ostensible or expressed sumption, No P is 


only partially expressed. The unexpressed steps 


Par. LXXV. 
The Second, 
Third, and 
Fourth Fig- 
ures only 
accidental 
modifica- 
tions of tho 
First. 


Moods of 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


435 


M, is mentally converted into the real sumption by lect. 
the inference , — Then no M is P. The other proposi- XXII ‘ 
tions follow regularly, — viz. : 

But all S arc M ; 

Therefore, no S is P. 


The real syllogism, fully expressed, is thus : — ^ 

Real Sumption, No M is P ; 

Subsumption, But all S arc M ; 

Conclusion, Ergo, no S is P. 


To save time, I shall henceforward state the com- 
plementary propositions which constitute the real and 
proximate parts of the syllogism, by the name of real , 
proximate , or interpolated sumption, subsumption, or 
conclusion ; and those who take notes may simply 
mark these, by placing them within brackets. To 
avoid confusing the conversive inference with the 
ostensible conclusion of the syllogism, I shall mark 
the former by the illative conjunction then ; the latter 
by the illative conjunction therejore. I shall take the 
concrete examples which I chanced to give in illustra- 
tion of the various moods. In Cesare the concrete 
example was : — 


Ostensible Sumption, 

Real, Interpolated, Sumption,... 

Subsumption, 

Conclusion, 


Nothing that is material has 
free will; 

( Then nothing that has free will 
is material ;) 

But all spirits have free will ; 
Therefore, no spirit is material. 


Throwing out of account the ostensible sumption, 
and considering the syllogism, in its real nature, as 
actually evolved out of the sumption mentally under- 
stood ; we have thus, instead of a syllogism in Cesare 
of the second figure, a syllogism in Celarent of the 


 


436 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXII. 


2. Gam- 
es tre*. 


In reality 
Celarent. 


first. The seeming irregularity is thus reduced to 
real order. 

The second mood of the second figure, viz. Cam- 
estres,“ is rather more irregular, and, therefore, the 
process of redressing it, though equally easy, is some- 
what more complex. The formula is: — 

All P are M ; 

But no S is M ; 

Therefore, no S is P. 

Here, in the first place, the premises are transposed, 
for you remember by the second general law of syllo- 
gisms, the sumption must in extension be universal, 
and the subsumption affirmative. By a preliminary 
operation, their apparent consecution must, therefore, 
be accommodated to their real. The premises being 
restored to order, there is yet a further intricacy to 
unravel. The sumption and the conclusion are neither 
of them proximate ; for we depart from a conversive 
sumption, and primarily obtain a conclusion which 
only gives us the ostensible conclusion, in the second 
instance, through an inference. Thus : — 

Ostensible Sumption, No S is M ; 

Proximate or Real Sumption, ( Then no M is S ;) 

Subsumption, All P arc M ; 

Proximate or Real Conclusion, ( Therefore , no P is 8 ;) 

Ostensible Conclusion, Therefore, no S is P. 

The concrete example given was : — 

All colours are, visible ; 

But no sound is visible ; 

Therefore, no sound is a colour. 

a [That Co wire anil Camestres are Logka, De Qiiarta Pigura Syllog., 
the same syllogism with accidental p. Ill, and authorities cited above, 
order of premises, see Zubarella, Opera p. 414, note.] 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


437 


Reversing the premises, we have : — 


LECT. 

XXII. 


Apparent Sumption, No sound is visible ; 

Proximate or Real Sumption, ( Then nothing visible is a sound ;) 

Subsumption, All colours are visible ; 

Proximate or Real Conclusion, ( Therefore , no colour is a sound;) 

which gives, as a conversivo 
inference, tho 

Expressed Conclusion, Then no sound is a colour. 


Thus it is evident that Camestres, in the second fig- 
ure, is only a modification of Celarent, in the first.® 

The third mood of the Second Figure, Festino, pre- 3. F«tino. 
sents no difficulty. We have only to interpolate the 
real sumption, to which the subsumption and conclu- in reality 
sion proximately refer. Thus : — 


Expressed Sumption, No P is M ; 

Real or Proximate Sumption,.. . . ( Then no M is P) ; 

Subsumption, But some S are M ; 

Conclusion, ; Therefore , some S arc not P. 


Our concrete example was : — 


Expressed Sumption, No vice is laudable ; 

Some actions are laudable ; 

Therefore , some actions are not vices. 

Here we have only to interpolate, as the real sump- 
tion : — 

Nothing laudable is a vice. 

Festino, in the second figure, is thus only Ferio in the 
first, with its sumption converted. 


o Cf. Krug, Logik , § 109, p. 308. Para iv. p. 648. Reusch, Sy sterna Logi- 
Mark Duncan, Instil. Loyica;, L. iv.c. 4, cum , § 439, p. 613.] 
p. 229. — Ed. [DeroUou, Loyica Ilcstit ., 


438 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXII. 


4. Baroco. 


Reductto tu 
impossibile 


In reality 
Darii. 


The fourth mood, Baroco, is more troublesome. In 
fact, this mood and Bocardo, in the third figure, have 
been at once the cruces and the opprobria of logicians. 
They have, indeed, succeeded in reducing these to the 
first figure by what is called the reductio ad impos- 
sibile , that is, by circuitously showing that if you deny 
the conclusion in these syllogisms, the contradictory 
inference is absurd ; but as of two contradictories one 
or other must be true, it, therefore, remains that the 
original conclusion shall be admitted. This process 
is awkward and perplexing ; it likewise only con- 
strains assent, but does not afford knowledge ; while 
at the same time we have here a syllogism with a 
negative subsumption, which, if legitimate, invalidates 
the universality of our second general rule. Now, on 
the principle 1 have proposed to you, there is no 
difficulty whatever in the reduction of this or of any 
other mood. Here, however, we do not, as in the other 
moods of the second figure, find that the syllogism 
proximately departs from an unexpressed sumption, 
but that the proximate subsumption and the proxi- 
mate conclusion have been replaced by two derivative 
propositions. The formula of Baroco is : — 

All P are M ; 

But some S are not M ; 

Therefore , some S are not P. 

* 

But the following is the full mental process : — 


Sumption, All P are M j 

Real Subsumption, (Some not - M are S ;) 

which Loves the , c , 


Real Conclusion, ( Therefore , some not - P are S ;) 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


which gives the 
Expressed Conclusion, 


439 


LECT. 

XXII. 


{ 


Then, some S are not- P 
Or, some S are not P. 




Or, to take our concrete example : — 

All birds are oviparous ; 

But some animals are not oviparous ; 
Therefore , some animals are not birds. 


Of this the explicated process will stand as follows : — 


Sumption, 

Real Subsumption, 

which gives the 
Expressed Subsumption, 


Real or Proximate Conclusion, 

which gives the 
Expressed Conclusion, 


All birds are oviparous ; 
j (Some things not oviparous are 
1 animals ;) 

l Then , some animals are not-ovi- 
< parous ; 
l Or, are not oviparous ; 

{ ( Therefore , some things not birds 
are animals ;) 

{ Then, some animals are not - 
birds ; 

Or, are not birds. 


Now, in this analysis of the process in Baroco, we 
not only resolve the whole problem in a direct and 
natural and instructive way ; but we get rid of the 
exception which Baroco apparently affords to the 
general rule, that the subsumption of a categorical 
must be affirmative. Here you see how the real sub- 
sumption is affirmative, and how, from having a 
negative determination in its subject, it by conversion 
assumes the appearance of a negative proposition, the 
affirmative proposition, — some things not-hirds are 
animals , being legitimately converted, first into, — 
some animals are not-hirds , and this again being legi- 
timately converted into, — some animals are not birds. 
You recollect that, in the doctrine of Propositions,® I 
showed you how every affirmative proposition could 


a See above, p. 253 . — Ed. 


440 


LECTURES -ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXII. 


Third Fig- 
ure. 


be adequately expressed in a negative, and every 
negative in an affirmative form ; and the utility of 
that observation you now see, as it enables us simply 
to solve the problem of the reduction of Baroco, and, 
as we shall also see, of Bocardo. Baroco is thus 
directly reduced to Darii of the first figure, and not, 
as by the indirect process of logicians in general, to 
Barbara. 0 On this doctrine the name Baroco is also 
improper, and another, expressive of its genuine affin- 
ity, should be imposed. 

We proceed now to the Third Figure. You will 
observe that, as in the Second Figure, with the ex- 


a There seems to be an error in the 
text here. The syllogism, as finally 
reduced, is not in Darii, nor in any 
legitimate mood ; and its natuml re- 
duction, according to the method 
adopted by the Author, is not to Darii, 
but to Ferio, by means of an unex- 
pressed sumption. Thus : — 

A ll P are M ; 

Then no not- M are P ; 

Some S are not-M ; 

Therefore, some S are not P. 

This is the method adopted by the 
following logicians, referred to by the 
Author in his Common -Place Book, 
viz. Noldius, who calls Baroco, Fa- 
crono, Loyica Rcccr/nita, cap. xii. § 12, 
p. 300, 1666; Reusch, (who follows 
NoldiuB), Systema Lexjicum, § 539, p. 
611,2ded., 1741 ; Wolf, Phil. Ration- 
alis , § 384 ; Bachmann, Logik, § 133, 
Anm., i. p. 224. Before any of the 
above-mentioned writers, MarkDuncan 
gives the reduction of Camestres to 
Celarent, and of Baroco to Ferio, by 
counterposition. He adds, with spe- 
cial reference to the reduction of Ba- 
roco to Ferio by this method, — “ Hanc 
reductionis spcciem cxistimo a acho- 


lasticis perspectam fuisse : sed despec- 
tam ; quia in prima figura propositio 
minor afihrmans attributi infiniti, quam 
primo intuitu videatur esse negans, 
forma} evidentiam obscurat : atqui 
syllogismorum reductio comparata est 
non ad formte bonitatem obscuran- 
dam, sed illustrandam. Institutioncs 
Loyicce, L. iv. c. 3, § 4, p. 230. Sal- 
murii, 1612. 

The syllogism of the text may also 
be exhibited more circuitously, as 
Darii, by retaining the affirmative 
quality in the converted proposition. 
Thus : — 

All nof-M are not - P ; 

Some S are not - M ; 

Therefore, some S are not- P. 

This is the method of reduction 
employed by Derodon, who, in the 
same way, would reduce Camestres 
to Barbara, Logica Restitula, P. iv. 
tract, i. c. 2, art. 6, p. 648. The error 
here noticed seems to have originated 
in a momentary confusion of the re- 
duction of Baroco with that of Bo- 
cardo ; which, however, could not be 
rectified without greater alterations 
in the text than tho Editors consider 
themselves justified in making. — E d. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


441 


ception of Baroco, it was the sumption of the two lect. 

1 1 XXII 

premises which was affected by the conversion, so in — — — 
the third it is the subsumption. For in Camestres of 
the second, and in Disamis and Bocardo of the third, 
figure, the premises are transposed. This understood 
subsumption is a conversive inference from the ex- 
pressed one, and it is the proximate antecedent from 
which the real conclusion is immediately inferred. 

In the first mood of this figure, Darapti, the sub- 1. Darapti. 
sumption is an universal affirmative ; its conversion 
is, therefore, into a particular affirmative. Its for- in reality 

i . Darii. 

niula is — 


Sumption, All M are P ; 

Expressed Subsumption, But all M are S ; 

which gives tho 

Really Proximate Subsumption, ...{Then some S are M ;) 
from which directly flows 

Tho Conclusion, Therefore , some S are P. 


Our concrete example was : — 


Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

which gives, as a conversion, 
tho 

Real Subsumption, 

and from this last imme- 
diately proceeds the 
Conclusion, 


All gilding is metallic ; 

But all gilding shines ; 

Then , some things that shine are 
gilding ; 

Therefore, some things that shine 
arc metallic. 


Thus Darapti, in the third figure, is nothing but a 
one-sided derivative of Darii in the first. a 

The second mood of the Third Figure is Felapton. z Fdapum. 
Its formula — 

a [Reuscb, Systema Loyicum, § 539, p. 614.] 


 


442 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXII. 


3. Dinmii. 


In reality 
Darii. 


Sumption, ifoMwP; 

Expressed Sumption, All M are S ; 

The Real Subsumption, (Then, same S are M ;) 

from which 

The Conclusion, Therefore, some S are not P. 


Our example was — 


Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

Of which the Real Subsumption 
is the converse 

From which the Conclusion, 


Nothing material is a free agen t ; 
( But everything material is cx- 
1 tended ; 

)( Then, something extended is 
j material;) 

/ Therefore, something extended is 
l not a free agent. 


Felapton, in the third Figure, is thus only a modifi- 
cation of Ferio in the first. 

The third mood in this figure is Disamis. Its for- 
mula — 

Some M are P ; 

But all M are S ; 

Therefore, some S are P. 


Here the premises are transposed. Their order being 
rectified : — 


Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

Which, by conversive inference 
gives, the Proximate Sub- 
sumption, 

From which proceeds the Real 

Conclusion, 

Which, by conversion, gives the 
Expressed Conclusion 


All M are S ; 

But some M are P ; 

some P are M;) 

| ( Therefore , same P are S ;) 
| Then, some S are P. 


Our example was (the reversal of the premises being 
rectified) : — 


Sumption, All acts of homicide are cruel ; 

„ . r , , , . ( But some acts of homicide are 

.Lx pressed ouosuniptioiif* ..••••••••• \ __ 

( laudable; 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


443 


Which gives, as a convcrsive in- 
ference, the Proximate Sub- 
sumption, 


} 


(Then, same laudable acts are 
acts of homicide ;) 


,, . -r, . „ , . ( (77 iercfore,sumelaudableactsare 

irom this Proximate Conclusion, i ' , ’ 

l cruel ;) 

Which again gives, as its converse, | Therefore, some cruel acts are 
the Expressed Conclusion, / laudable. 


LKC'T. 

XXII. 


Thus Disamis in the third, is only Darii in the first 
figure. 

The fourth mood of the Third Figure is Datisi, which *• i>«m. 
is only Disamis, the premises not being reversed, and 
the conclusion not a conversive inference. It re- ™»U‘y 

. . Dam. 

quires, therefore, only to interpolate the proximate 
subsumption. Thus — 


Sumption, All M are P ; 

Expressed Subsumption, But some M are S ; 

Giving by conversion, (Then, some S are M;) 

From which last the Conclusion, Therefore, some S are P. 


Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

Which gives, by conversion, the 
Proximate Subsumption, 

From which tho Conclusion, 


{ 

} 

{ 


All acts of homicide are cruel ; 

But some acts of lurmicide are 
laudable ; 

(Then, some laudable acts are 
acts of homicide ;) 

Therefore, some laudable acts are 
cruel. 


Thus, Datisi likewise is only a distorted Darii. 

The fifth mood of the Third Figure is the famous s. Bo«r.io. 
mood Bocardo, which, as I have mentioned, with 
Baroco, but far more than Baroco, was the opprobrium 
of the scholastic system of reduction. So intricate, in 
fact, was this mood considered, that it was looked 
upon as a trap, into which if you once got, it was no 
easy matter to find an exit. Bocardo was, during the 
middle ages, the name given in Oxford to the Aca- 


 



414 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXII. 


demical Jail or Career, — a name which still remains as 
a relique of the ancient logical glory of that vener- 
able seminary. Rejecting, then, the perplexed and un- 
satisfactory reduction by the logicians of Bocardo to 
Barbara by an apagogical exposition, I commence by 
stating, that Bocardo is only Disamis under the form 
of a negative affirmative ; its premises, therefore, are 
transposed. Removing the transposition, its formula 
is — 

All M are S ; 

But some M are not P ; 

Therefore , some S arc not P ; 

which is thus explicated, like Baroco : — 


Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

Which gives, by eonversivo in- 
ference, 


All M are S ; 

Some M arc not P ; 

| (Then, some nut- P arc M ;) 


From tills Real Subsumption pro- 
ceeds the Proximate Conclu- 
sion, 

Which again gives, by conversion, 

the Expressed Conclusion, 

Whence aguin, 


j- ( Therefore , some not-Y are S ;) 

| Then, sotne S are not- P ; 

Some S arc not P ; 


Our concrete example was — the order cf the pre- 
mises being redressed : 


Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

From which, by convereive in- 
ference, 

And from this Proximate Sub- 
sumption proceeds the Proxi- 
mate Conclusion, 

From whence, by conversion, the 
Expressed Conclusion, 

Whence, 


All syllogisms are important ; 

{ But some syllogisms arc not 
regular ; 

( (Then, some things not regular 
are syllogisms) ; 

I Therefore, some things not regu- 
f lar are important ; 

} Then, some important things are 
not-rrgular ; 

{ Whence, some important things 
are not regular ; 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


445 


LECT. 

XXII. 


Bocardo is thus only a perverted and perplexed 

Darii. a 

The last mood of the Third Figure is Ferison, which 6. Ferison. 
is without difficulty, — it only being required to inter- 
polate the real subsumption, from which the conclusion in reality 
is derived. Its formula is — 


Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

Which gives, by conversive infer- 
ence, the Subsumption, 

From which immediately flows 
the Conclusion, 

Sumption, 

Expressed Subsumption, 

The Conversive Inference, from 

which is, 

And from this Implied Subsump- 
tion immediately proceeds the 
Conclusion, 


No M is P ; 

But some M are S ; 


/ 


Then, some S are M ; 


Therefore , some S are not P. 

No truth is without result : 

But some truths are misunder- 
stood ; 

Then some things misunderstood 
are truths ; 


he ref ore, some things misunder- 
stood ' ' 


Ferison ^ is thus only Feno, fringed with an accident Fourth 

. J > o Figure. 

ot conversion. 

The Fourth Figure is distinguished from the two 
former in this, — that in the Second and Third Figures 
one or other, but only one or other, of the premises 
requires the interpolation of the mental inference ; 
whereas, in the Fourth Figure, either both the pre- 
mises require this, or neither, but only the conclusion. 

The three first moods, (Bamalip, Calemes, Dimatis), 
need no conversion of the premises ; the two last, 
Fesapo and Fresison, require the conversion of both. 

The result of the foregoing discussion is thus accord- 


a [See Noldius, Log. Rec. c. xii. § $ [Scotus Bays that Ferison, Bocardo, 

12, p. 301. Bocardo is called Docam- and Felapton, are useless, as conclud- 
roc by Noldius. Cf. Reusch, Syst. ing indirectly. Quastiones, In A nal 
Log., § 539, p. 611.1 Prior., L. i. q. 24.] 


446 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXII. 

The First 
Figure the 
only simple 
atm inde- 
pendent 
form of 
reasoning. 


t 


Figure of 
Hypotheti- 
cal, Dis- 
junctive, 
and Hypo- 
thctico-Dis- 

J 'unctivo 
Syllogisms. 


ingly that, in rigid truth, there is no figure entitled 
to the dignity of a simple and independent form of 
reasoning, except that which has improperly been 
termed the First ; the three latter figures being only 
imperfect or elliptical expressions of a complex pro- 
cess of inference, which, when fully enounced, is mani- 
festly only a reasoning in the first figure. There is 
thus but one figure, or, more properly, but one process 
of categorical reasoning ; for the term figure is 
abusively applied to that which is of a character 
regular, simple, and essential. 

Having, therefore, concluded the treatment of figure 
in respect of Categorical Syllogisms, it remains to con- 
sider how far the other species of Simple Syllogisms, — 
the hypothetical, the Disjunctive, and the hypothetico- 
disjunctive, — are subject to this accident of form. In 
regard to the Hypothetical Syllogism, this kind of 
reasoning is not liable to the affection of figure. It is 
true indeed that we may construct a syllogism of three 
hypothetical propositions, which shall be susceptible 
of all the figures incident to a categorical reasoning ; 
but this is itself in fact only a categorical syllogism 
hypothetically expressed. For example : — 


If A is, then B is , 

But if S is, then A is , 
Therefore , if S is, then B is. 


This syllogism may certainly be varied through all 
the figures, but it is not an hypothetical syllogism, in 
the proper signification of the term, but manifestly 
only a categorical ; and those logicians who have 
hence concluded, that a hypothetical reasoning was 
exposed to the schematic modifications of the cate- 
gorical, have only shown that they did not know how 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


447 


to discriminate these two forms by their essential 
differences. 

In regard to the Disjunctive Syllogism the case is 
different ; for as the disjunctive judgment is in one 
point of view only a categorical judgment, whose pre- 
dicate consists of logically opposing members, it is 
certainly true that we can draw a disjunctive syllo- 
gism in all the four figures. 

I shall use the letters P, M, and S ; but as the dis- 
junction requires at least one additional letter, I shall, 
where that is necessary, take the one immediately fol- 
lowing. 

Figure I. 

M is either P or Q ; 

S is M ; 

Therefore, S is either P or Q. 

Figure II. 

First case — 

P is either M or If ; 

S is neither M nor N ; 

Therefore, 8 is not P. 

Second case — 

P is neither M nor ST ; 

S is either MorN; 

Therefore, S is not P. 


Figure III. 

M is either P or Q ; 

M is S ; 

Therefore, some S is either P or Q. 


Figure IV. 

First case — 

P is either MorN; 
Both M and N are S ; 
Therefore, some S is P 


LF.CT. 

XXII. 


 



LECT. 

XXII. 


Figure of 

Composite 

Syllogisms. 


448 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

Second case — 

P is either M or N ; 

Neither M nor N is S ; 

Therefore, S is not P.a 

Of Composite Syllogisms, — I need say nothing con- 
cerning the Epicheirema, which, it is manifest, may 
be in one figure equally as another. But it is less 
evident that the Sorites may be of any figure ; and 
logicians seem, in fact, from their definitions, to have 
only contemplated its possibility in the first figure. 
It is, however, capable of all the four schematic acci- 
dents by a little contortion ; but as this at best con- 
stitutes only a logical curiosity, it is needless to spend 
any time in its demonstration/ 

So much for the Form of reasoning, both Essential 
and Accidental, and the Divisions of Syllogisms which 
are founded thereon. 

tea in different figures, see Herbart, 
Lchrbuch zur Einleitung in die Philo- 
sophic, § 70. Drobisch, Neuc Darttel - 
lung dcr Logik, §§ 80-84. — Ed. 


a See Cbr. J. Braniss, Grundriss der 
Logik , § 394, p. 146. Compare Krug, 
Logik , p. 387 et seq, 

fr For a complicated theory of Son- 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


449 


LECTURE XXIII. 

STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — OF THE PRODUCTS OF THOUGHT. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF REASONINGS. 

SYLLOGISMS. — THEIR DIVISIONS ACCORDING TO 

VALIDITY. 

FALLACIES. 

All the varieties of Syllogism, whose necessary laws and lect. 

" ° # J XXIII 

contingent modifications we have hitherto considered, - 

are, taken together, divided into classes by reference 
to their Validity ; and I shall comprise the heads of 
what I shall afterwards illustrate, in the following 
paragraph. 

IF LXXVI. Syllogisms, by another distribution, p ar . lxxvi. 
are distinguished, by respect to their Validity, 
into Collect or True and Incorrect or False. The ^ d L Incor ' 
Incorrect or False are again, (though not in a 
logical point of view), divided, by reference to 
the intention of the reasoner, into Paralogisms , or 
Faulty , and into Sophisms, or Deceptive, Reason- 
ings. The Paralogism (paralogismus) is properly 
a syllogism of whose falsehood the employer is 
not himself conscious ; the Sophism (sophisma, 
captio , cavillatio), is properly a false syllogism, 

VOL. i. 2 F 


 


450 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


Explica- 

tion. 

Logical and 
absolute 
truth dis- 
criminated. 


fabricated and employed for the purpose of de- 
ceiving others. The term Fallacy may be applied 
indifferently in either sense. These distinctions 
are, however, frequently confounded ; nor in a 
logical relation are they of account. False 
Syllogisms are, again, vicious, either in respect 
of their form or of their matter, or in respect of 
both form and matter." 

In regard to the first distinction • contained in this 
paragraph, — of Syllogisms into Correct or True and In- 
correct or False, — it is requisite to say a few words. 
It is necessary to distinguish logical truth, that is, the 
truth which Logic guarantees in a reasoning, from the 
absolute truth of the several judgments of which a 
reasoning is composed. I have frequently inculcated 
on you that Logic does not warrant the truth of its 
premises, except in so far as these may be the formal 
conclusions of anterior reasonings, — it only warrants, 
(on the hypothesis that the premises are truly assumed), 
the truth of the inference. In this view the conclu- 
sion may, as a separate proposition, be true, but if this 
truth be not a necessary consequence from the pre- 
mises, it is a false conclusion, that is, in fact no con- 
clusion at all. Now on this point there is a doctrine 
prevalent among logicians, which is not only erroneous, 
but, if admitted, is subversive of the distinction of 
Logic as a purely formal science. The doctrine in 
question is in its result this, — that if the conclusion 
of a syllogism be true, the premises may be either true 
or false, but that if the conclusion be false, one or 
both of the premises must be false ; in other words, 
that it is possible to infer true from false, but not 

a Krug, Logik, § 115. — Ed. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


451 


false from true. As an example of this I have seen 
given the following syllogism : — 

Aristotle is a Roman ; 

A Roman is a European ; 

Therefore , Aristotle is a European. 


The inference, in so far as expressed, is true ; but I 
would remark that the whole inference which the 
premises necessitate, and which the conclusion, there- 
fore, virtually contains, is not true, — is false. For the 
premises of the preceding syllogism gave not only the 
conclusion, Aristotle is a European , but also the con- 
clusion, Aristotle is not a Greek ; for it not merely 
follows from the premises, that Aristotle is conceived 
under the universal notion of which the concept Roman 
forms a particular sphere, but likewise that he is con- 
ceived as excluded from all the other particular spheres 
which are contained under that universal notion. The 
consideration of the truth of the premise, Aristotle 
is a Roman , is, however, more properly to be regarded 
as extralogical ; but if so, then the consideration of 
the conclusion, Aristotle is a European , on any 
other view than a mere formal inference from certain 
given antecedents, is, likewise, extralogical. Logic is 
only concerned with the formal truth, — the technical 
validity, — of its syllogisms, and anything beyond the 
legitimacy of the consequence it draws from certain 
hypothetical antecedents, it does not profess to vindi- 
cate. Logical truth and falsehood are thus contained 
in the correctness and incorrectness of logical in- 
ference ; and it was, therefore, with no impropriety 
that we made a true or correct, and a false or in- 
correct syllogism convertible expressions.® 

o Cf. Esser, Logik , § 109. — Ed. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


452 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


The distinc- 
tion of Iu- 
corrcct Syl- 
logisms iuto 
Paralogisms 
and So- 
phisms, not 
of logical 
import. 


Formal and 
M atcrial 
Fallacies. 


Ancient 

Greek 

Sophisms. 


In regard to the distinction of Incorrect Syllogisms 
into Paralogisms and Sophisms, nothing need be said. 
The mere statement is sufficiently manifest ; and, at 
the same time, it is not of a logical import. For 
Logic does not regard the intention with which rea- 
sonings are employed, but considers exclusively their 
internal legitimacy. But while the distinction is one, 
in other respects, proper to be noticed, it must be 
owned that it is not altogether without a logical value. 
For it behoves us to discriminate those artificial 
sophisms, the criticism of which requires a certain 
acquaintance with logical forms, and which, as a play 
of ingenuity and an exercise of acuteness, are not 
without their interest, from those paralogisms which, 
though not so artificial, are on that account only the 
more frequent causes of error and delusion. 

The last distinction is, however, logically more im- 
portant, viz. 1°, Of reasonings into such as are mate- 
rially fallacious, that is, through the object-matter of 
their propositions ; 2°, Into such as are formally falla- 
cious, that is, through the manner or form in which 
these propositions are connected; and, 3°, Into such as 
are at once materially and formally fallacious. Material 
Fallacies lie beyond the jurisdiction of Logic. Formal 
Fallacies can only be judged of by an application of 
those rules, in the exposition of which we have hither- 
to been engaged. 

The application of these rules will afford the oppor- 
tunity of adducing and resolving some of the more 
capital of those Sophisms, which owe their origin to the 
ingenuity of the ancient Greeks. “Many of these 
sophisms appear to us in the light of a mere play of 
wit and acuteness, and we are left to marvel at the 
interest which they originally excited, — at the celebrity 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


453 


which they obtained, and at the importance attached 
to them by some of the most distinguished thinkers 
of antiquity. The marvel will, however, be in some 
degree abated, if we take the following circumstances 
into consideration. 

“ In the first place, in the earlier ages of Greece the 
method of science was in its infancy, and the laws of 
thought were not yet investigated with the accuracy 
and minuteness requisite to render the detection of 
these fallacies a very easy matter. Howbeit, there- 
fore, men had an obscure consciousness of their fal- 
lacy, they could not at once point out the place in 
which the error lay ; they were thus taken aback, 
confounded, and constrained to silence. 

“ In the second place, the treatment of scientific 
subjects was more oral and social than with us ; and 
the form of instruction principally that of dialogue 
and con vernation. In antiquity, men did not isolate 
themselves so much in the retirement of their homes ; 
and they read far less than is now necessary in the 
modern world : consequently, with those who had a 
taste for science, the necessity of social communication 
was greater and more urgent. In their converse on 
matters of scientific interest, acuteness and pro- 
fundity were perhaps less conducive to distinction 
than vivacity, wit, dexterity in questioning and in 
the discovery of objections, self-possession, and a 
confident and uncompromising defence of bold, half- 
true, or even erroneous assertions. Through such 
means a very superficial intellect can frequently, even 
wfith us, puzzle and put to silence another far acuter 
and more profound. But, among the Greeks, the 
Sophists and Megaric philosophers were accomplished 
masters in these arts. 


LEOT. 

XXIII. 


454 > 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. “ In the third place, as we know from Aristotle and 

1 Diogenes Laertius,® it was the rule in their dialogical 

disputations, that every question behoved to be an- 
swered by a yes or a no, and thus the interrogator 
had it in his power to constrain his adversary always 
to move in a foreseen, and, consequently, a deter- 
minate, direction. Thus the Sophisms were somewhat 
similar to a game at forfeits, or like the passes of a 
conjuror, which amuse and astonish for a little, but 
the marvel of which vanishes the moment we under- 
stand the principle on which they are performed.” P 
As the various fallacies arise from secret violation 
of the logical laws by which the different classes of 
syllogisms are governed, and as syllogisms are Cate- 
gorical, or Hypothetical, or Disjunctive, or Hypothetico- 
disjunctive, we may properly consider Fallacies under 
these four heads, and as transgressions of the syllo- 
gistic laws in their special application to these several 
kinds of syllogism. 

IF LXXVII. The Syllogistic Laws determine, in 
reference to all the classes of Syllogism, the three 
following principles ; and all Fallacies are viola- 
tions of one or other of these principles, in rela- 
tion to one or other class of syllogism. 

I. If both the Logical Form and the Matter of 
a syllogism be correct, then is the Conclusion 
true. 

II. If the syllogism be Materially Correct, but 
Formally Incorrect, then the Conclusion is not (or 
only accidentally) true. 

a A rist. Soph. Blench., c. 17. Lacr- & Bachmann, Logik , § 384, p. 
tius, L. ii. c. 18, § 135. The references 513. 
are given by Bachmann. — Ed. 


Par. LXXVII. 

Fallacies, — 
their divi- 
sion and 
classifica- 
tion. 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


455 


III. If the syllogism be Formally Correct, but lect. 
Materially Incorrect, then the Conclusion is not XX1IL 
(or only accidentally) true. 

Fallacies, as violations of these principles in 
more immediate reference to one or other of the 
Four Classes of Syllogism, must again be vicious 
in reference either to the form, or to the matter, 
or to both the form and matter of a syllogism. 

Fallacies are thus again divided into Formal and 
Material, under which classes we shall primarily 
arrange them. 

H LXXVIII. Of I 1 ormal Fallacies, the Catego- Par.Lxxvm. 
rical are the most frequent, and of these, those fXc'L 
whose vice lies in having four in place of three CategoncaL 
terms ( quaternione tenninomm ) ; for this, in 
consequence of the ambiguity of its expression, 
does not immediately betray itself. Under this 
genus are comprised three species, which are 
severally known under the names of, 1°, Fallacia 
sensus compositi et divisi ; 2°, Fallacia a dicto 
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter , et vice 
versa ; 3 °, Fallacia figures dictionis. 

“ That in a categorical syllogism only three terms Expiic*- 
are admissible, has been already shown. A categori- Fallacies 
cal syllogism with four capital notions has no con- 
nection ; and is called, by way of jest, the logical 
quadruped (< animal quadrupes logicum). This vice 
usually occurs when the notions are in reality differ- 
ent, but when their difference is cloaked by the ver- 
bal identity of the terms ; for, otherwise, it would be 
too transparent to deceive either the reasoner himself 
or any one else. This vice may, however, be of various 


 


456 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


1. Fallacia 
sensus com - 
positi ct 
divisi. 


Modes of 
this Fallacy. 


kinds, and of these there are, as stated, three principal 
species.” 

“ The first is the j Fallacia sensus compositi et divisi , — 
the Fallacy of Composition and Division .“ This arises 
when, in the same syllogism, we employ words now 
collectively, now distributively, so that what is true 
in connection, we infer must be also true in separa- 
tion, and vice versa ; as, for example : — All must sin; 
Caius sins; therefore, , Caius must sin” P Here we 
argue, from the unavoidable liability in man to sin, 
that this particular sin is necessary, and for this indi- 
vidual sinner. “ This fallacy may arise in different 
ways. 1°, It may arise when the predicate is joined 
with the subject in a simple and in a modal relation, 
— for example , — White can be (i.e. become) black, 
therefore white can be black. — 2°, It may arise from 
the confusion of a copulative and disjunctive combin- 
ation. Thus, 9 consists or is made up of 7 + 2, which 
are odd and even numbers, therefcn'e 9 is odd and 
even . — 3°, It may arise, if words connected in the pre- 
mises are disjoined in the conclusion. Thus, — Soci'ates 
is dead, therefore Socrates is” 7 

An example of the first of these contingencies, — 
that which is the most frequent and dangerous, — 
occurs when, from its universality, a proposition must 
be interpreted with restriction. Thus, when our 
Saviour says, The blind shall see, — The deaf shall hear , 
he does not mean that the blind, as blind, shall see, — 


o [See Fonseca, Instil. Dial., L. viii. 
c. v. p. 106, Ingolstadii, 1604.] 

$ Krug, Logik, § 116, p. 420 .— Ed. 
[On the distinction of Sensus Com- 
posit i et Divisi, so famous in the 
question of foreknowledge and liberty, 
see its history in lluiz, Commentarii 
ac Disputationcs, de Scientia, de Idcis, 


de Veritate, ac de Vita Dei, Disp. 
xxxiii. p. 261 et seq. Alvarez, in Gale, 
Philosophia Gencralis, L. iii. c. iii. sect. 
2, § 8, p. 466.] 

7 [Dcnzinger,] [Die I<ogik als Wissen- 
scha/t der Denkkunst, dargesteUt, § 658, 
Bamberg, 1836 . — Ed.] 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


±57 


that the deaf, as deaf, shall hear, but only that those 
who had been blind and deaf should recover the use 
of these senses. To argue the opposite would be to 
incur the fallacy in question. 

The second fallacy is that, A dicto secundum quid ad 
dictum simpliciter, and its converse, A dicto simpliciter 
ad dictum secundum quid. The former of these, — the 
fallacy A dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter , — 
arises when from what is true only under certain modi- 
fications and relations, we infer it to be true absolutely. 
Thus, if, from the fact that some Catholics hold the 
infallibility of the Pope, we should conclude that the 
infallibility of the Pope is a tenet of the Catholic 
Church in general. The latter, the fallacy a dicto 
simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid, is the opposite 
sophism, where from what is true absolutely we con- 
clude what is true only in certain modifications and 
relations, — as, for example, when from the premise 
that Man is a living organism, we infer that A 
painted or sculptured man is a living organism .’ 1 
The third fallacy, — the Sophisma figures dictionis , — 
arises when we merely play with the ambiguity of a 
word. The well-known syllogism, Mus syllaba est ; 
Mus caseum rodit ; Ergo, syllaba caseum rod it, & is 
an example ; or, 

Herod is a fox ; 

A fox is a quadruped ; 

Therefore, Herod is a quadruped. 

To this fallacy may be reduced what are called the 
Sophisma equivocationis, the Sophisma amphibolies, 
and the Sophisma accentus, y which are only con- 
temptible modifications of this contemptible fallacy. 

a Cf. Denzinger, Logit, , § 564. — Ed. 7 On these fallacies, see Denzinger, 

J0 Seneca, EpUt., 48.— Ed. Logit, §§ 559, 560, 561.— Ed. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


2. Fallacia 
a dicto se- 
cundum 
q u id ad dic- 
tum fimjdi- 
ciUr, and 
its converse. 


 



458 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


Par. LXXIX. 

Material 

Fallacies. 


1 LXXIX. Of Material Fallacies, those are of 
the most frequent occurrence, where from a pre- 
mise which is not in reality universal, we conclude 
universally ; or from a notion which is not in 
reality a middle term, we infer a conclusion. 
Under this genus there are various species of 
fallacies, of which the most remarkable are, 1°, 
the Sophisma cum hoc ( vdpost hoc), ergo propter 
hoc ; 2°, Soph isma pigrum, or ignava ratio ; 3°, 
Sophisma pohjzeteseos ; and 4°, Sophisma hetero- 
zeteseos. a 


Explica- In this paragraph you will observe that there are 
FaUacie* of given two genera of Material Fallacies, — those of an 
cJicriii- Unreal Universality ( sophismata feta universalitatis), 
an illusive and those of an Illusive Eeason ( sophismata falsi 
Ro "°“‘ medii , — or non causa ut causa). I must first explain 

the nature of these, considered apart, then show' that 
they both fall together, the one being only the cate- 
gorical, the other only the hypothetical, expression of 
the same vice ; and, finally, consider the various spe- 
cies into which the generic fallacy is subdivided, 
i. or w. “ Our decisions concerning individual objects, in so 
wSlly far as they belong to certain classes, are very fre- 
quently fallacies of the former kind ; that is, conclu- 
sions from premises of an unreal universality. For 
example : — The Jews are rogues, — The Carthaginians, 
faithless , — The Cretans, liars, — The French, braga- 
docios, — The Geimans, mystics, — The rich, purse- 
proud, — The noble, haughty , — Women, frivolous , — 
The learned, pedants . — These and similar judgments, 
which in general arc true only of many, — at best only 


« CL Krug, Loyii, § 117. — Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


459 


of the majority, of the subjects of a class, often con- lect. 
stitute, however, the grounds of the opinions we form — I — 1. 
of individuals ; so that these opinions, with their 
grounds, when expressed as conclusion and premises, 
are nothing else than fallacies of an unreal generality, 

— sophismata fctce universalitatis. It is impossible, 
however, to decide by logical rules, whether a proposi- 
tion such as those above stated, is or is not universally 
valid ; in this, experience alone can instruct us. Logic 
requires only, in general, that every sumption should 
be universally valid, and leaves it to the several 
sciences to pronounce whether this or that particular 
sumption does or does not fulfil this indispensable 
condition.” ° The sophisma fictce universalitatis is 
thus a fallacious syllogism of the class of categoricals. 

But the second kind of material fallacies, the 2 . of Unreal 
sophisms of Unreal Middle, are not less frequent than M,ddle * 
those of unreal universality. When, for example, it 
is argued, (as was done by ancient philosophers), that 
the ma<met is animated, because it moves another 
body, or that the stars are animated, because they 
move themselves ; — here there is assumed not a true, 
but merely an apparent, reason, there is, consequently, 
no real mediation, and the sophisma falsi medii is 
committed. For, in these cases, the conclusion in the 
one depends on the sumption, — If a body moves an- 
other body , it is animated ; in the other, on the sump- 
tion, — If a body moves itself it is animated , but as 
the antecedent and consequent in neither of these 
sumptions are really connected as reason and conse- 
quent, — or as cause and effect, — there is, therefore, no 
valid inference of the conclusion. 0 The sophisma 

a Krug, Logit, § 117. Anm., p. 0 Cf. Krug, Logit , p. 423 . — Ed. 

422.— Ed. 


 


4C0 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect . non causa ut causes is thus an hypothetical syllogism ; 
— - — - but, as it may be categorically enounced, this fallacy 
<!? Unriti' 0 ’ of unreal reason will coincide with the categorical fal- 
?f < T^rc“ d lacy of unreal universality. Thus, the second example 
ttli'tymm- above alleged : — 

ddtt. 

If the. stars move themselve s, they arc animated ; 

. But the stars do move themselves ; 

Therefore, the stars are animated. 

is thus expressed by a categorical equivalent : — 

All bodies that move themselves are animated ; 

But the stars move themselves ; 

Therefore, the stars are animated. 

In the one case, the sumption ostensibly contains the 
subsumption and conclusion, as the correlative parts 
of a causal whole ; in the other, as the correlative 
parts of an extensive whole, or, had the categorical 
syllogism been so cast, of an intensive whole. The 
two genera of sophisms may, therefore, it is evident, 
be considered as one, — taking, however, in their par- 
ticular manifestation, either a categorical or an hypo- 
thetical form. 

Faiiarv of I may notice that the sophism of Unreal Generality 
Rea*™ u or Unreal Reason, is hardly more dangerous in its posi- 
in it* nc^a- tive than in its negative relation. For we are not 
itapusinvo more disposed lightly to assume as absolutely uni- 
versal, what is universal in relation to our experience, 
than lightly to deny as real, what comes as an excep- 
tion to our factitious general law. Thus it is that 
men having once generalised their knowledge into a 
compact system of laws, are found uniformly to deny 
the reality of all phenomena which cannot be compre- 
hended under these. They not only pronounce the 
laws they have generalised as veritable laws of nature, 


 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


4G1 


which, haply, they may be, but they pronounce that lect. 
there are no higher laws ; so that all which does not - XX 11 I i- 
at once find its place within their systems, they scout 
without examination as visionary and fictitious. So 
much for this ground of fallacy in general ; we now 
proceed to the species. 

Now, as unreal reasons maybe conceived infinite Specks of 
in number, the minor species of this class of sophisms of Unreal 
cannot be enumerated ; I shall, therefore, only take R *“° n ' 
notice of the more remarkable, and which, in conse- 
quence of their greater notoriety, have been honoured 
with distinctive appellations. 

Of these, the first is the Soj)hisma cum hoc (vel a, so,j,u. 
post hoc), ergo propter hoc. This fallacy arises, when, {vtl )toH 
from the contingent consecution of certain phenomena 
in the order of time, we infer their mutual dependence 
as cause and effect. When, for example, among the 
ancient Romans, a general, without carefully consult- 
ing the augurs, engaged the enemy, and suffered a 
defeat ; it was inferred that the cause of the disaster 
was the unfavourable character of the auspices. In 
like manner, to this sophism belongs the conclusion, so 
long prevalent in the world, that the appearance of a 
comet was the harbinger of famine, pestilence, and 
war. In fact, the greater number of the hypotheses 
which constitute the history of physics and philosophy, 
are only so many examples of this fallacy. But no 
science has exhibited, and exhibits, so many flagrant 
instances of the sophism cum hoc, ergo propter hoc, 
as that of medicine ; for, in proportion as the connec- 
tion of cause and effect is peculiarly obscure in physic, 
physicians have only been the bolder in assuming that 
the recoveries which followed after their doses, were 
not concomitants but effects. This sophism is, in 


 



4G2 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

XXIII. 


b, Ignava 
licit io. 


Example. 


practice, of great influence and very frequent occur- 
rence ; it is, however, in theory, too perspicuous to 
require illustration. 

The second fallacy is that which has obtained the 
name of Ignava ratio, or Sophisma pigru m , — in Greek, 
apyo% Xoyo9.° The excogitation of this argument is 
commonly attributed to the Stoics, by whom it was 
employed as subsidiaiy to their doctrine of fate. “ It 
is an argument by which a man endeavours to vindi- 
cate his inactivity in some particular relation, by the 
necessity of the consequence. It is an hypothetico- 
disjunctive syllogism, and, when fully expressed, is 
as follows : — 

Sumption, If I ought to exert myself to effect a certain event , 

this event cither must take place or it must 
not ; 

Subsumption, If it m ust take place, my exertion is superfluous ; 

if if must not take place, my exertion is of no 
avail ; 

Conclusion, Therefore, on either alternative, my exertion is 

useless” P 

Cicero, in the twelfth chapter of his book, De Fato , 
thus states it : — 

If it he fated that you recover from your present disease, whether 
you call in a doctor or not, you icill recover ; again, if it he 
fated that you do not recover from your present disease, 
whether you call in a doctor or not, you will not recover ; 
But one or other of the contradictories is fated ; 

Therefore, to call in a doctor is of no consequence. 

Others have enounced the sumption in various forms, 
for example : — If it be impossible but that you recover 

a See Menage on Diogenes Laertius, De Log. Orig. et Var., L. i. c. 6 ? 
L. ii. p. 123 . — Ed. [Fncciolati, Aero- p. 51.] 

ash, v. p. 65. Gassendi, Opera , t. i. 0 Krug, Logik, § 117, p. 424 . — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


4G3 


from the 'present disease , &c., — or — If it be true that lect. 

you will recover from this disease , — or — I fit be decreed 1 

by God that you will not die of this disease, and so 
likewise in different manners, according to which like- tlon8 ' 
wise the question itself has obtained various titles as 
Argument De Fato — De Possibilibus — De Libero 
Arbitrio — De Procidentia — De Divinis Decretis — 

De Futuris Contingentibus — De Physica Prcedeter- 
minatione , &c. No controversy is more ancient, 
none more universal, none has more keenly agitated 
the minds of men, none has excited a greater in- 
fluence upon religion and morals ; it has not only 
divided schools, but nations, and has so modified not 
only their opinions but their practice, that whilst the 
Turks, as converts to the doctrine of Fate, take not 
the slightest precaution in the midst of pestilence, 
other nations, on the contrary, who admit the contin- 
gency of second causes, carry their precautionary 
policy to an opposite excess. 

The common doctrine, that this argument is an in- 1* history, 
vention of the Stoics, and a ground on which they 
rested their doctrine of the physical necessitation of 
human action, is, however, erroneous, if we may 
accord credit to the testimony of Diogenes Laertius, 
who relates, in the Life of Zeno, the founder of this 
sect, that he bestowed a sum of two hundred minae 
on a certain dialectician, from whom he had learned 
seven species of the argument called the Xoyo? 0€pC- 
* metens, or reaper , — which differs little, if at all, 
from the ignava ratio. a For how this sophism is con- 
structed, and with what intent, I find recorded in the 
commentary of Ammonius on the book of Aristotle 

a See Laertius, vii. 25. The obser- Acroasis, v. p. 57, ed. 1750 . — Ed. 
vation in the text is from Facciolati, 


4G4 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


The vice 
of this 
sophism. 


c, Soph is- 
ma poly- 
zdestos. 


Tlepl 'Epiir)veLOL<;. a Of the same character, likewise, 
is the argument called the Xoyos Kvpcevcov , the 
ratio dominanSy or controlling reason , the process of 
which Arrian describes under the nineteenth chapter 
of the second book of the sayings of Epictetus.^ 
The lazy reason , — the reaper , — and the controlling 
reason, , are thus only various names for the same pro- 
cess. 

In regard to the vice of this sophism, “ it is mani- 
fest that it lies in the sumption, in which the disjunct 
members are imperfectly enounced. It ought to have 
been thus conceived — If I ought to exert myself to 
effect a certain event, which I cannot, however, of my- 
self effect, this event must either take place from 
other causes, or it must not take place at all. It is 
only under such a condition that my exertion can on 
either alternative be useless, and not if the event 
depend wholly or in part for its accomplishment on 
my exertion itself, as the conditio sine qua non” 7 It 
is plain, however, that the refutation of this sophism 
does not at all affect the doctrine of necessity ; for 
this doctrine, except in its very absurdest form, — 
the Fatum Turcicum — makes no use of such a rea- 
soning. 

“ The third fallacy is the Sophisma polyzeteseos 
or queestionis duplicisy — the sop>hism of continuous 
questioningy which attempts, from the impossibility of 
assigning the limit of a relative notion, to show by 
continued interrogation the impossibility of its deter- 
mination at all. There are certain notions which are 


a F.91 b,ed. Ald.Venet., 1546 . — Ed. by Lucian, Vit. And., c. 22. Plutarch, 
/3 The purpose of this sophism may Sympos., i. 1, 5. Gellius, N.A., L 2. 
be gathered from Arrian, but not the Compare Facciolati, Acroasis, v. p. 57. 
nature of the argument itself. It is — Ed. 

also mentioned, though not explained, y Krug, Loyik, p. 424 . — Ed. 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


4G5 


only conceived as relative, — as proportional, and whose 
limits we cannot, therefore, assign by the gradual 
addition or detraction of one determination. But 
there is no consequence in the proposition, that, 
if a notion cannot be determined in this manner, it is 
incapable of all determination, and, therefore, abso- 
lutely inconceivable and null.”* Such is the Sorites, 
the nature of which I have already explained to you. 
This reasoning, as applied to various objects, obtained 
various names, as, besides the Sorites or Acervus, we 
have the crescensfi — the <£aXa*po5 or calvus? — the 
vnepOtTiKos, superpositus or superlativus ,* — the rjcrv- 
X*C<*>v or quiescens , &c. &c. e The Sorites is well de- 
fined by Ulpian,^ a sophism in which, by very small 
degrees, the disputant is brought from the evidently 
true to the evidently false. For example, I ask, Does 
one grain of corn make up a heap of grain ? My op- 
ponent answers, — No. I then go on asking the same 
question of two, three, four, and so on ad infinitum , 
nor can the respondent find the number at which the 
grains begin to constitute a heap. On the other hand, 
if we depart from the answer, — that a thousand grains 
make a heap, the interrogation may be continued 
downward to unity, and the answerer be unable to 
determine the limit where the grains cease to make 
up a heap. The same process may be performed, it is 


a Krug, Lorjxk , § 117. — Ed. 

6 Wyttenbach, Ad Plutarch. Be 

Sera Num. Vind., p. 559 ; Praccpta 
Phil. Log ., p. iii. c. 9, § 4 Ed. 

7 Diog. Laert., ii. 108. Cf. Gas- 
sendi, Be Loy. Orig., c. 3 . — Ed. 

8 Epictetus, Bissert., iii. 2, 2. As 
interpreted by Gassendi, Be Jjoy. 
Orig., c. 6. But the true reading is 
probably {nroOertKobs. See Schweig- 
hccuser’s note. — E d. 

VOL. I. 


« Cicero, A cad., ii. 29. Epictetus, 
Bissert., ii. 18, 18 . — Ed. 

C Lege, 177. Be Verb. Sign!/. “ Na- 
tura cavillationis, quam Gneci auptl- 
tt)v appellarunt, haec eat, ut ab ea ab 
evidenter veris per brevissimas muta- 
tionea disputatio ad ea qua) eviden- 
tur falsa sunt perducatur.” Quoted 
by Gassendi, Be Logicce Originc et 
Varietate, L. i. c. 3, p. 41, and by 
Menage, Ad Laert., ii. 108 . — Ed. 

2 G 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


Its various 
designa- 
tions. 


466 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

XXIII. 


d, Sophism a 

hdcrozetcs- 

eos. 


It* various 
name*. 


It* charac- 
ter. 


manifest, upon all the notions of proportion, in space 
and time and degree, both in continuous and discrete 
quantity.® 

The fourth and last fallacy of this class is the 
sophisma hcterozetescos, or sophism of counter-ques- 
tioning & and, as applied to various objects, it obtained, 
among the ancients, the names of the Dilemma , y — the 
Cornutus, { — the Litigiosus, — the AchiUcs ,* — the Men- 
tions * — the Fallens , v — the Electro , B — the Ohvelatus , 1 — 
the Reciprocus, K — the Crocodilinus , K — the ovrisp — the 
Inductio imperfecta ' ; and to this should also be re- 
ferred the Ass of Buridanus.t “ It is a hypothetico- 
disjunctive reasoning, which rests on a certain suppo- 
sition, and which, through a reticence of this supposi- 
tion, deduces a fallacious inference. To take, for an 
example of this fallacy, the /cepartws or Cornutus : — 
it is asked ; — Have you cast your horns 1 — If you 
answer, I have ; it is rejoined, Then you have had 
horns : if you answer, I have not, it is rejoined, Then 
you have them still. 0 — To this question, and to the 
inferences from it, the disjunctive proposition is sup- 
posed, — A certain subject has either had horns or has 
them still. This disjunction is, however, only correct 


a Krug, Logit, § 117.— Ed. 

/9 [See Gassendi, Opera, t. i. Dt 
Log. Orig. et Var. L. i. c. 6 , p. 51.] 

7 Hermogenes, Dt Invent ., L. iv., 
and Proleg. ad llermoyencm. See 
Walz’s Rketcrt » Qrecci, vol. iiL p. 167, 
iv. p. 14 . — Ed. 

8 Seneca, Epist., 45. Menage, Ad 
Diog. Laert ., L. ii. 108 .— Ed. 

* Diog. Laert., L. ix. 23. Aris- 
totle, Phyt., vi. 9. Sojd i. Elench ., 24. 
—Ed. 

( Menage, Ad Diog. Laert., L. ii. 
108. Cicero, Acad., ii. 29. — Ed. 

i? Diog. Laert., ii. 108 .— Ed. 

$ Lucian, Vit. Auct., § 22. Cf. 


Menage, Ad Diog. Laert., L. ii. 108. — 
Ed. 

t Menage, ibid. — Ed. 
k A ulus Gellius, N.A., L. v. c. 10, 
11 .— Ed. 

A Lucian, l. c. Quintilian, Inst. 
Oral., i. 10. 5. Cf. Menage, Ad Diog. 
Laert., L. ii. 108 . — Ed. 

p Ammonias, Ad Arist. Categ., t 
58. Cf. Menage, lot. cit. — Ed. 

v Cicero, Dt Inventione, L. i. c. 31. 
— Ed. 

( See Denzinger, Logik, § 571, from 
whom these designations are taken. 
Reid's I Yorks, p. 238.— Ed. 
o Diog. Laert., vii. 187 . — Ed. 


 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


467 


if the question is concerning a subject to which horns lect. 
previously belonged. If I do not suppose this, the — — 1 
disj unction is false ; it must, consequently, thus run : 

— a certain subject has either had or not had horns. 

In the latter case they could not of course be cast. 

The alternative inferences, (then you have had them , or 
then you have them still), have no longer ground or 
plausibility.”® To take another instance in the Liti-’YYwLMguh 
giosus or Reciprocus. Of the history of this famous 
dilemma there are two accounts, the Greek and the 
Roman. The Roman account is given us by Aulus 
Gellius,^ and is there told in relation to an action 
between Protagoras, the prince of the Sophists, and The case of 
Euathlus, a young man, his disciple. The disciple had nwl Euath- 
covenanted to give his master a large sum to accom- 
plish him as a legal rhetorician ; the one half of the 
sum was paid down, and the other was to be paid on 
the day when Euathlus should plead and gain his 
first cause.. But when the scholar, after the due 
course of preparatory instruction, was not in the same 
hurry to commence pleader, as the master to obtain 
the remainder of his fee, Protagoras brought Euathlus 
into court, and addressed his opponent in the follow- 
ing reasoning : — Learn, most foolish of young men, 
that however matters may turn up, — (whether the 
decision to-day be in your favour or against you), — 
pay me my demand you must. For if the judgment 
be against you, I shall obtain the fee by decree of the 
court, and if in your favour, I shall obtain it in terms 
of the compact, by which it became due on the very 
day you gained your first cause. You thus must 
fail, either by judgment or by stipulation. To this 
Euathlus rejoined: — Most sapient of masters, learn 

o Krug, Logik, p. 425. — Ed. /3 L. v. c. 10. 


 


4G8 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIII. 


Parallel 
ease of 
Corax and 
Tildas. 


from your own argument, that whatever may he the 
finding of the court, absolved I must be from any 
claim by you. For if the decision be favourable, I 
pay nothing by the sentence of the judges, but if 
unfavourable, I pay nothing in virtue of the compact, 
because, though pleading, I shall not have gained my 
cause. The judges, says Gellius, unable to find a 
ratio decidendi , adjourned the case to an indefinite 
day, and ultimately left it undetermined. I find a 
parallel story told, among the Greek writers, by Arsen- 
ius, by the Scholiast of Hermogenes, and by Suidas,® 
of the rhetorician Corax (anglied Crow) and his scholar 
Tisias. In this case, the judges got off by delivering 
a joke against both parties, instead of a decision in 
favour of either. We have here, they said, the plaguy 
egg of a plaguy crow, and from this circumstance is 
said to have originated the Greek proverb, KaKov Kopa- 

KOS KOLKOV d)OU. 

Herewith we terminate the First Great Division of 
Pure Logic, — Stoicheiology or the Doctrine of Ele- 
ments. 

a [Prolegomena to Hermogenes, in by Sigwart, Loffilc, § 333, p. 211, 3d 
Walz’s lihctortx Gr&ci, tom. iv. pp. 13, edit. Suidas, quoted by Schottus, 
14. Arsenii Violetum, edit. Walz, Adayia Gnicorum, p. 450, 1G12.] 
Stuttgard, 1832, pp. 313, 314. Quoted 



rniNTED BY WtI,LIA.M BLACKWOOD AND 80NS, EDINBURGH. 


 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD & SONS’ 


PUBLICATIONS. 


?— 

Complete Library Edition of Sir Edward 

Bulwer Lytton’s Novels. 

In Volumes of n convenient and handsome form. Printed from a largo readable type. 
Published monthly, prico 5s. per Volume. Vols. I. to VIII. are published. 

“ It is of the handiest of sizes ; tho paper is good ; and the type, which seems to bo new, is very 
clear and beautiful. There are no pictures. The whole charm of the presentment of the volume 
consists in its handiness, and the tempting clearness and beauty of the type, which almost converts 
into a pleasure the mere act of following the printer's lines, and leaves the author's mind free to 
exert its unobstructed force upon the reader.” — Examiner. 

“ Nothing could be better as to size, type, pai>er, and general getting up. Tho Bulwer Novel* will 
range on the same shelf with the Scott Novels ; and appearing, as these two series will do, together, 
and in a mode tempting readers, old and young, to go through them once ngnin for pleasure and profit, 
will inevitably lead to comparison of the genius, tho invention, the worldly knowledge, and artistic 
skill of tho great Scottish and English writers.” — Athcnasum. 


New General Atlas. 

Keith Johnston’s Royal Atlas of Modern Geography. 

Part V., now published, contains — 

AUSTRIAN EMPIRE, Western Sheet, comprising Austria Proper, tho Tyrol, 
Bohemia, Venetia, &c. 

AUSTRIAN EMPIRE, Eastern Sheet — Hungary, Galicia, Transylvania, tho 
Servian Woiwodschafts, and the Banat of Temes, Slavonia, and the Military 
Frontier. 

NEW SOUTH WALES, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, & VICTORIA. 

OCEANIA, WESTERN AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, & NEW ZEALAND. 

WEST INDIA ISLANDS & CENTRAL AMERICA. 

This Atlas will be completed in Ten Parts, price 10s. fid. oacb, and will form a hand- 
some portable Volume, size 20 x 13.3 inches, consisting of a serios of 48'original and 
authentic Maps, constructed hy Ai.F.x. Keith Johnston, F.R.G.S., Author of tho 
u Physical Atlas,” &c., and boautifully engTaved and coloured in tho finest style by 
W. & A. K. Johnston, with a special Indox to each Map. 


A Cruise in Japanese Waters. 

By Captain Shkkard Osrorn, C.B., 

Author of “ Loavos from an Arctic Journal,” “ Quodab,” Ac. 

A Now Edition. Crown Octavo, price 5s. 

“ The fascination of this strange country was undoubtedly great, for it Is transferred to every page 
of Captain Osborn's narrative ” — 'Jht Times. 

“One of the most charming little books that for many a day we have had the good fortune to 
peruse.” — Literary (laxette. 

“ One lays down the lxiok with an irresistible desire to pack up all one has ami start at once 
for Japan .” — Evening Ifrrnhl. 

“ In reading many pages of this book we almost feel that the action of the events is proceeding 
before us. .... There Is not a dull or uninteresting line in the book." — Morning Herald. 


2 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD ANT) SONS' PUBLICATIONS. 


St Stephens: A Poem. 

OR, ILLUSTRATIONS OF PARLIAMENTARY ORATORY. 

Coinprisi iig — Pym — Van©— Strafford — Halifax — Shaftesbury - St John — Sir R. Walpolo 
— Chesterfield --Carteret— Chatham — Pitt — Fox— Burke — Sheridan — Wilberforco 
— Wyndham — Conway — Cnatlcreagh — William Lamb (Lord Melbourne) — Tieruey 
— Lord G rey— O' Connell — Plunkett— Shiol— F ollett — Macaulay —Pool . 

Second Edition. Crown Octavo, price 5s. 

Fleets and Navies, 

By Captain Charles Hamley, R.M. 

Originally published in BlacfocootC s Magazine. 

In Crown Octavo, price 6s. 

Conquest and Colonisation in North 

Africa; 

Being; tho substance of a Scries of Letters from Algeria published in the 
Timet, and now by permission collected. 

With Introduction and Supplement, containing the most recent French 
and other information on Morocco. 

By Georoe Winorove Cooke, 

Author of “ China in 1857-1858.” 

With a Map, prico 5s. 

Narrative of the Earl of Elgin’s Mission 

to China and Japan. 

By Laurence Olifhant, 

Private Secretory to Lord Elgin. 

Socond Edition. In Two Volumes Octavo, price £‘2, 2s. 

Illustrated with numerous Engravings in Chromo- Lithography, Maps, and Engravings 
on Wood, from Original Drawings and Photographs. 

“ It is long since any spectacle has been disclosed to tho observer of politics and of manners so 
novel and so Interesting as that which Mr Olipli&ut affords us of the internal condition of Japan ; ami 
we cannot lay down his Second Volume without in some degree sharing in the onthusiosui and 

astonishment the aspect of the Japanese empire appears to have excited in his own mind 

The volumes in which Mr Oliphant has related these transactions will be read with the strongest 
Interest now, and deserve to retain a permanent place in the literary and historical annals of our time.'* 
— Edinburgh I Urine. 

Story of the Campaign of Sebastopol. 

Written in the Camp. 

By Lieut. -Col. E. Bruce Hamley. 

Octavo, with Illustration** drawn in Camp by tho Author, 21s. 

" It is a book unlikely to be ever superseded. Its truth Is of that simple and startling character 
which is sure of an immortal existence; nor is it paying the gnilaut author too high a compliment to 
class this mnaterpieco of military history with the most precious of those classic records which have 
been beoueatlicd to us by the great writers of antiquity who took part iu the wars they have 
described. ** — The Press. 

An Essay on the National Character of 

the Athenians. 

By John Brown Patterson. 

Edited from the Author’s revision, by Professor PiLLAXS, of the University 
of Edinburgh, 

Crown Octavo, price 4s. 6*1. 


 



MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS* PUBLICATIONS. 


3 


The Mill on the Floss. 

By George Eliot, 

Author of “ Scenes of Clerical Life,” and “ Adam Bede.” 
In Throe Volumos. Price £1, lls. 6d. 


Adam Bede. 

% 

By George Eliot. 

Eighth Edition. Two V ols., Foolscap Octavo, price 12s. 

Scenes of Clerical Life. 

THE SAD FORTUNES OF AMOS BARTON— MR GILFIL’S LOVE STORY— 

JANET'S REPENTANCE. 

By George Eliot. 

Third Edition. Two Vols., Foolscap Octavo, price 12s. 

Lady Lee’s Widowhood. 

By Lieut. -Colonel E. B. Hamlev. 

With Engravings. Third Edition. Crown Octavo, price Gs. 

The Athelings; or, the Three Gifts. 

By Mrs Olipilant. 

Three Volumes, Post Octavo, prico £1, lls. 6d. 

" It Is quite charming. The beginning is perfect, and may rank with any picture of an interior 
that we know. In The Atheling * Mrs Oliphant exercises with tiic greatest success her talent for pic- 
ture-painting. There is not a stroke or a shade too much or too little. A sweeter story titan The 
Athelings, or ouo more beautifully written, we liavo uot seen for many a long day.” — Globe. 


Zaidee : A Romance. 

By the same Author. 

Throo Volumes, Post Octavo, prico £1, lls. Gd. 

Katie Stewart: A True Story. 

By the same Author. 

Second Edition, Foolscap, prico Gs. 

The Quiet Heart. 

By the same Author. 

Second Edition, Post Octavo, prico 10s. Gd. 

Some of my Contributions in Rhyme to 

Periodicals in Bygone Days. 

By a Septu agin aria n. 

Foolscap, price 3s. Gd. 


 


4 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLICATIONS. 


Tales from “Blackwood.” 

Publishing in Monthly Numbers, price 6d., and in Volumes Quarterly, price Is. 6d., 
bound in cloth. 

The Volumes published contain — 

Vot. I. The Glenmutchkin Railway. — Vanderdeckun’s Message Home.— The Floating Beacon.— 
Colonna the Paintor. — Napoleon. — A Legend of Gibraltar. — The Iron Shroud. 

Vol. II. Lozaro’t Legacy. — A Story without a Tail. — Faustus and Queen Elizabeth.— How I 
became a Yeoman. — Devereux Hall. — The Metempsychosis.— College Theatricals. 

Vol. III. A Reading Party in - the Long Vacation. — Father Tom and the Pope. — La Petite 
Madeleine. — Bob Burke’s Duel with Ensign Brady. — The Headsman : A Tale of Doom. — The 
Wearyful Woman. 

Vol. IV. How I stood for the Dreepdaily Burghs. — First and Last. — The Duke’s Dilemma : A 
Chronicle of Nicsenstcin. — The Old Gentleman’s Teetotum. — “Woe to us when we lose the Watery 
Wall.” — My College Friends : Charles Russell, the Gentleman Commoner. — The Magic Lay of the 
One-IIorsc Cliay. 

Vol. V. Adventures in Texas. — How we got Possession of the Tuileries. — Captain Paton’s 
Lament. — The Village Doctor. — A Singular Letter from Southern Africa. 

Vol. VL My Friend the Dutchman. — My College Friends — No. II. : Horace Leicester. — The 
Emerald Studs.— My College Friends — No. III.: Mr W. Wellington Hurst.— Christine : A Dutch 
Story. — The Man in the BelL 

Vol. VII. My English Acquaintance. — The Murderer’s Last Night. — Narration of Certain 
Uncommon Things that did formerly happen to Me, Herbert Willis, B.D — The Wags. — Tim Wet 
Wooing : A Narrative of ’98. — Benna-Grolch. 

Vol. VIII. The Surveyor’s Tale. By Professor Aytoun. — The Forrest-Itacc Romance.— Di 
Vasari : A Tale of Florence. — Sigisnmnd Fatello. — The Boxes. 

Vol. IX. Rosaura : A Tale of Madrid.— Adventure in the North-West Territory. — Harry Bolton’s 
Curacy.— The Florida Pirate.— The Pandour and bis Princess —The Beauty Draught. 


Cheap Editions of Popular Works. 

Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life. Foolscap 8vo, Ss. cloth. 

The Trials of Margaret Lyndbay. By the Author of “Lights and Shadows of Scottish 
Life." Foolscap 8vo, 3s. cloth. 

Thf. Foresters. By the Author of “ Lights an hadows of Scottish Life." Foolscap 8vo, 3s. 
cloth. 

Tom Cringle's Loo. Complete in One Volume, Foolscap 8vo, 4s. cloth. 

The CnuiSE of thf. Midoe. By the Author of “Tom Criugle’s Log." In One Volume. Fool- 
scap 8vo, 4s. cloth. 

The Lite of Mansif. Wauch, Tailor in Dalkeith. Foolscap 8vo, 3s. cloth. 

The Subaltern. By the Author of “ The Chelsea Pensioners.” Foolscap 8vo, 3s. cloth. 

Peninsular Scenes and Sketches. By the Author of “The Student of Salamanca." Foolscap 
8vo, 3s. cloth. 

Niohts at Mess, Sir Frizzle Pumpkin, and other Tales. Foolscap 8vo, 3s. cloth. 

The Youth and Manhood of Cyril Thornton. By the Author of “ Men and Manners in 
America.” Foolscap 8vo, 4s. cloth. 

Valerius: A Roman Story. Foolscap 8vo, 3s. cloth. 

Reginald Dalton. By the Author of “Valerius.” Foolscap 8vo, 4s. cloth. 

Some Passages in the Life of Adam Blair, and History of Matthew Wald. By the Author 
of “ Valerius " Foolscap 8vo, 4s. cloth. 

Annals or the Parish, and Ayrshire Legatees. By John Galt. Foolscap 8vo, 4s. cloth. 

Sir Andrew Wylie. By John Galt. Foolscap Svo, 4s. cloth. 

The Provost, and other Tales. By John Galt. Foolscap 8vo, 4s. doth. 

The Entail. By John Galt Foolscap Svo, 4s. cloth. 

Lift: in the Far West. By G. F. Ruxton. A New Edition. Foolscap Svo. 4s cloth. 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLICATIONS. 


5 


The Sketcher. 

By the Rev. John Eagles, A.M. Oxon. 

Originally published in Blackwood's Magazine. 

In Post Octavo, prico 10s. 6d. 

“ There is an earnest and vigorous thought about them, a genial and healthy tono of feeling, and 
a flowing and frequently eloquent style of language, that make this book one of the most pleasant 
companions that you can take with you, if you are bound for tho woodland or pastoral scenery of 
rural England, especially if you go to study the picturesque, whether as an observer or os an artist." 


Essays. 

By the Rev. John Eagles, A.M. Oxon. 

Originally published in Blackwood! s Magazine. 

Post Octavo, 10s. 6d. 

Contents — 

Church Music, and other Parochial*. — Medical Attendance, and other Parochials. — A few Hours at 
Hampton Court. — Grandfathers and Grandchildren. — Sitting for a Portrait. — Are there not great 
Boosters among us? — Temperance and Teetotal Societies. — Thackeray's Lectures: Swift. — The 
Crystal Palace.— Civilisation : the Census. — Tho Beggar's Legacy. 


Sea -Side Studies. 

By George Henry Lewes, 

Author of “ Physiology of Common Life,” Ac. 
A New Edition, price 6s. 6d. 


The Moor and the Loch. 

CONTAINING MINUTE INSTRUCTIONS IN ALL HIGHLAND SPORTS, WITH 
WANDERINGS OVER CRAG AND CORREI, FLOOD AND FELL. 

By John Colquhoun, Esq. 

Third Edition, in Octavo, with Illustrations, price 12s. 6d. 

Salmon -Casts and Stray Shots: 

BEING FLY-LEAVES FROM THE NOTE BOOK OF 
John Colqchoun, Esq., 

Author of the “ Moor and the Loch,” &c. 

A New Edition, Foolscap Octavo, price 5s. 

** This is a true British Sportsman's Book, cheerful with anecdote and general good-lmraour, full 
of the kindly temperament of the naturalist aud of a keen relish for such Held-sports as it best becomes 
a man to follow." — Spectator. 

. ' y 

View of the Salmon-Fishery of Scotland,. 

WITH OBSERVATIONS ON THE NATURE, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF THE 
SALMON, AND ON T1IE LAW AS AFFECTING THE RIGHTS OF PARTIES,. 
Ac. Ac. 

By the Late Murdo Mackenzie, Esq. of Cardross and DundonaliL 
In Octavo, Cloth, prico 5s. 

The Angler’s Companion to the Rivers 

and Lochs of Scotland. 

By Thomas Ton Stoddart. 

Second Edition, Crown Octavo, price 7s. 6d. 


G 


MESSRS BI.ACKWOOD AND SONS 1 PUBLICATIONS. 


Works of Professor Wilson. 

Edited by his Son-IN-Law, Professor Ferrier. 

In Twelvo Vols. Crown Octavo, price £3, 12a. 

The following aro sold separately 

NOCTES AMBROSIAN Four Vols. 24s. 

ESSAYS, CRITICAL AND IMAGINATIVE. Four Vols. 24s. 
ON HOMER AND HIS TRANSLATORS. One Vol. 6s. 
RECREATIONS OF CHRISTOPHER NORTH. Two Vola. 12s. 
TALES. One Vol. 6s. 

POEMS. One Vol. 6s. 


Works of Samuel Warren, D.C.L. 

Uniform Edition, Five Vols., prico 24a. 

The following are sold separately : — 

DIARY OF A PHYSICIAN. 5a. 6d. 

TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR. Two Vola. 9*. 

NOW AND THEN. 2a. 6d. 

MISCELLANIES. 6s. 


Works of Thomas M'Crie, D.D. 

Edited by his Son, Professor M'Crie. 

Uniform Edition, in Four Vols., Crown Octavo, prico 24a. 

The following aro sold separately : — 

LIFE OF JOHN KNOX. 6a. 

LIFE OF ANDREW MELVILLE. 6«. 

HISTORY OF TnE REFORMATION IN ITALY. 4a. 

HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION IN SPAIN. 3a. Gd. 

REVIEW OF “TALES OF MY LANDLORD/’ AND SERMONS. Co. 


Curran and his Contemporaries. 

By Charles Phillips, Esq., A.B. 

A Now Edition. Crown Octavo, prico 7s. 6d. 

“ Certainly one of tlio moat extraordinary piece* of biography ever produced. . . . No library 
Should be without It .” — Lord Uroiigham. 

" Never, perhaps, was there a more curious collection of portraits crowded before into the same 
canvass.” — Times. 


Life of John, Duke of Marlborough, 

WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS CONTEMPORARIES. 

By Sir Archibald Alison, Bart., D.C.L. 

Third Edition, Two Vola. Octavo, Portrait and Maps, 30*. 


 



MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS* PUBLICATIONS. 


7 


Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers, and other 

Poems. 

By W. Edmondstoune Aytoun, D.C.L., 

Professor of Rhetoric and Belles-Lettres in the University of Edinburgh. 
Twolfth Edition, price 7s. 6d. 

“ Mr Ay to tin's Lays are truly beautiful, and aro perfoct poems of their class, pregnant with fire, 
with patriotic ardour, with loyal zeal, with exquisite pathos, with noble passion. Who can hear the 
opening lines descriptive of Edinburgh after the great battle of Flodaen, and not feel that the 
minstrel's soul luu caught the geuuine inspiration ? "—Morning Post. 


Bothwell : A Dramatic Poem. 

By the same Author. 

Third Edition, prico 7s. Gd. 


The Ballads of Scotland. 

Edited by Professor Aytoun. 

Second Edition. Two Volumes, prico 12s. 

“ No country can boast of a richer collection of Ballads than Scotland, and no Editor for these 
Ballade could be found more accomplished than Professor Aytoun. lio lias sent forth two beautiful 
volumes which range with Percy's Ileliques — which, for completeness and accuracy, leavo little to lie 
desired — which must henceforth be considered as the standard edition of the Scottish Ballads, and 
which wo commend os a model to any among ourselves who may think of doing like service to the 
English Ballads .” — The Times. 


Firmilian; or, the Student of Badajoz : 

A 8PASMODIC TRAGEDY. 


Price 6s. 

•'Without doubt, whether we regard it as a satire or as a complete drama, Firmilinn Is one of the 
most finished poems of (lie day. Unity is preserved, and the intensity of the ‘spasmodic’ energy 
thrown into the narrative carries the reader through every page, while the graces of poetic fancy, and 
the touches of deep thought scattered throughout, challenge comparison with selections from the 
most modern poems .” — Liverpool Albion. 


The Book of Ballads. 

Edited by Bon Gaultier. 

Fifth Edition, with numerous Illustrations by Doyle, Leech, and Crowquill. 
Gilt Edges, price 8s. 6d. 


Poems and Ballads of Goethe. 

Translated by Professor Aytoun and Theodore Martin. 

Second Edition, prico Gs. 

“There is no doubt that theso aro the best translations of Goetlio’s marvolloutiy-cut goms which 
have yet been published .'' — The Times. 


8 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLICATIONS. 


Lives of the Queens of Scotland, 

AND ENGLISH PRINCESSES CONNECTED WITH THE REGAL SUCCESSION. 
By Agnes Strickland. 

With Portraits and Historical Vignettes. Complete in Eight Vols., price £-1, 4s. 


History of Europe, 

FROM THE COMMENCEMENT OF T1IE FRENCH REVOLUTION TO TIIE 
BATTLE OF WATERLOO. 

By Sir Archibald Alison, Bart., D.C. L. 

A New Edition of the Library Edition is in the Press. 

Crown Octavo Edition, 20 vols., price £0. 

Peoplo’s Edition, 12 vols;, double cols., £2, 8s. ; and Index Vol., 3s. 


The History of Europe, 

FROM THE FALL OF NAPOLEON TO THE ACCESSION OF LOUIS NAPOLEON. 

By Sir Archibald Allson, Bart, D.C.L. 

Complete in Nine Vols., price £0, 7s. 6cL Uniform with tho Library Edition of the 
Author’s "History of Europe, from the Commencement of the French Revolu- 
tion.’' 


Atlas to Alison’s History of Europe ; 

Containing 109 Maps and Plans of Countries, Rattles, Sieges, and Sea-Fights. Con- 
structed by A. Keitii Johnston, F.R.S.E. With Vocabulary of Military and 
Marino Terms. 

Library Edition, £3, 3s. ; People’s Edition, £1, 11s. 6d, 


History of Greece under Foreign Dom- 

ination. 

By George Finlay, LL. I)., Athens. 

Five Volumes Octavo — viz.: 


Greece under the Romans. B.C. 140 to a.d. 717. A Historical View of the condition 
of the Creek Nation from its Conquest by tho Romans until the Extinction of tho 
Roman Power in the East. Second Edition, Ids. 

History of the Byzantine Empire, a.d. 710 to 1204 ; and of the Greek Empire of 
Nicsea aud Constantinople, A.D. 1204 to 1453. Two Volumes, £1, 7s. 6d. 

Mediaeval Greece and Trebizond. The History of Greece, from its Conquest by the 
Crusaders to its Conquest by the Turks, a.d. 1204 to 1560 ; and History of tho 
Empire of Trebizond, a.d. 1204 to 1461. Price 12s. 

Greece under Othoman and Venetian Domination, a.d. 1453 to 1821. Price 10s. 6d. 

" IBs bo<>k is worthy to take its place among the remarkable works on Greek history, which form 
one of the chief glories of English scholarship. The history of Greece is hut half told without it" — 

l.oialun (luuriliaa. 

"His work Is therefore learned and profound. It throws a flood of light upon nn important 
though obscure portion of Grecian history. . . . In the essential requisites of fidelity, accuracy, 

and learning, Mr Finlay bears a favourable comparison with any historical writer of our day.'— 

Sorlh American A' c view. 


 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLICATIONS). 


9 


The Eighteen Christian Centuries. 

By the Ilev. James White. 

Third Edition, with Analytical Table of Contents, and a Copious Index. Post Octavo 
price 7*. 6d. 

“ lie goes to work upon the only true principle, and produces a picture that at once satisfies 
truth, arrests the memory, and fills the imagination. When they (Index and Analytical Contents 
are supplied, it will be difficult to lay hands on any book of thu kind more useful and more enter- 
taining.” — Times, Keview of first edition. 

" At once the mod picturesque and the most informing volume on Modern History to which tlio 
genera) reader could be referred.” — Nonconformist, 

“His faculty for distinguishing the wheat from the chaff, and of rejecting the useless rubbish, 
while tearing no stray grain unsifted, makes the • Eighteen Christian Centuries ' an invaluable 
manual alike to the old and young reader.” — Globe. 

" Mr White comes to the assistance of thoao who would know (something of the history of the 
Eighteen Christian Centuries; and those who want to know still more than he gives them, will find 
that he has perfected a plan which catches the attention, and fixes the distinctive feature of each 
century in the memory .” — Wesleyan Time*. 


History of France. 

FROM THE EARLIEST PERIOD TO THE YEAR 1848. 

By the Rev. James White, 

Author of tho “ Eighteen Christian Centuries.” 

Second Edition, Poat Octavo, price to. 

** Mr White’s * History of France,’ in a single volume of somo 600 pages, contains every leading 
incident worth the telling, and abounds in word-painting whereof a paragraph bos often ax much 
active life in it as one of those inch-square etchings of tho great Callot, in which may be clearly seen 
whole armies contending in bloody aibitrarneut, and ax many incident* of battle as may be gazed at 
in the miles of canvass in the military picture galleries at Versailles." — JiftaUHMB. 

“An excellent and comprehensive compendium of French history, quite abovo the standard of 
a school-book, and particularly well adapted for the libraries of literary institutions .”— National 
Review. 

" We have In this volunio tho history of France told rapidly and distinctly by a narrator who has 
fancy and judgment to assist him in seizing rightly and presenting in the most effective manner both 
the main incidents of Ids tale and tho main principles involved in them. Mr White is, in our time, 
the only writer of »hort histories, or sunimsrios of history, that may be rrud for pleasure as well as In- 
struction. that are nut less true for being told in an effective way, and that give equal pleasure to the 
cultivated and to the uncultivated reader." — Examiner. 


Leaders of the Reformation: 

LUTHER, CALVIN, LATIMER, AND KNOX. 

By the Rev. John Tulloch, D.D., 

Principal, and Primariua Profeasor of Theology, St Mary’s College, St Andrews. 
Second Edition, Crown Octavo. 

** We are not acquainted with any work in which •» much solid information upon the leading 
aspects of the great Reformation is presented in so well-packed and pleasing a form.” — Witness. 

•* The idea wti* excellent, and most ably has It been executed. Each Essay is a lesson In sound 
thinking as well as In good writing. The deliberate perusal of the vofume will be an exercise for 
which nil, whether young or old. will be the better. The book is erudite, and throughout marked by 
great independence of thought. We very highly prize the publication .” — Rrilith Standard. 

“ We cannot but congratulate both Dr Tulloch and the university of which he is so prominent a 
member on this evidence of returning life in Presbyterian thought. It seems a* though the chains of 
an outgrown Puritanism were At last falling from the limb* of Scotch theology. There is a width of 
sympathy and a power of writing in this little volume which fills us with great expectation. We trust 
that Dr Tulloch will consider it as being merely the basis of a more complete and erudite inquiry." — 
literary Gazette. 

“ Tiie style is admirable in force and in pathos, and the hook one to be altogether recommended, 
bo tli for the merits of those of whom it treats, and for that which the writer unconsciously reveals of 
hb own character.” — Globe. 


 



10 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLICATIONS. 


The Book of the Farm. 

By Henry Stephens, F.RS.E. 

A Now Edition. In Two Volumes, largo Octavo, with upwards of 600 Engravings, 
price £3, half-bound. 

41 Tho best practical book I have ever met with .*' — Professor Johnston. 

** Oue of tiie oompletest works ou agriculture of which our literature can boast." — Agricultural 

Gazette. 


Book of Farm Implements and Machines. 

By James Slight and R. Scott Burn. 

Edited by Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E. 

Illustrated with 876 Engravings. One largo Volume, uniform with tho “ Book of tho 
Farm,’' price £2, 2b. 

“The author has omitted, moat judiciously, those machines not now used, and he has confined 
himself to those in actual operation, thereby rendering a great service to the agricultural mind, 
which is liable to confusion in cases of much complication. Some of the machines described are 
commended, snd deserve the commendation ; others, on the contrary are condemucd, and it would 

seem with eaual justice: but the character of all is stilted distinctly Full, complete, and 

perfect in all its parts ; honestly compiled, and skilfully illustrated with numerous and valuable 
engravings and diagrams, it is not aayiug too much to state that there is no parallel to this impor- 
tant work in any country of Europe, and that its value to the agriculturist is almost incalculable.” 
— Observer. 


The Book of the Garden. 

By Charles MTntosil 

In Two large Volumes, Royal Octavo, published separately. 

Vol. I.— On the Formation of Gardens — Construction, Heating, and Ventilation of Fruit and 
Plant- Houses, Pits. Frames, and other Garden •Structures, with Practical Details, illustrated by 1073 
Engravings, pp. 776. Price £2, 10s. 

Von. II. — PRACTICAL GARDENING — Contains : Directions for tho Culture of the Kitchen Oar- 
den, the Hardy- Fruit Garden, tiie Forcing Garden, and Flower Garden, including Fruit and Plant 
Houses, with select List* of Vegetables, Fruit*, and Plant*. I»p. 6<W t with 270 Engravings. Price 
£1, 17s. (id. 


The Year-Book of Agricultural Facts. 

Edited by R. Scott Burn. 

In Foolscap Octavo, price 5s, 


A Handy Book on Property Law. 

By Lord St Leonards. 

A New Edition, enlarged, with Index, Crown Octavo, prico 3s. 6d. 

'•Less than 200 page* serve to arm us with the ordlnnry precautions to which wo should attend in 
selling, buying, mortgaging, leasing, settling, nnd devising estates. We are informed of our relations 
to our property, to our wives nnd children, and of our liabilities ns trustees or executors, in a little 
book for the million, a book which the author tenders to tho profanum vulfftts ns even capable of 
* beguiling a few hours in a railway carriage.' " — The Times. 


 




MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLIC ATION3. 


11 


The Geology of Pennsylvania. 

A Government Survey ; with a General View of tho Geology op the United 
States, Essays on the Coal- Formation and its Fossils, and a Description 
of the Coal-fields of North America and Great Britain. 

By Professor Henry Darwin Rogers, F.R.S., F.G.S., 

Professor of Natural History in tho Univorsity of Glasgow. 

With Sevon largo Maps, and numerous Illustrations engraved on Copper and on Wood. 
In Throo Volumes, Royal Quarto, £3, 8«. 


Introductory Text-Book of Geology. 

By David Page, F.G.S. 

Fourth Edition, with Engravings. In Crown Octavo, price Is. 6<L 

“ It has not been often our good fortune to examino a text-book on science of which we could 
express nu opinion eo entirely favourable as we aro enabled to do of Mr Pago's little work." — 

Athcnauia. * 


Advanced Text-Book of Geology. 

DESCRIPTIVE AND INDUSTRIAL. 

By David Page, F.G.S. 

Second Edition, enlarged, with numorous Engravings, 6s. 

*' An admirable book on Geology. It is from no Invidious desire to underrate other works — It is 
the simple expression of iuntiue — which causes us to assign to Mr Page’s Advanced Text-Book the 
very first place among geological works addressed to students, at toast among those which have come 
before us. We have read every word of it, with care and with delight, never hesitating as to ite 
meaning, never delecting the omission of anything needful in a popular and succinct exposition of a 
rich and varied subject.” — Leader. 

** It Is therefore with unfeigned pleasuro that wo record our appreciation of his Advanced Text - 
Book of Geology. Wo have carefully read this truly satisfactory book, and do not hesitate to say 
that it is an excellent compendium of the great facts of Geology, and written in a truthful and philo- 
sophic spirit." — Edinburgh Philosophical Journal. 

“We know of no introduction containing a Jnrger nmonnt of information in the same space, and 
which we could more cordially recommeud to tlic geological student." — Athcna-um. 


Handbook of Geological Terms and 

Geology. 

By David Page, F.G.S. 

In Crown Octavo, prico Ga. 

“ • To the student, miner, engineer, architect, agriculturist, and others, who may havo occasion to 
deal with geological facts, and yet who might not be inclined to turn tip half a dozen volumes, or go 
through a course of geological readings for an explanation of the term in question,* Mr Page lias car- 
ried out his object with the most complete success. His book amply fulfils the promise contained in 
its title, constituting a handbook not only of .geological terms but of the science of geology. It will 
not only be absolutely indispensable to the student, but will be invaluable as a complete and handy 
book of reference even to the advanced geologist. ” — Literary Gazette. 

“ There is no more earnest living practical worker in geology than Mr David Page. To his excel- 
lent Introductory Text-Book of Geology and his Advanced Text-Book of Geology, Descriptive and 
Industrial, lie has now added an admirable system of geological terms, with ample and clearly written 
explanatory notices, such as all geological observers, whether they are able professors and distin- 
guished lecturers, or mere inquirers upon tho threshold of the science, must tind to be of the highest 
value." — Practical Mechanics' Journal. 

M But Mr Page’s work is very much more than simply a translation of the language of Geology 
into plain English ; it is a Dictionary, in which not only the meaning of the words is given, but also 
a clear uud concise account of all that is most remarkable and worth knowing in the objects which 
the words aro designed to express. In doing this he has chiefly kept in view the requirements of the 
general reader, but at tho same time adding such details us will render the volume an acceptable 
Handbook to the student and professed geologist. ’*¦ — The Press. 


12 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLICATIONS. 


The Chemistry of Common Life. 

By Professor Johnston. 

A New Edition, Edited by G. H. Lewes. 

Illustrated with numerous Engravings. In Two Vola., Fcap. Octavo, price 11s. 6d. 


The Physiology of Common Life. 

By Gkorgb H. Lewes. 

Illustrated with numerous Engravings. Two Vols., prico 12s. 

Content *— Hunger and Thirst.— Food and Drink.— Digestion and Indigestion.— The Structure and 
Uses of the Blood.— The Circulation.— Respiration and Suffocation.— Why we are Warm, and 
how we keep so. — Feeling and Thinking. — The Mind and the Brain. — Our Senses and Sensations. 
— Sleep and Dreams.— The Qualities we Inherit from our Parents.— Life and Death. 


The Physical Atlas of Natural Phenomena. 

By Alex. Keith Johnston, F.R.S.E., Ac., 

Geographer to tho Qucon for Scotland. 

A Now and Enlarged Edition, consisting of 35 Folio Plates, 27 smaller onos, printed 
in Colours, with 135 pages of Letterpress, and Index. 

Imperial Folio, half bound morocco, £12, 12s. 


Atlas of Astronomy. 

A Complete Series of Illustrations of the Heavenly Bodies, drawn with the greatest 
care from Original and Authentic Documonts, and printed in Colours by Alex. 
Keith Johnston. 

Edited by J. R. Hind. 

Imperial Quarto, half-bound morocco, 21s. 


A Geological Map of Europe. 

By Sir R. I. Murchison, D.C.L., M.A., F. R.S., Ac., and 
James Niool, F.K.S.E., F.G.S., 

Professor of Natural History in the University of Aberdeen. 

Constructed by Alex. Keith Johnston. 

On Four Sheets Imperial, beautifully printed in Colours. Sixe, 4 foet 2 by 3 feet 
5 inches. Prico in Shoots, £3, 3a. ; in a Cloth Coso, Quarto, £3, 10s. 


A Geological Map of Scotland. 

By Professor Nicol. 

The Topography by A. Keith Johnston. 

Coloured, with Explanation and Indox, prico 21s. 


 



MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS* PUBLICATIONS. 


13 


Diversities of Faults in Christian Believers. 

By the Very Rev. E. B. Ramsay, M.A., F.R.S.E., 

Doan of the Dioce .0 of Edinburgh, 
fn Foolscap Octavo, price 4s. 6d. 


Diversities of Christian Character. 

Illustrated in the Lives of the Four groat Apostles. 

By the same Author. 

Uniform with the above, price 4s. Gd. 

Religion in Common Life : 

A Sermon preached in Crathio Church, October 14, 1855, boforo Her Majesty 
the Queen and Prince Albert. Published by Her Majesty’s Command. 

By the Rev. John Caird, D.D. 

Bound in cloth, 8d. Cheap Edition, 3d. 


Sermons. 

By the Rev. John Caird, D.D., 
Minister of West Park Church, Glasgow. 
In Post Octavo, price 7s. 6d. Tenth Thousand. 


Prayers for Social and Family Worship. 

Prepared by a Committee of tho General Assembly of tho Church of Scotland, 
and specially designed for tho use ofSoldiors, Sailors, Colonists, Sojourners 
in India, and othor Persons, at Homo or Abroad, who are deprived of tho 
Ordinary Services of a Christian Ministry. Published by Authority of tho 
Committee. 

In Crown Octavo, bound in cloth, price 4s. 


Prayers for Social and Family Worship. 

Being a Cheap Edition of tho al>uve. 

Prico Is, 6d. 


Theism : 

THE WITNESS OP REASON AND NATURE TO AN ALL WISE AND BENE- 
FICENT CREATOR.— <BuhNrrr Prize Treatise.) 

By the Rev. J. Tulloch, D.D., 

Principal, and Primarius I’rofcsaor of Theology, St Mary’s College, St Andrews. 
Crown Octavo, 10s. 6d. 


 



14 


MESSRS BLACKWOOD AND SONS’ PUBLICATIONS. 


In Crown Octavo, price 10s. 6<1., 

INSTITUTES OF METAPHYSIC; 

THE THEORY OF KNOWING AND BEING. 

By JAMES F. FERRIER, A.B. Oxon., 

Profesjor of Moral Philosophy and Political Economy, St Andrews. 

SECOND EDITION. 


EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS. 

Eclectic Review. 

We might havo written a very different article on this remarkable book, dwelling on 
its strong points instead of its weak ones, calling attention to the value of many of Pro- 
fessor Ferrier* b views, and especially of his historical criticisms ; and illustrating by 
extracts his mastery over thought and language, and his wonderful power of presenting 
the most abstruse thought in a clear, common-sense light, and clothing tho most arid 
themes with a vivacity and felicity of diction which a poet or an orator might envy, and 
to which few indeed among metaphysicians can pretend. 

London Quarterly Review. 

This is in all respects a most remarkable book. When wo began its perusal, wo were 
greatly excited by the magnificent promiso it laid before us ; which was no loss than, 
by an unfaltering march and process of reason, of demonstration, to arrive before and 
capture tho fort of absolute existence. Professor Forrier writes with such genius, such 
passion, such enthusiasm ; ho is so evidently master of his subject, and lias thought it 
out from beginning to end ; he is so conversant with the history of previous failures, and 
so aware of the futility of the expectations of metaphysic from psychology, that if any 
man may hope to make sure the foundation and place tho coping-stone of on edifice of 
metaphysic, it will be Professor Forrier. 

British Quarterly Review. 

This is no ordinary book. If wo mistake not, its publication will mark an epoch in 
tho history of speculation in this country. 

Daily New*. 

Tho M Institutes of Metaphysic " is indeed tho most suggestive work on tho subject 

that has beon published for many a long year, and it is the most readable 

While thus decidedly differing from tho tenets of I*rofos»or Forrier, wo cannot close tho 
book without again acknowledging in tho frankest manner tho delight we have derived 
from its perusal, and tho bracing influence of its bold and free discussions. Did our 
limits permit of it, wo should have liked to make some quotations to show the beauty 
of tho writing, and tho wit and humour that are so lavishly scattered over a theme that 
in ordinary hands is a very Sahara of aridity and dulness. 

Examiner. 

Wo havo expressed as fairly ns we can, in our irreverent, unphilosophical way, tho 
position taken by Professor Ferrier. We have only to add that he maintains it most 
ably, thinks it out doeply, and in its illustration displays everywhere a genius for 
metaphysical reasoning of a very rare and original order. 


 



MESSRS BI.ACKWOOD AXD SONS’ FUBLICATIOX& 


15 


In Crown Octavo, price 10s. 6d., 

THORND ALE; 

OR, 

THE CONFLICT OF OPINIONS. 

By WILLIAM SMITH, 

Author of “ A Discourse on Ethics,*' " Athelwold ; a Tragedy," Ac. 

•* Sleapa the future, liko a snake enrolled. 

Coil within coil.** 

¦Wordsworth. 

SECOND EDITION. 


EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS. 

Worth British Review. 

This volume is sure, sooner or later, to have many readers, notwithstanding its de- 
fects, to which wo shall refer. The subjects treated of, and the style, always chasto 
and beautiful, often attractively quaint, in which they are clothed, will not fail to secure 

the attention of tho class for whom the work is avowedly writteu It deals 

with many of those higher forms of speculation characteristic of the cultivated minds 
of the age. 

Praser’s Magazine. 

Mr Smith has read deeply and accurately into human nature, in all its weaknesses, 
fancies, hopes, and fears. It is long since we have met with a more remarkable or wor- 
thy book. Mr Smith is always thoughtful and suggestive : he has been entirely success- 
ful in carrying out his wish to produce a volume in rending which a thoughtful man will 
often pause with his finger betweon the leaves, and muso upon what ho has read. We 
judgo that tho book must have boon written slowly, and at intervale, from its affluence 
of beautiful thought. No mind could have tumod off such material with the equablo 
flow of a stream. Wo know few works in which there may be found so many fino 
thoughts, light- bringing illustrations, and happy turns of expression, to invito tho 
readers pencil. 

Ouardien. 

It possesses the great and rare charm of perfect elcganco of stylo. It is oosc and 
free, because colloquial and easy, but it never offers an obscuro sentonco, or a clumsy 
illustration. It is one of tho few books which will bear to bo read slowly. Its spirit 
does not evaporate by exposure. 

Sun. 

The tone, indeed, is at onco eminently religious and eminently philosophical. And 
the effect of tho whole is, in truth, to sum up all in a few words, exquisitely and pro- 
foundly pathetic. “ Thomdalo” comprises within it the thought of a lifetime. Its 
every syllable shows it to be the production of a thoroughly earnest man, and that man 
a Christian gentleman. 

Patriot. 

Viewed as a literary production, the chief light in which, we think, its author would 
have it viewed, this book commands our high approbation, and all but unqualified 
praise. The stylo, though not always equal, is a pure, crystalline vehicle of thought, 
tho minutest shade of which has easy and beautiful expression ; while there aro numer- 
ous passages of such exquisite beauty, and tenderness, and truth, that wo lingor over 
them, and often return to thorn, with accuse of fascination. Wo could fill columns 
with extracts. 

Scotsman. 

But this loose description would give an unfair impression of tho book. Though not 
peculiarly original, it contains a great deal that is original, and sufficient to show tho 
shaping, disposing, and suggesting powers of a creative mind. It reflects as in a mirror 
all the speculation of tho ago. It combines it, arranges it, and gives it definiteness. 
Opposing doctrines find always fair and adequato, often admirably effective expression. 
The author’s mind is so finely balanced that it can weigh any speculative dogma. It 
has no pcrceptiblo bias ; it is, in short, a singularly sceptical and unbiassed mind, 
subtle in speculative thought, and capable of giving beautiful utterance to such thought. 
More literary gems (chiefly comparisons) could be picked from this than almost any recent 
volume wc know. It is a repository of select thoughts— tho fruit of much reflection, 
much reading, and many years. 


\1 AG| 


 



WORKS IN TIIE PRESS. 

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

OF TIIE 

REV. DR ALEXANDER CARLYLE, 

Minister of Invcresk. 

CONTAINING MEMORIALS OF THE MEN AND EVENTS OF 1118 TIMES. 

Edited by JOHN HILL BURTON. 

In One Volume Octavo. 


ENGLISH PURITANISM AND ITS 
LEADERS: 

CROMWELL —MILTON — BAXTER — BUN VAN. 


By the Rev. JOHN TULLOCH, D.D., 

Principal and Primariue Professor of Theology, 8t Mary's College, St Andrews ; 
Author of “ Leaders of the Reformation." 

Uniform with the “ Loaders of the Information.” 


LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF 
THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND, 

FROM THE REFORMATION TO THE REVOLUTION SETTLEMENT. 

By the Late Very Rev. JOHN LEE, D.D., LL.D. 

Principal of the University of Edinburgh. 

With Notes and Appendices from the Author h Papers. Edited by his Son, 
the Rev. WILLIAM LEE. Two Volumes, Octavo. Price 21s. 

[Voir Ready. 


THE NEW REVOLUTION: 

Or, THE NAPOLEONIC POLICY IN EUROPE. 
By R. H. PATTERSON. 

Octavo. 


THE LUCK OF LADYSMEDE. 

ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN “BLACK WOO d’b MAGAZINE.” 

In Two Volumes, post8vo. 

[ To be pvbHsfted in June. 


WHAT WILL HE DO WITH IT u 

By PISISTRATUS CANTON. 

A New Edition. 

In Four Volumes, Foolscap Octavo, price 2ds. 


U 


 











* 


* 






* 

„ (A 


* *»« 


* 1 " 

*-• 





r -s v ? * t n, *p» . ?5 v o<35 

v . .». 

'i • -•. • 

¦ * V •- *i*£. *;Vfc 

* » $¦*. • U&' 

I 41 - * v •- » ** *- + '¦ 

.. ;A<i S£ > :.. . j - £ 1 A 

*•¦»«’ pi 




. 




* 


k g *4 l 2*^ * ’ ^ -i *1 

V • <¦ ' ’* V* j> , * «•* '• n S 

*#*iS*yt '¦¦ **.*>> 


/ ’>?> w i&W£ ^ ' 

‘v' t S^il vf 


# 





% 




V 4 * jrfp art 


•T 


y k 4 & 


€; 


4 











.*] 

. .. r 


¦¦* - • * ’’fciCV. * * M 

p'akj- v ’ > 

# SL.^- * * uk : 1 ia’ 

... A ¦ * *#>' J*, . ' 


I 


*£* 


Li. , Hj 4 P * j? 



» 




Hr 




.4 


V < 4 . * 


4 I 





U W HTVt 





;*£. ¦ • • ' £¦' '•• : ‘iVr-VM?;. =.'.’ ; 

! : V> oc a s,. ., 

: .» UrAh. ••wiFJ 




. . - yj’' r • * T * *«S : ; 

: a ur x 4-i. m ’** *' i^.iJQi V 

¦ t • «, • '-i-# t • * *. j’rf 1 ? i*! . r< 

/ ?. . ' - - v * i# <** »• , 

i i* V"' 


4 -* w • * - « * # ••«,<! « « • • • ¦ * ¦ * ' *¦ • • I ¦— - 

• , - ’ » - Jl ' • '. * • •?•**•», ^4 4*4 *0 . *04-44*. •••40*. 0 

• «¦)< «tr; r : • • • • • • < ,i < « * » • * .. • • 4 . t * - • ¦• * • fj- 1 ¦>» • • * 

*4. ^ *m0 0 ¦* f • 0 “ 4 ' 0 4 0 0 * / 4 4 "\ 4* 4 A / « V > # * 4 4*4 4 4 • * * ' i *.4 . I * 4 " , • A 

^ V • *. / .i * » • 4 V4 r « ’4* • 4 7 • ,4 4 4-4 ,4 * - 4V* 4 • 4 I ,f ,« * » • • 4* / ‘ 4 - • A* 

. ••• 4 *. 4*4 • • * 0 * 0 • • • • • 4 ' • •’ • «••¦#*•’# • « • 4 • 4 - - 4 « 4 . 4 h 4 ,4 Z, 4 f 9 *"• 

• «4#«««****4«4 4 4 • » 4'4’4 4 # 4.# 4 •*/ ‘ • < • • 4 # » « .« # - 4 « « « 

* * 0 0 - $ *. • \ 0 ¦ 4 .J ¦ 0 • 4 9 0 ‘ 0 ¦.+ * 0 4 0 0 0 4 \ 0 0' 0 0 0 .0 • 4 • 4 ' A 0 ¦ 0 + 4 ’ ^ * 0 .0\ 4 € \ 4 • 4*4 1 # ».# *41 « 

. *4*40000* • l •• 4 0 0* 4*0*$4**%4‘ 040 ** 004 • •*• « 

40400*4', 4 0 0 00 0 4 0 04 4 00'4*+0» + ‘ 0 0 0 *4*t0*0 • • t f 

9 • 0 • * 4", 0 • 4 W* ¦ *'.• 4U ,i»4 <4 UV* «4 4 4 .4'j4 0 4.0 0 . r 4 ‘ • * 4 • - • A 4 -*•*?-* 4 ‘ J 

.,4 0 4.4.0 0 4 4 0 4 * 4‘ 0 • 0 0 0 0 * 0 4 * • ’ • 4 • * 4 4 * • * 4*4 4 4 A~ 4 ' 4 ' t 4*4 fl',4 * 4 

,* • * *4,0 < 4 * 4 4.0 0 0 0 ,4 4,0 - 0,4 0 , 0 0,4 4.4 • « • * • * • * 4 

0 0 4 4 4 ‘ 0* 4 0 0 4 • m m • A i • * 4 0 4 If 4 ' • • - 4 • 4 4 4' 4 4 ' 4 f 0 ' * - . A « * * 4 • • 

• • 4 • 4 # . . *.# 4 4 .1 *4 4 4 1.4 • 4 4 • 4 4 • • 4 4 44 • ^ ^ • • * '4 « * • . • - 4 

1 ' 4 • - 14 •••«, , »4««i'4# «# > « . ** *••• ( . « < 4 . . / «4««444' ^ 


4 0 , 4 0 4.0 A *0 4.4^4 4 4 4%# 4 4v#^t*. 4 4 < ^4 4 « 4'.# ,4 0 0 


V f V» * 4 • 4 4 , 

4* 0 ‘.4,0 4 .4 

0 0 ‘ 4 4 0 • 


9,4.0 4.4 .4 4 4 4 4 ,4 4 4 .0 4* 4 4*4 0 4 * * 4.4 4 4 A 4.0 4 • 0.4 t • 4 - • 

4-0 0 4 L4 * 4t 4 .4*.4* 4 « .4 ‘4 • 4 4 •- 0 ~. 0-4 0 ' * • » 4 4 4- j r • 4.4 « 4 4 4 4 4 4 

f f14'.4 • . « . « 4*4 4 4 4,4 0.0 *4 0~*.s\A' 4 4 a 04.0 4 0 0 44 44 4 4 0 . 4 \ 0 * - * 


• r 0 sA • > 4 4 '-4 4 4 44 <4 44 44 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 #44. 4 4 *00 0 4 4 I # 4 » 44 

•4 4* 4 4 * 4.4 * 4 4 4.4 0 0 0 \ 0,0.0 0 0 00 4 • .... 

0 9 ,4 ,4 yA 4 4.44.1.4 • 4 4 4 4 4 .4 « 4 V 4 • 4 4 4 4 • • 4 4 > 4 ^ * . 4 ¦ Jt V J . 4 Jl 4 4 4 

• •«4««<*«««<##<«|*# 4 ( «• «• • 00m., 4 • • 4 4 • 

«.4 |<4|4 « 4 4.# 4 4 #-4 • 4 * 4 4 . . #> 4 / < 4 4 • 4 0 4 ’ 4 4 • 4 < 4 4 ¦ • # 

0 04*0*40 m •• 0 0 ¦ ¦•¦.««« 4 - 4 ' ^ t 4 * * * - 

• 4 • 4. 4 4 44 0 • 9 9 04 0 0 0 “0* *0 0 0 4 0 00 .00, * A 0 0 0 0 4*0 01 






4\ 4 * 4.4.’ • 0 14 4 4 . 4 \4 • 4 

4,4*4 • 4 4 4 0 4 4 4 4 # 


- • 4 A • \A • * 4 . 4 » , ' 4 ,4 .*.4 < . 4 4,4 4 4.4.4 4 4 • 4 4 - « « .4 4 - - « » 

- 4 *4 0.0.0 4.0 4 *4 4*4 * 4 • 4 • • # ' # « 4 4 » - •»* •*-**^> # *¦ *41 # . • 4 « 

* 0 0 ,4.4 444^.4.4»#.4,4 4 4-4.4 4 « 4.4*4 4 4 4 4 • A . • 00 * 

*0*40»0. *m. 0. 0.4.0^00-' 0.040*0 - 0 * -.*4 m • 

.0 ‘ 0 0 4 4 4 4 0 4 4 % 04 0 * 00 *0»40 0A * -4A-4* 9 0 < • - • - 440 

* 0 0 •4.4,4,0 0.0 4 4,4,4 • • 44« 44444« • m • 0 0 - - 4 * 4- • 4 • * * * 4 

4 •.'*4 0 00 4 0 0- 0 00 0 0 * 4 * *0 .0 0* 000 * 0 - 0 •••*• 0 0 0 * 4 0 

0 0 4 , 0 4 4 4 #* • • * 4 44444040044440040 • 4.4,4. 4 • #.4 44 * « < # 4 

4 -• • 0 4 4 4 4 : • 4 4 • • 4 4 4 * * 4 * 4 ^ ¦ • • 4 4 « * * 4 • .0 4 0 0 0 0 * 4 4 * 

4 4 % ; 4 4.4*4 #;.«[ # 4 ,4-4 4 • 4 4 4 4 4 » 4 •* * 4 4 4 4 4 4,4 4 0 0' 4 • • 4 4 # 4 A * \ 4 

>0.40.44*4 0 4 0 0 f • 4 • * * •. • 4 4 A. 4, 4. #.#,»# 4 - 4 • - • 4 • * :• 4' f 

.• 4 • • ’ 4 f %• « 4 4 4 «: * 4 «4 4 , 4 4 0,0.0 0 0 0 0 • • • * 4 4 * .* * 0 # • • • | 4 

# « # «#’« * « • • ^ 4 • 4 » .4-44 4 0 f * • 4 . *•••*. 4 4 * 4 4 4 

904000*444 *400 0 •** •^000** 00 0 0*4* 00040 0*0 

* * l « • 4 4 • » • * . • 4 %4^ /t -Af4>4 « 4 * * • 0 0 * # * .^ # ;• • * *1-* 4 ,4 4 4 4 4,# 

t******* 44 *,** 4 •»# « 44 *4|<k# •» 0 4 0 *’04 4 00* 0 * 

• A •¦•* 4.4.#4 • « • 4 4 4 ^ 4 « % 4 • 4 4 4*4 4 • 4 4 4 4 4 *44 • 4 f* 4 » • - 

4 44 #4 4 4 *4 4 t'*4>4 44 4 « «4 4 t •'•# # 4 4 *#« 444«4«# 4 • 0 4 

* - • * - * • 1 * f * 4 ^ 4 4 • 0 0 0 • t^t <| • i 4 • A f 4 4 y- 4 **/ * # # 4 0 44.4 A A r 0 • 

4 • # 4 • • • « 4 » «4« 4 # 4 *4 4 4*.f A»44# 4 4 4 *4444 0 * 0 0 - 4 

A t .44, #4. 4 4 t 4 # «.«,! * • • 4 4 * • A 4 ^ * 4 4 * #4 / A * • * 4 / 4 / / € 4 4 0 » * 


0 4 0 0 0 4 • • # 4 #, 4 » 4 • • 4. 4 4 4 « 4 • 4 %* 0 0 0 0 0 

• 44 * « 4 4 5 % • « * * A 4 4 f ) 4 4 4 • * * 4 4^4 0 4 4 4 

00400000,0 4 4 4 < * * 4 , 444 *«l 444 » 4 < 

. . . . . 

,#4 A‘4*## A'j* 4 4 *4* 4 4 • 4 * 4 4 4 

?•A 44 004 0 *4404 0 •*^• 04*0 044 • * - 0.0 

0040000000000. • 4 “ * t * 0 0 * 0 0 0 0 • 0 

• . * .......A.’. . . 


a 4 4 4 / 4 / #..r 44004 

4 0 4 4 0 ^ ^*4 0 00400 0 

... 

• • • 4 4 0 * 0 • 40.4 4 ,4 4 

• - 0 ** 00 * 40 - 04 .* 0 * 

0.4 • .0 A 0 .4 ‘ f f 4 # • • A 4 

A • . 0 . 0 . 4 * A 4 4 » 4 4 0'0 0 0 


.00*-**0 004» ••••*- 04040 40*00 >‘ 00 4 4 ... 4 A * • 

- 4 / 4 44 « # 4 *» ( « 44 0400 * 4 0 0 0 . 4 ~ • A 0*0000040 

0 0* * 0 •«« * * * • • » •' * 0 0 0 * 0 0 * • 0 0 -4*000 4 » • • 0 

.0 ••‘ 00*04*0*400 . 0 • • 4 4 4 4 

• *,0 - 0 * 0 0 0 • • 0 » 0 0 0 * 4 4 . 0 0 ' 0 40 0 0000 0 0 4 

4 4 • 0 * A 0 * 4 4 0 • 4 0 4 0 4 0 • 0 4 • 0 0 0 • 0 • 0 * 4 0 0 4 0 4 4 0 • 

A ‘ *000*4*0** m f* • 0 0 - • 4 * A 4 0 • 0 4 • • 4 • • 0', 40*0* 

• 0 0 * 0 4 * * 4.4 4 « * 000 

0 000*00 00*000*000 -* ^4900*0 0*0004*0 00 

A • * •! i 4 4 4 % 4 *+.+ 4 0 0 4* 4 * 00 0 00 0 04 4 09, §4 00 0 4 4 *' 

0 ~4* f+0 0 0 0 4 0 4 • ’ 0 0 *00000*00 *0*. 0* 004000 

' * ’ • ,4,.* * 4 < • • |.4» 4 4 4 4 4 * 4 *#.A *J / # 4 # I • f *4 4 4 ,0 

• _ 4 ' 4 4 • 0 • 0 0 • 4 • * • 0 4 * 4 A • A 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 * 0 4 0 0 4 0 

^ * • 4444 #.»»# 44444 — 0 0 0 * 0 * 0 0 ' 4 0 * 4 0 0 0 0 0 , 

• . 400 400*9*4. *• • 4 4* • * • 0 4 4 € 0 0 . 4 0 0 4 

4 * ^* * 444 **»» 4 » 44 '*»***«* 4 «*»* 4 # 4 I*#» 444 *# ^ 

¦••••••*. 440 00 • 4 4 4 • 400040444000 • • 4 4 4 4 4 9 

• * 0 • 0 0 0 * 0 •*•**• • m • 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 • 0 0 0 • 0 0 0 • • • 4 


* * ** m 4 9 :* 0* * m * 0 * *' '.*// '//• . <4 ‘/.' 

*. - A # A** #4 A*. * i' ** 0* 4* 0* 0* .* 4* 0* 4* 0' 4* 4* 0* 0* 4* •' 


*4 .004 


0 0 0^0 0 4 




- # A A A *.#.# • 44404040044 0 A44 


0 • A 4 0 0 4.44 0.44 0 