This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/ 








^5~-j 


• . 


v ^ c 


(4 

'•V 

c 

2, 


-- 








LIBRARY 

•H I hi 



University of California. 

fyet 

Aaamm No. £*% 3 3 fy QflM 



I go 
No. 



r v 



(: 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 



AN INQUIRY 



THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTER 



LOGICA L PRO CESSES. 

*£Vb It Aft^ 

or THK 

TJNIVeftSITY 



HENRY LONGUEVILLE MANSEL, B.D. 

WAYNFLETE PB0FE8B0R OF MORAL AND METAPHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY, 

TUTOR AMD LATE FELLOW OF BT. JOHN'S COLLEGE, OXFORD, 

HONORARY LLJ>. OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. 



La Logique n'est qu'un retour de la Psychologic sur elle-m&ne. 

Cousin. 



8ECOND EDITION, CORRECTED AND ENLARGED. 

OXFORD, 

HENRY HAMMANS, HIGH STREET. 

WH1TTAKER AND CO. LONDON. 
1860. 






V 



QctHxr /SJ6. 



yz33 V- 



'Tr*' wt ¦ C<vnd>'. 



BAXTER, TRINTEB, OXFORD. 



u 



PREFACE. 



A # portion of the following pages has already 
appeared in two Articles contributed by the Author 
to the North British Review*. The present Work 
is an attempt to exhibit more fully the relations 
there intimated as existing between Logic and 
Psychology, with some additional matters, which 
could not be included within the limits of a Review. 
The title of the work is not meant to, imply that 
it contains an introduction to Logic, or is designed 
for the use of those unacquainted with its rudi- 
ments. On the contrary, without some previous 
knowledge of the elementary portion of that 
science, the greater part of the present Volume 
will not be intelligible. But it is intended as an 
inquiry into that which in the order of nature is 
prior to Logic ; though in the order of time it is 
of later scientific development, and in the order 
of study should be postponed till after an ac- 
quaintance at least with the elements of logical 

n No. 27. Art. Philosophy of Language. No. 29. Art. Recent 
Extensions of Formal Logic. 

a2 



IV PREFACE. 

science : — an inquiry into a subject which is in- 
dicated by every page of Logic in which mind 
and its operations are mentioned, and which is 
the touchstone by which the whole truth and 
scientific value of Logic must ultimately be 
tested : — an inquiry into the constitution and laws 
of the thinking faculty, such as they are assumed 
by the Logician as the basis of his deductions. 
It may therefore be regarded as an attempt to 
prosecute, in relation to Logic, the inquiry, in- 
stituted by the Prolegomena of Kant in relation 
to Metaphysics; namely, What are the psycho- 
logical conditions under which a scientific system 
is possible ; and what, in conformity to those 
conditions, are the characteristic -features which 
such a system must exhibit? It is not intended 
as a complete treatise, either on Psychology 
alone, or on Logic alone; but as an exposition 
of Psychology in relation to Logic, containing 
such portions of the former as are absolutely 
necessary to the vindication and even to the 
understanding of the latter. 

That something of the kind is not altogether 
unneeded, will be acknowledged by those who are 
acquainted with the literature of the subject. 
During the last and present century, under the 
influence of the Critical Philosophy of Kant, 
Formal Logic, in itself and in its relations to 
Psychology, has been elaborated by numbers of 
eminent writers in Germany, from whose labours 



PREFACE, V 

the English student has, as yet, derived hardly 
any benefit. Misconceptions are still allowed to 
prevail concerning the nature and office of Logic, 
which the slightest acquaintance with the actual 
constitution of human thought and its laws would 
suffice to dissipate for ever. Matters treated of 
by different logicians are alternately expelled from 
and restored to the province of the science, with- 
out the appearance of any thing like a sound 
canon of criticism to determine what is logical 
and what is not. Attack and defence of the 
study have been conducted on grounds equally 
untenable ; and a conception of Logic as it might 
% be were the human mind constituted as it is not, 
is frequently tossed to and fro between contending 
parties, to the exclusion of Logic as it must be 
while the human mind is constituted as it is. 

But if an exposition of Psychology in relation 
to Logic is thus needed for a distinct conception 
of the latter science in itself, it is not less needed 
when we look to the conditions under which 
that science may be most profitably employed 
as a branch of academical study. Few who are 
acquainted with the various logical systems of 
modern times will hesitate to give a decided 
preference over all others to the formal view of 
the science, which from the days of Kant has 
gradually been advancing to perfection. Whether 
we regard the unity and scientific completeness 
of* the system itself, the great names by which 



VI PREFACE. 

it is supported, the valuable works that might 
easily be made available for its communication, 
or the facility with which it might be introduced 
into the existing course of study, in all it pos- 
sesses unquestionable advantages, as the basis of 
logical instruction. But, on the other hand, its 
compass is small, and its contents, though clear 
and definite, are, taken by themselves, too meagre 
to be an adequate substitute for the miscellaneous 
reading which is so often misnamed Logical. To 
supply this defect, two courses are open. The 
study of Formal Logic may be combined either 
with its objective or with its subjective applications. 
We may treat, that is to say, a system of Logic, 
either in connection with some of the various objects 
of thought to which it may in practice be applied, 
or in relation to the thinking mind and to that 
mental philosophy of which it forms a portion. 
The former method has been abundantly tried, and 
has abundantly failed in the trial. A system of 
Logic treated in its objective application has no 
alternative between an impossible universality or 
an arbitrary exclusiveness. By whatever right 
one iota of the matter of thought can claim ad- 
mission into the system, by the same right the 
whole universe of human knowledge is entitled to 
follow. Such a method can only be employed as 
a bad means of collecting desultory information on 
unconnected subjects. As a system, it postulates 
its own failure. 



PREFACE. Vll 

It is in connection, not in confusion, with 
cognate sciences, as a branch of mental philosophy, 
that Logic may and ought to be studied. One of 
the objects of the present work is to shew that 
Logic as a science cannot be rightly understood 
and appreciated, except in relation to Psychology. 
The negTect of this relation has been acknowledged 
as the weak side of the Kantian Philosophy b : its 
recognition has been imperatively demanded by 
the ablest modern writers on the subject. " Selon 
moi," says M. Duval-Jouve, " l'objet de la logique 
n'est pas seulemenf la direction de Intelligence, 
mais encore VHude de Intelligence ; la direction 
aprds Petude; et un traite de logique doit com- 
prendre la description du fait intellectuel, la 
th6orie de ses lois, Pexpos6 des regies qu'il doit 
reconnaitre, soit dans son etat psychologique et de 
pure pensee, soit dans sa manifestation par la 
parole V The propriety of including these psy- 
chological matters in a Treatise on Logic may be 
questioned ; but to the necessity of including them 
in a philosophical course, of which Logic should 
form a portion, the whole history of the science 
bears witness. The alliance established of old 
between Logic and Metaphysics was dissolved by 
the Critical Philosophy of Kant, and cannot be 
restored, except by identifying the two, with Hegel. 
To those who reject this alternative, a blank is 

b See Fries, System der Logik, p. 22. 
c Traits de Logique, Preface, p. viii. 



Vlll PREFACE. 

made in philosophical study, which can only be 
adequately supplied by a well-connected course of 
Mental Science, embracing, as its constituent por- 
tions, the three cognate subjects of Logic, Ethics, 
and Psychology. 

To Ethics, as well as to Logic, Psychology is an 
indispensable supplement. The science <5f man as 
he ought to be must be based on that, of man as 
he is. In Moral Philosophy, as in Logic, questions 
of a psychological character meet us at every stage 
of our course; and the value of every ethical 
system must ultimately be tested on psychological 
grounds. Perhaps it is not too much to say, 
that half the ethical systems which have been at 
different times in vogue, have started from a psy- 
chological assumption, which, consistently carried 
out, would make Ethical Philosophy impossible. 

Mqy it be allowed to suggest a still higher 
application of the same criterion? In the very 
conception of Revealed Religion, as a commu- 
nication from an Infinite to a finite Intelligence, 
is implied the existence of certain ideas of a purely 
negative character, the purpose of which is not 
speculative but regulative truth ; which are de- 
signed, not to satisfy our reason, but to guide our 
practice. These, from their very nature, are beyond 
the criticism of reason. But in order to discri- 
minate accurately between the provinces of reason 
and faith, to determine what we may and what we 
may not seek to comprehend as a speculative 



PREFACE. IX 

truth, an examination of the limits of man's mental 
powers is indispensable. The ground of many a 
controversy might be considerably narrowed, were 
we to inquire at the outset what are the mental 
powers that can be brought to the solution of the 
question, and how are they related to the data on 
which they must operate. Fichte made his earliest 
attempt, as a disciple of the Kantian philosophy, 
by an Essay towards a Critique of every Revelation. 
The positive portion of his principles of criticism 
(for many of them have a negative character only) 
might be better applied to a Critique of every 
Critique of Revelation : — an inquiry, that is to 
say, what portion of the contents of Revelation, 
as addressed to human minds, can be wrought by 
human interpretation into the form of speculative 
dogmas. 

" La psychologie," says M. Cousin, " n'est as- 
surement pas toute la philosophie, mais elle en est 
le fondement." If there be any truth in this saying 
of one of the highest philosophical authorities of 
our own or of any age, it will follow of necessity 
that a course of instruction in this fundamental 
branch must be an integral and indispensable 
portion of any system of philosophical teaching. 

The psychological criticisms of the present work 
are mainly limited to logical questions, and are 
designed to throw some light on matters which, 
almost from the commencement of my logical 
studies, have appeared to me to stand in especial 



X PREFACE. 

need of elucidation. Much of what has been 
acquired from foreign sources, with much labour 
and little guidance in the search, might have been 
learned in an easier and more direct manner, had 
the course which I have ventured to recommend 
been adopted in relation to my own early studies. 
The numerous obligations which the work is under 
to previous writers are most of them acknow- 
ledged as they occur. One or two, however, 
demand an express mention here. The reader 
who is familiar with Kant's writings will probably 
discern obligations to the Critical Philosophy in 
almost every page; even where the language of 
Kant has been departed from, and the difference 
in detail is such as would not justify a direct refer- 
ence to his works. The method and material for 
thinking derived from the study of the Kantian 
philosophy is in many respects far more valuable 
than the direct information communicated. This 
is especially the case with a student who views 
that philosophy from the psychological rather 
than the metaphysical side, in its relation to 
Hume and Locke rather than to Wolf and Leib- 
nitz, and who endeavours to combine the materials 
thence obtained with the most valuable results of 
the Scottish philosophy, which owes its rise, like 
the Kantian, to the scepticism of Hume. 

To two other eminent philosophers a similar 
acknowledgment is due. The German side of 
M. Cousin's Eclecticism approaches, in aim at 



PREFACE. XI 

least, if not in method, nearer to the philosophy 
of Schelling and Hegel, than to that of Kant. 
It is natural, therefore, that his view of the limits 
of human thought, and consequently of the pro- 
vince of Logic and of its relation to Psychology, 
should contain much which cannot be directly 
transferred to the pages of a work which advocates 
a strictly formal view of Logic, and which would 
rather contract than enlarge the limits assigned by 
Kant to the Understanding and the Reason. But 
the writings of M. Cousin are indispensable to all 
who would gain a true estimate of the importance 
of Psychology and its position in a philosophical 
course ; and the benefits which I am conscious of 
having derived from their study are far more than 
can be adequately expressed by a direct acknow- 
ledgment of passages borrowed from them. From 
the author's view of the office of Logic I have 
departed widely ; which makes it the more neces- 
sary to confess the numberless advantages derived 
from his writings, in relation to almost every point 
treated of in the following pages. 
% In many points in which I have departed from 
the doctrines of the great Eclectic, I am much 
indebted to the writings of his illustrious critic, 
Sir William Hamilton. The same acknowledg- 
ment may indeed be made in relation to nearly 
the whole contents of the present volume, partly 
by way of direct obligation, and still more by way 
of hints and suggestions of questions to be solved 



XII PREFACE. 

and the method of their solution. I cannot indeed 
claim the sanction of this eminent authority for 
any statement which is here advanced, except 
where direct reference is made to his writings; 
yet probably, even where I have differed from 
him in opinion, there is much that would never 
have been written at all, but for the valuable aid 
furnished by him. To say that I have occasionally 
ventured to dissent from the positions of each and 
all of the philosophers to whom I am so much 
indebted, is only to say that I have endeavoured 
to study their works in the spirit in which they 
themselves would wish to be studied ; with the 
respect and gratitude of a disciple, but, it is hoped, 
without the servility of a copyist. 

For the phraseology which I have occasionally 
been compelled to employ in the course of the 
following remarks, no apology will be required 
by those acquainted with the history of mental 
science. In no branch of study is it so necessary 
to observe the Aristotelian precept, ovofiaroTrouiv 
<ra(p7]v€Las €P€K€v. Nine tenths of the confusion 
and controversy that have existed in this departs 
ment are owing to that unwillingness to innovate 
in matters of language, which leads to the employ- 
ment of the same term in various shades of 
meaning and with reference to various phenomena 
of consciousness. In this respect, philosophy is 
under deep obligations to the purism of German 
writers, which has enabled subsequent thinkers to 



PREFACE. X1U 



examine the most important problems of Psycho- 
logy apart from the old associations of language. 
A new phraseology may occasion some little dif- 
ficulty at the outset of a work ; but to adhere to 
an inadequate vocabulary, merely because its ex- 
pressions are established, is to involve the whole 
of the subject in hopeless confusion and obscurity. 
In this respect, however, I trust I shall not be 
found to have departed from authorized language 
in a greater degree than is absolutely necessary 
for the purpose of communicating to English 
readers some of the most valuable results of 
German thought, and of carrying into effect the 
main design of the present Essay, — that of testing 
the received processes of Logic, by reference to 
the facts of human consciousness. 



CONTENTS. 



Page 

Chap. I. On Thought, as distinguished from other 

facts of Consciousness. . . . . 1 

Chap. II. On the three Operations of Thought. . 57 

Chap. III. On Law, as related to Thought and other 

objects. 78 

Chap. IV. On the Psychological character of Mathe- 
matical Necessity. 99 

Chap. V. On the Psychological character of Meta- 
physical Necessity. 126 

Chap. VI. On Logical Necessity and the Laws of 

Thought , . . 181 

Chap. VII. On the Matter and Form of Thought. 243 

Chap. VIII. On Positive and Negative Thought. . 266 

Chap. IX. On Logic, as related to other Mental 

Sciences. . 278 

Appendtx. 309 



<7,*j-v 



ITPr 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 



CHAPTER I. 

ON THOUGHT, AS DISTINGUISHED FROM OTHER FACTS OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 

Without entering into the countless disputes 
which have taken place concerning the nature and 
definition of Logic*, it is sufficient to observe that 
it will be treated in the following pages, in accord- 
ance principally with the views of Kant, as the 
Science of the Laws of Formal Thinking , In the 
wide sense, indeed, in which the term is used by 
Archbishop Whately, it may be admitted that 
Logic, as furnishing rules to secure the mind from 
error in its deductions, is also an Art, or, to speak 
more correctly, a Practical Science \ Still, it may 

* For a summary of various opinions on this question, 
see Zabarella, de Natura Logic®, lib. i. Smiglecii Logica, 
Disp. ii. Qu. v. Burgersdicii Inst. Log. lib. i. cap. 1. and 
Sir W. Hamilton, Edinburgh Bevietc, No. 116, p. 203. 

b For the distinction between these terms, see Wolf, Phil. 
Bat. Proleg. §. 10. " Omnis Logica utens est habitus, qui 
proprio exercitio com para tur, minime autem discendo acqui- 
rilur, adeoque et ipsa doceri nequit. Quamobrem, cum 
Logica omnis vel sit docens vel utens, neque enim prater 

B 



2 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

be questioned whether the practical service thus 
performed by Logic can with propriety be allowed 
to influence its definition. The benefits performed 
by Logic as a medicine of the mind, however highly 
we may be disposed to rate them, are accidental 
only, and arise from causes external to the Science 
itself: its speculative character, as an inquiry into 
the laws of thought, is internal and essential. To 
the twofold character of Logic two conditions are 
necessary. Firstly, that there exist certain mental 
laws to which every sound thinker is bound to 
conform. Secondly, that it is possible to trans- 
gress those laws, or to think unsoundly. On the 
former of these conditions depends the possi- 
bility of Logic as a speculative Science : on the 
latter, its possibility as a practical Science or Art. 
Now, if we look at these two conditions with refer- 
ence to the actual contents of pure Logic, it is 
manifest that the abrogation of the first would 
utterly annihilate the whole Science ; whereas the 
abrogation of the second would at most only neces- 
sitate the removal of a few excrescences, leaving 
the main body of Logical doctrine substantially as 
it is at present. Suppose, for example, that the 
difference between sound and unsound reasoning 

regularum notitiam atque habitum eas ad praxin transference 
tertium concipi potest ; sola Logica artificialis docens ea est, 
quae ddceri adeoque in numerum disciplinarum philosophica- 
rum referri potest Atque ideo quoque Logicam dofinivimus 
per scientiara, minirae autem per artem vel habitum in gen ere, 
quod genus convenit Logicne utenti." 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 6 

could be discerned in individual cases as a matter 
of fact, but .that we had no power of classifying 
the several instances of each and referring them 
to certain common principles. It is clear that, 
under such a supposition, the present contents of 
Logic, speculative and practical, could have no 
existence. The number of sound and unsound 
thinkers in the world might remain much as it is 
now, but the impossibility of investigating the prin- 
ciples of the one and applying them to the correc- 
tion of the other would make an Art or Science 
of Logic unattainable. But let us imagine, on the 
other hand, a race of intelligent beings, subject to 
the same laws of thought as mankind, but inca- 
pable of transgressing them in practice. The 
elements of existing Logic, the Concept, the Judg- 
ment, the Syllogism, would remain unaltered. The 
Science of Logic would investigate the laws of 
unerring Reason, as the Science of Astronomy 
investigates the unvarying laws of the heavenly 
phenomena ; but an Art of Logic, to preserve the 
mind from error, would be as absurd as an Art of 
Astronomy proposing to control and regulate the . 
planets in their courses. From these consider- 
ations it follows that, even granting Logic to be, 
under existing circumstances, both Science and 
Art, yet the former is an essential, the latter an 
accidental feature; the one is necessarily inter- 
woven with the elements of the system, the other 
a contingent result of the infirmities of those who 

b2 



4 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

possess it. In this respect, pure Logic may not 
unfairly be compared to Mechanics treated as a 
branch of Mathematics. As Sciences, both proceed 
deductively from assumptions more or less incon- 
sistent with the actual state of things. As Arts, 
neither can be put in practice without making 
allowance for contingencies neglected in the scien- 
tific theory. The assumed logical perfection of 
thought bears about the same relation to the 
ordinary state of the human mind as the assump- 
tion of perfectly rigid levers and perfectly flexible 
cords bears to the actual condition of those instru- 
ments in practice. But, on the other hand, the 
possibility of making such allowances implies that 
the difference between practice and theory is one 
of degree only, and not of kind. The instrument 
as used may not be identical with the instrument 
as contemplated, but it must be supposed capable 
of approximation to it. A Science of the Laws of 
Thought is only valuable in so far as its laws are 
acknowledged to be those to which actual thinking 
ought, as far as possible, to conform, and which, 
if fully complied with, would represent only the 
better performance of existing obligations, not the 
imposition of new ones. The same may be said 
of Ethical Philosophy likewise. In describing the 
perfection of moral and intellectual virtue, we 
describe a standard to which, in the existing state 
of human nature, no man does or can attain ; but 
the whole value of the portrait is derived from its 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 5 

being a more or less accurate representation of 
man as he ought to be, not the imaginary sketch 
of a being of a totally distinct kind . 

In order therefore to the right appreciation of 
any given system of Logic, it becomes necessary to 
ask, what is the actual nature of Thought as an 
operation, to what laws is it subject, and to what 
extent are they efficient ? This inquiry does not, 
strictly speaking, fall within the province of Logic 
itself. No Science is competent to criticise its 
own principles. That there is such an operation 
as thinking and certain laws to which it is bound 
to conform, the Logician does not question, but 
assumes. Whether there are other mental ope- 
rations besides thinking, and whether these must 
act in combination with Thought for the attain- 
ment of any special class of truths ; — these and 
such like questions it is beyond his province to 
investigate. His own branch of inquiry is twofold, 
partly constructive, and partly critical. In the 
former capacity, he inquires, what are the several 
forms, legitimate or illegitimate, which Thought as 
a product will assume, according as the act of 
thinking is or is not conducted in conformity to 



d '• Beide, Logik und Ethik, haben Vorschriften aufzustell**, 
nach welchen sich, hier das Denken, dort das Handeln richten 
soil, obgleich es sich eins wie das andere, aus psychologischen 
Griinden gar oft in der Wirklichkeit nicht darnach richtet, 
und nicht darnach richten kann." Herbart. Pgycholoyie ah 
Wissenschqft, Th. ii. §.119. 



O PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

its given laws. In the latter capacity, he sifts 
and examines the special products of this or that 
thinker, and pronounces them, according to the 
features which they exhibit, to be legitimately 
produced or otherwise d . 

Beyond the boundaries of pure Logic there is 
thus another and important field of inquiry. Is 
the mind capable of other operations besides those 
of Thought, and are there other kinds of mental 
rectitude besides that which results from the con- 
formity of Thought to its own laws? Do the 
several mental faculties act in the pursuit of truth 
conjointly or separately? Does each process 
guarantee the complete attainment of a limited 
class of truths, or the attainment of a single 
element which becomes truth only in combina- 
tion ? Do the Laws of Thought, as assumed by 
Logic, exhibit those features which, from the 
general constitution of the human mind and the 
peculiar character of the thinking faculty, they 
might be expected to exhibit? In relation to 
these and similar questions, Logic is subordinate 
to Psychology, 

To Psychology we must look for the explanation 
and justification of the peculiar features of Logic. 
Logic, says one antagonist, furnishes no criterion 
of material truth and falsehood. It may be that, 
from the constitution of the human mind, such a 

d See Clauberg, Logica, Proleg. §• viii. Drobisch, Neue 
Darstellung der Logik, §. 9. Fries System der Logik, §• 1. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 7 

criterion is impossible. Its principles, says another, 
are mere frivolous tautologies. It may be that 
this very tautology has a psychological significance, 
that it is the necessary consequence of a mind 
gazing upon its own laws. It is barren in the 
production of positive science. It may be that 
Thought alone was never designed by man's Maker 
to be otherwise. As an instrument, it has at- 
tempted much and accomplished little. The fault 
may lie, not in the tool, but in the workman. 
Before we condemn Logic for what it does not 
perform, or despise it for what it does, it may be 
as well to ask, what we may learn elsewhere of the 
nature of the thinking faculty, and what it may 
reasonably be expected to accomplish. 

In order, therefore, to determine accurately 
the province and capabilities of Logic, it will be 
necessary to examine the psychological distinction 
between Thought, properly so called, and other 
phenomena of mind. This being ascertained, there 
will remain the inquiry, in what manner our con- 
sciousness itself and the several objects submitted 
to it may be regarded as subject to law, what 
are the different classes of laws, whether of the 
subject or of the object, the characteristic features 
of each, their mode of determining the several 
operations subject to them, and the consequent 
character of the respective products. 

Every state of consciousness necessarily implies 
two elements at least ; a conscious subject, and an 



8 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

object of which he is conscious. In every exercise, 
for example, of the senses, we may distinguish the 
object seen, heard, smelt, touched, tasted, from 
the subject, seeing, hearing, smelling, touching, 
tasting. In every emotion of pleasure or of pain, 
there is a certain affection, agreeable or dis- 
agreeable, existing within me, and of this affection 
I am conscious. In every act of volition, there 
takes place a certain exercise of my will, and I am 
conscious that it takes place. In this point of 
view, it is not necessary to enter on the often 
disputed question, whether such states of conscious- 
ness furnish immediate evidence of the existence 
of a world external to ourselves. That of which 
I am directly conscious may be an object nu- 
merically distinct from myself, or it may be a 
modification of ray own mind. All that need be 
insisted upon here is, that there is present an 
individual object, whether thing, act, or state of 
mind, and that we are conscious of such an object 
as existing within or without ourselves. A psycho- 
logical dualism is implied in the very notion of 
consciousness: whether this necessarily involves 
an ontological dualism, it is beyond our present 
purpose to inquire 6 . 

9 This point has been already argued fully and satisfactorily 
by the great modern advocate of Natural Dualism, Sir William 
Hamilton. The reader is referred to his edition of Reid's 
works, especially to his notes B and G, for a masterly dis- 
sertation on this important question. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. JJ 

But to constitute an act of Thought, more is 
required than the immediate relation of subject to 
object in consciousness. Every one of the above 
states might exist in a mind totally incapable of 
thought. Let us suppose, for example, a being, 
in whose mind every successive state of conscious- 
ness was forgotten as soon as it had taken place. 
Every individual object might be presented to him 
precisely as it is to us. Animals, men, trees, and 
stones, might be successively placed before his 
eyes; pleasure, and pain, and anger, and fear, 
might alternate within him; but, as each departed, 
he would retain no knowledge that it had ever 
existed, and consequently no power of comparison 
with similar or dissimilar objects of an earlier or 
later consciousness. He would have no know- 
ledge of such objects as referred to separate notions; 
he could not say, this which 1 see is a man, or a 
horse; this which I feel is fear, or anger. He 
would be deficient in the distinctive feature of 
Thought, the concept or general notion resulting 
from the comparison of objects. Hence arises 
the important distinction between Intuitions 1 , in 
which the object is immediately related to the 

r Here, and throughout the following pages, the word 
Intuition is used in the extent of the German Anschauuny, to 
include all the products of the perceptive (external or internal) 
and imaginative faculties; every act of consciousness, in short, 
of which the immediate object is an individual, thing, act, or 
state of mind, presented under the condition of distinct exist- 
ence in space or time. 



10 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

conscious mind, and Thoughts, in which the object 
is mediately related through a concept* gained by 
i comparison. The former contains two elements 
only, the subject and the object standing in 
present relation to each other. The latter con- 
tains three elements, the thinking subject, the 
object about which he thinks, and the concept 
mediating between the two\ Thus even the 
exercise of the senses upon present objects, in 
the manner in which it is ordinarily performed by 
a man of mature faculties, does not consist of 
mere intuition, but is accompanied by an act of 
thought. In mere intuition, all that is simul- 
taneously presented to the sense appears as one 
whole; but mere intuition does not distinguish 

* The revival of this term, unfortunately, till very recently, 
suffered to grow obsolete in philosophy, will need no apology 
with those who are acquainted with the writings of Sir W. 
Hamilton. It is absolutely necessary to distinguish in lan- 
guage between the act of thought and its product, a distinction 
expressed in Greek by v6rjais and v6r\pa, and in the following 
remarks by conception and concept. The latter term has been 
folly sanctioned by the usage of French philosophers, as well 
as of the eminent writer above mentioned. 

h " In apprehending an individual thing, either itself through 
sense or its representation in the phantasy, we have, in a 
certain sort, an absolute or irrespective cognition, which is 
justly denominated immediate, by contrast to the more relative 
and mediate knowledge which, subsequently, we compass of 
the same object, when, by a comparative act of the under- 
standing, we refer it to a class, that is, think or recognise it, 
by relation to other things, under a certain notion or general 
term." Sir W. Hamilton, lleid's Works, p. 804. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 11 

its several parts from each other under this or that 
notion. I may see at once, in a single panorama, 
a ship upon the sea, an island lying behind it, 
and the sky above it. To mere intuition this is 
presented only in confusion, as a single object. 
To distinguish its constituent portions, as sea 
and land, ship and sky, requires a comparison 
and classification of them relatively to so many 
separate concepts existing in the mind ; and such 
classification is an act of Thought 1 . 

In every act of Consciousness the ultimate 
object is an individual. But in intuition this 
object is presented to the mind directly, and does 
not imply the existence, past or present, of any 
thing but itself and the mind to which it is pre- 
sented. In thought, on the other hand, the indi- 
vidual is represented by means of a concept, which 
contains certain attributes applicable to other indi- 
viduals of the same kind J . This implies that there 
have been presented to the mind prior objects of 
intuition, originating the concept or general notion 

1 Hoff bauer, Logik, §. 1 0. 

J The terms represent, representation, &c. are, here and 
throughout the present work, used in a wider sense than 
that to which they are confined by Sir W. Hamilton. With 
that philosopher, the representative ' faculty is synonymous 
with the imagination proper, and the above terms are used 
exclusively with reference to individual objects. See Raid's 
Works, p. 805, 809. Discussions, p. 18. In the following pages 
the term representation and its cognates are extended so as 
to include the concept, which is representative of many indi- 
viduals, as well as the image, which is representative of one. 



12 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

to which subsequent objects are referred* Hence 
arises another important distinction. All intuition 
is direct and presentative ; all thought is indirect 
and representative. 

This distinction necessitates a further remark 
on the characteristic feature of thought, as com- 
pared with one special class of intuitions. That 
sensitive perception takes place through the me- 
dium of a representative idea, is a hypothesis 
which was made more than questionable by the 
philosophy of Reid, and may be regarded as com- 
pletely overthrown by the recent labours of his 
illustrious editor, Sir William Hamilton. But 
there still remains the faculty of Imagination, 
whose office is the production of images repre- 
sentative of the several phenomena of Perception k , 

k The term Perception requires a few words in explanation. 
In modern philosophy, from Descartes to Reid, this term 
was used widely, as coextensive with Apprehension or Con- 
sciousness in general, with some minor modifications, for an 
account of which the reader is referred to Sir W. Hamilton's 
Reid, p. 87ft. By Reid and his followers it was used for 
the consciousness of an external object presented to the 
mind . through the organs of sense, as distinguished from 
Sensation, the consciousness of an affection of the subject 
through the same organs. In this sense they are clearly 
distinguished by M. Royer Coliard, Jouffroy's Reid, iii. p. 329. 
" 11 y a dans l'operation du toucher sensation et perception 
tout ensemble : changement d etat ou modification interieure, 
c'est la sensation ; connaissance d'un objet exterieur, c'est la 
perception." Cf. Reid, Inteli. Powers, Essay i. ch. i. Stewart, 
Outlines of Moral Philosophy, §. 15. According to M. Royer 
Coliard, the senses of smell, hearing, and taste, give rise to 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 13 

internal as well as external. In relation to this 
faculty, the criterion above given as characteristic 
of Thought requires a few words of explanation. 

Imagination, regarded as a product, may be 
defined, the consciousness of an image in the 
mind resembling and representing an object of 

sensations only ; touch is in every case an union of sensation 
and perception ; while sight holds an intermediate and doubtful 
position, as informing us of the existence of extension, but 
only in two dimensions of space. Sir W. Hamilton, on the 
other hand, holds that the general consciousness of the 
locality of a sensorial affection ought to be regarded as a 
Perception proper ; and, in accordance with this view, he has 
announced the important law, that Sensation and Perception, 
though always coexistent, are, as regards their intensity, 
always in an inverse ratio to each other. Some recent French 
philosophers, influenced by the union of physiological with 
psychological researches, have employed the term Perception 
in another sense, to denote Sensation with Consciousness, 
Sensation being extended to those affections of the nervous 
organism of which we are not conscious. This occurs in the 
writings of Maine de Biran, and appears to have misled 
M. Ravaisson into imagining that that philosopher had anti- 
cipated the above-mentioned law of Sir W. Hamilton. The 
passage alluded to is apparently one in the Essai sur la de- 
composition de la Pensee, p. 116. but the resemblance is 
merely verbal. A nearer anticipation may perhaps be found 
in Kant, Anthropologic, §. 20. 

In the text, Perception is employed to denote all those 
states of Consciousness which are presentative only, not 
representative. It will thus include all intuitions except 
those of Imagination, and may be divided into external or 
sensitive, and internal ; the former corresponding to the Per- 
ception of Eeid. This use of the term, allowance being made 
for a different theory of external Perception, accords with 
that of Kant. 



14 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

intuition 1 . It is thus at the same time preventative 
and representative. It is presentative of the image, 
which has its own distinct existence in conscious- 
ness, irrespective of its relation to the object which 
it is supposed to represent. It is representative of 
the object which that image resembles ; and such 
resemblance is only possible on the condition that 
the image be, like the object, individual. If we 
try to form in our minds the image of a triangle, 
it must be of some individual figure, equilateral, 
isosceles, or scalene. It is impossible that it should 
be at the same time all of these, or none. It may 
bear more or less resemblance to the object which 
it represents ; but it can attain resemblance at all 

1 This is the ordinary psychological sense of Imagination ; 
however variously the term may have been employed in 
reference to poetry, and generally to the philosophy of taste. 
It corresponds with the definition given by Descartes, 
(Meditatio Secunda,) " imaginari nihil aliud est quam rei corporea 
figuram sen imaginem contemplari ;" except that the latter is 
incorrectly limited to the reproduction of objects of sight 
only. The beautiful lines of Shelley furnish an exact de- 
scription of imagination relatively to two other senses : 
" Music, when soft voices die, 

Vibrates in the memory ; 

Odours, when sweet violets sicken, 

Live within the sense they quicken." 
But the operation of the imaginative faculty must not be 
confined even to the general field of sensations. The im- 
portant question, How many presentative faculties has man ? 
will be referred to again. The province of imagination will 
be determined by the answer to this question, as every 
original presentation may be represented in a phantasm. 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 15 

only by being, like the object itself, individual. 
I may recall to mind, with more or less vividness, 
the features of an absent friend, as I may paint 
his portrait with more or less accuracy; but the 
likeness in neither case ceases to be the individual 
representation of an individual man. But my 
notion of Man in general can attain universality 
only by surrendering resemblance. It becomes 
the indifferent representative of all mankind only 
in so far as it has no special likeness to any 
one. It is thus not the adequate and actual 
representative of any single object, but an in- 
adequate and potential representative of many : 
that is, it may in different acts of thought be 
employed in relation to distinct, and in some 
respects dissimilar, individuals of the same class. 
From this neglect of individual characteristics n 
arises the first distinguishing feature of a concept ; 
viz. that it cannot in itself be depicted to sense or 
imagination™. It is not the sensible image of 
one object, but an intelligible relation between j 
many. 

A second important characteristic of all con- 
cepts is, that they require to be fixed in a repre- 
sentative sign. This characteristic cannot indeed be 
determined a priori, from the mere notion of the 
concept as universal, but it may be proved to a 
moral certainty a posteriori, by the inability of 

- Cf. Hamilton on Reid, p. 360. 



16 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

which in practice every man is conscious, of ad- 
vancing, without the aid of symbols, beyond the 
individual objects of sense or imagination. In the 
presence of several individuals of the same species, 
the eye may observe points of similarity between 
them ; and in this no symbol is needed ; but every 
feature thus observed is the distinct attribute of a 
distinct individual, and, however similar, cannot be 
regarded as identical. For example : I see lying 
on the table before me a number of shillings of 
the same coinage. Examined severally, the image 
and superscription of each is undistinguishable from 
that of its fellow ; but, in viewing them side by 
side, space is a necessary condition of my percep- 
tion ; and the difference of locality is sufficient to 
make them distinct, though similar, individuals n . 
The same is the case with any representative 
image, whether in a mirror, in a painting, or in the 
imagination, waking or dreaming. It can only be 
depicted as occupying a certain place ; and thus 
as an individual and the representative of an indi- 
vidual. It is true that I cannot say that it repre- 
sents this particular coin rather than that; and 
consequently it may be considered as the repre- 
sentative of all, successively but not simultaneously. 
To find a representative which shall embrace all 
at once, I must divest it of the condition of occu- 

a i On this ground Kant refutes Leibnitz's principle of the 
identity of indiscernibles, a principle applicable to concepts, but 
not to objects of intuition. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 17 

pying space ; and this, experience assures us, can 
only be done by means of symbols, verbal or other, 
by which the concept is fixed in the understand- 
ing. Such, for example, is a verbal description of 
the coin in question, which contains a collection 
of attributes freed from the condition of locality, 
and hence from all resemblance to an object of 
sense. If we substitute Time for Space, the same 
remarks will be equally applicable to the objects of 
our internal consciousness. Every appetite and 
desire, every affection and volition, as presented, is 
an individual state of consciousness, distinguished 
from every other by its relation to a different 
period of time. States in other respects exactly 
similar may succeed one another at regular inter- 
vals; but the hunger which I feel to-day is an 
individual feeling, as numerically distinct from that 
which I felt yesterday or that which I shall feel 
to-morrow, as a shilling lying in my pocket is fr§m 
a similar shilling lying at the bank. Whereas my 
notion of hunger, or fear, or volition, is a general 
concept, having no relation to one period of time 
rather than to auother, and, as such, requires, like 
other concepts, a representative sign. 

Language, taking the word in its widest sense, 
is thus indispensable, not merely to the commu- 
nication, but to the formation of Thought. This 
doctrine is not unfrequently estimated as the cor- 

Compare Herbart, Psyckologie ah Wissenschaft, §. 120. 
Werke, vi. p. 168. 

C 



18 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA, 

relative or consequent of that which derives all 
knowledge from sensation ; an estimate apparently 
warranted by the association of the two theories 
in the philosophy of Condillac. But it would not 
be difficult to shew that the ultra-sensational 
philosophy is that which could most easily dis- 
pense with the necessity of introducing language 
at all. Ideas, says Condillac, are but transformed 
sensations; and his cHsciple, Destutt de Tracy, 
has carried the doctrine to its fullest development 
in the aphorism penser c'e*l sentir. But who ima- 
gines language to be essential to sensation? Or 
who does not see that the introduction of such 
an instrument for the purpose of transforming 
our sensations implies the existence of a mental 
power which mere sensation can never confer? 
It is only onythe supposition that the concept is 
something instinct from and unlike all the pro- 
ducts of the senses, that the representative symbol 
becomes necessary. Sensation, imagination, and 
memory, so far as the latter is distinct from 
thought 9 , may dispense with its assistance. As 
for the crowning extravagance of Home Tooke, 
who tells us that what are called operations of 

p So far, namely, as it corresponds to the /*"»?/"?» not to ^ e 
foafunjo'is of Aristotle. The neglect of this distinction led 
Condillac to deny that brutes have any memory, since they 
are destitute of language. Aristotle, with more accuracy, 
allows that memory is common to men and brutes, but 
reminiscence peculiar to the former. See De Memoria, ch. 8. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 19 

mind are merely operations of language, we have 
only to ask, what makes language operate? It 
might as reasonably be maintained that a coat is 
not the work of the tailor, but merely of his 
needle. But it is the perpetual error of the sensa- 
tional school to confound the indispensable con- 
dition of a thing with the thing itself. Thought 
is not sensation, though the exercise of the senses 
is a necessary preliminary to that of the under- 
standing. Science is not a well-constructed lan- 
guage, as the skill of the painter is not identical 
with the goodness of his brushes and colours ; yet 
we must acknowledge that the power of the artist 
could neither have been acquired nor exhibited, 
had these necessary implements been withheld. 

The above view of the relation of thought to 
language is sometimes met by the following 
dilemma. " Language, you say, is essential to 
thought; yet language itself, if not of divine 
origin, must have been thought out by man. 
You must, therefore, be prepared to defend in its 
utmost rigour the hypothesis of a supernatural 
origin of speech; or you must allow that its 
inventor, at least, was a man capable of thinking 
without its aid q ." To solve this dilemma, we need 

* See Rousseau, Discours sur V origins de Vinegalite 
parmi les homines. Premiere Partie. " Franchissons pour 
un moment l'espace immense qui dut se trouver entre le 
pur etat de nature et le besoin des langues ; et cherchons, 
en les supposant necessaires, comment elles purent com- 

c2 



20 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

not call in aid the curious hypothesis of Condillac, 
who held that the dependence of thought on 
sensation (and by implication on language) was a 
consequence of the fall of Adam : we need only 
observe what actually takes place in the formation 
of language and thought among ourselves. To 
the child learning to speak, words are not the 
signs of thoughts, but of intuitions; the words 
man and horse do not represent a collection of 
attributes, but are only the name of the individual 
now before him. It is not until the name has 
been successively appropriated to various indi- 
viduals, that reflection begins to inquire into the 
common features of the class'. Language there- 
fore, as taught to the infant, is chronologically 
prior to thought and posterior to sensation. In 
inquiring how far the same process can account 
for the invention of language, which now takes 
place in the learning it, the real question at issue 
is simply this : Is the act of giving names to indi- 
vidual objects of sense a thing so completely beyond 
the power of a man created in the full maturity 
of his faculties, that we must suppose a divine 
Instructor performing precisely the same office as 

mencer a s'etablir. Nouvelle difficulty pire encore que la 
precedente: car si les hommes ont eu besoin de la parole 
pour apprendre a pehser, ils ont eu bien plus besoin encore 
de savoir penser pour trouver Tart de la parole." 

T See Adam Smith's Considerations concerning the first 
formation of Languages, appended to his Theory of Moral 
Sentiments. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 21 

is now performed for the infant by his mother or 
his nurse ; teaching him, that is, to associate this 
sound with this sight? This question may be 
answered affirmatively or negatively, but in either 
case it has nothing whatever to do with the re- 
lation of language to thought, properly so called'. 
In relation to this question, the reader must be 
careful not to confuse Language with Articulations. 

* On this subject, the following remarks of Maine de Biran 
are well worthy of attention. " Pour que ces premiers 
signes donnes deviennent quelque chose pour l'individu qui 
s'en sert, il faut qu'il les institue lui-m£me une seconde fois 
par son activite propre.-ou qu'il y attache un sens. Ceux qui 
pensent que lliomme n'eut pu jamais inventer le laugage, si 
Dieu meme ne le lui eut donne ou revele, ne me semblent 
pas bien entendre la question de Tinstitution du langage : ils 
confondent sans cesse le fond avec les formes. Suppose que 
Dieu eut donne a lliomme une langue toute faite ou un 
system e parfait de signes articules ou ecrits propres a ex- 
primer toutes ses idees ; il s'agissait toujours pour lliomme, 
d'attribuer a chaque signe sa valeur ou son sens propre, 
c'est-a-dire d'instituer veritablement ce signe avec une in- 
tention et dans un but concu par 1 etre intelligent, de meme 
que Tenfant in3titue les premiers signes quand il transforme 
les cris qui lui sont donnes par la nature en veritables signes 
de reclame. 

La difficult du probleme psychologique, qui consiste a 
determiner les facultes qui ont du concourir a institution du 
premier langage, subsiste done la meme, soit que les signes 
qui sont la forme et comme le materiel de ce langage aient 
ete donnes ou reveles par la supreme intelligence, soit qu'ils 
aient ete inventes par lliomme ou suggeres par les idees ou 
les sentimens dont ils sont Texpression." Nouvelles Const- 
derations sur les rapports du physique et du moral de Vhomme, 
p. 93. 



22 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

The case of the deaf and dumb, so often quoted as 
an instance of thought without language, is in this 
respect utterly irrelevant. The education of these 
persons consists in the substitution of a system of 
signs addressed to the eye or the hand in the place 
of one addressed to the ear. This system performs 
precisely the same office in relation to them that 
speech performs in the ordinary mental develop- 
ment of children : it constitutes, in fact, their 
language. They are thus in no respect an excep- 
tional case ; and the whole question has to be con- 
sidered on general not on special date. I cannot 
perceive any other man's thoughts as they pass in 
his mind : I can only infer their existence from 
perceptible signs ; and this presupposes an esta- 
blished system of communication. The only valid 
method of investigating the relation between 
thought and speech is to examine the only in- 
stances in which both elements are presented, the 
operations of my own consciousness. Accepting 
* what is there given in combination, I must en- 
deavour by analysis to ascertain how much of the 
compound phenomenon is necessary, and how 
much accidental. 

The concept, as thus described, is the charac- 
teristic feature of Thought proper, as distinguished 
from other facts of consciousness : and the think- 
ing process may be adequately defined as the act 
of knowing or judging of things by means of concepts 1 . 
1 " Der Verstand iiberhaupt kann als ein Vermdgen zu ur- 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 23 

It remains to inquire what, according to this de- 
finition, must be the limits within which Thought 
is operative, and what consequently will be th^ 
distinguishing character of its laws. 

Thought is only operative within the field of 
possible experience ; i. e. upon such objects as can 
be presented in an actual intuition or represented 
in an imaginary one. For the concept is the result 
of data furnished by intuition ; and its legitimacy, as 
an object of thought, must be tested by reference 
to the same data. It is true that the concept itself, 
as such, cannot be presented intuitively; but it must 
contain no attribute which is incompatible with the 
intuitive presentation of its object. The concept 
is not itself individual, but it must comprehend 
such attributes as are capable of individualisation, 
such as can coexist in an object of intuition. The 
notion of a triangle, as a rectilinear figure of three 
sides, does not itself contain the attributes of 
equilateral, isosceles, or scalene ; but it is capable 
of being combined with any one of the three in a 
perceived or imagined figure. But a rectilinear 

theilen vorgestellt werden. Denn er ist nach dem Obigen ein 
Vermogen zu denken. Denken ist das Erkenntniss durch 
Begriffe." Kant, Kritik der rein. Vern. (p. 70.) An exact 
adherent of Kant would regard the definition given in the 
text as tautological : for with him the provinces of Thought 
and Judgment are coextensive, and all judgment requires 
concepts. But as in the following remarks the province of 
judgment is extended beyond that of thought, the limitation 
becomes necessary. 



24 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

figure of two sides is, by the application of the same 
test, shewn to be no concept at all. So long as 
we merely unite the attributes in speech, without 
attempting to combine them in an individual object, 
we may not be aware that we are talking nonsense; 
the attempt to imagine the figure shews at once 
the incompatibility of the attributes. This, then, is 
the criterion of positive thinking. A form of words, 
j uniting attributes not presentable in an intuition, 
i is not the sign of a thought, but of the negation 
| of all thinking. Conception must thus be carefully 
distinguished, as well from mere imagination, as 
from a mere understanding of the meaning of 
words \ Combinations of attributes logically im- 
possible may be expressed in language perfectly 
intelligible. There is no difficulty in understand- 
ing the meaning of the phrase bilinear figure, or 
iron-gold. The language is intelligible, though the 
object is inconceivable. On the other hand, though 
all conception implies imagination, yet all imagin- 
ation does not imply conception. To have a valid 
conception of a horse, I must not only know the 
meaning of the several attributes constituting the 

u These have been confounded by others besides Reid. 
Thus Aid rich, after defining Simple Apprehension as nudus 
rei conceptus intellectivus, proceeds, " Si quis dixerit Triangulum 
aquilaterum esse aquiangulum, possum Apprehensione Simplici 
incomplexa intelligere quid sibi velint singula Orationis hujus 
vocabula." Apprehension jn this sense is not a logical pro- 
cess at all, and is not governed by any of the laws of logical 
thinking Cf. Hamilton on Reid, p. 377. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 



25 



definition of the animal, but I must also be able to 
combine those attributes in a representative image ; 
that is, to individualise them. This, however, is 
not mere imagination, it is imagination relatively 
to a concept. I not only see as it were the image 
with the mind's eye, but I also think of it as a 
horse, as possessing the attributes of a given con- 
cept, and called by a name expressive of them. 
But mere imagination is possible without any such 
relation. Without any effort to recall an object 
by means of its distinctive attributes, I may be 
passively conscious of the continuance, in a weaker 
state, of a sensible or otherwise intuitive impression, 
when the object which gave rise to it is no longer 
present. This is the Imagination which is described 
by Aristotle as a kind of weak sensation*, and as 
sensitive Pagination 7 . When coupled with a con- 
sciousness of the past existence of the impression 
which it represents, it forms the Memory, as dis- 
tinguished from the Reminiscence, of Aristotle". 
This kind of Imagination does not in itself involve 
a distinction or comparison of presentations ; it is 
compatible with an ignorance or forgetfulness of 
the existence of any presentations, save the one 
represented by the image. Conception, on the 
other hand, in its lowest degree, implies at least a 
comparison and distinction of this from that. 
When exhibited, as for its ultimate verification it 

* Rhet. I. 11. y De Anima, III. 11. 

* De Memoria, c. 1. 



26 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

must be, in the construction of an individual image 
answering to the general notion, it is still an act 
of thought, rather than of intuition; and when 
coupled with the conscious effort to recall a past 
impression, it answers in some degree to the 
Reminiscence of Aristotle'. 

Conception, where it does not coincide with 
imagination, implies imagination as the test of its 
validity. To form the notion of a class as distin- 
guished from an individual, I must emancipate 
the attributes of which I am conscious from their 
connection with a definite time and place, and 
this, as has been already observed, requires the 
intervention of language. The consciousness of a 
general notion is thus an instance of symbolical 
as distinguished from intuitive knowledge b ; and 
the act of Conception, viewed apart ffbm Ima- 
gination, could only consist in the enumeration, by 

* " The Understanding, thought proper, notion, concept, &c. 
may coincide or not with Imagination, representation proper, 
image, &c. The two faculties do not coincide in a general 
notion ; for we cannot represent Man or Horse in an actual 
image without individualising the universal; and thus con- 
tradiction emerges. But in the individual, say Socrates or 
Bucephalus, they do coincide ; for I see no valid ground why 
w<e should not think, in the strict sense of the word, or con- 
ceive the individuals which we represent" Sir W. Hamilton, 
Discussions, p. 13. The Reminiscence of Aristotle will in- 
clude this kind of imagination under it, as the last step of 
the process. 

b This distinction is due to Leibnitz. See his Meditation** 
de Cognitione, Vtritate, *t Ideis, Opera ed. Erdmann, p. 79. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 27 

means of verbal or other symbols, of the diflgprent 
parts constituting a given notion c . But the symbol, 
though indispensable as an instrument of thought, 
lends itself with equal facility to every combination, 
and thus furnishes no criterion by which we can 
distinguish between sense and nonsense, between 
the conceivable and the inconceivable. A round 



c "In cognitions symbolica prima mentis operatio absolvitor 
recensions vocabulorum, vel aliorum signorum, quibus ea indir 
gitantur qua notionem rei distinctam ingrediuntur. Etenim in 
cognitione symbolica tan turn modo verbis enuncianius quae in 
ideis continental*, vel aliis sign is eadem reprsesentamus, ideas 
vero ipsas verbis aut signis aliis indigitatas non intuemur. 
Quare cum in cognitione intuitiva prima mentis operatio 
absolvatur si attentionem successive in idea rei ad ea dirigimus 
quee notionem distinctam generis vel speciei ingrediuntur, 
singula autem hsec enunciabilia sint, adeoque vocabulis vel 
signis aliis indigitari possint ; in cognitione symbolica prima 
mentis operatio absolvi debet recensione vocabulorum, vel 
reprsesentatione aliorum signorum, quibus ea denotantur, 
quee notionem rei distinctam ingrediui^J^. Ita prima mentis, 
operatio in cognitione symbolica arboris absolvitur, si dicimus 
vegetabile, quod ex trunco, ramis, surculis et foliis constat; 
etenim sigillatim recensemus verba quibus ea indigitantur 
quee in arboribus tanquam communia distinguimus, conse- 
quenter quae notionem arboris in genere, quatenus distincta 
est, ingrediuntur. Non autem jam nobis qusestio est, utrum 
notio distincta sit completa atque determinata, atque oratione 
ista talis notio significetur, ut hsee definitionis loco inservire 
possit. Sufficit enim hie ea sigillatim enunciari quae mente 
ab idea rei separantur, dum distincte nobis genus vel speciem 
repraesentare conamur. Pendet enim cognitio symbolica ab 
intuitiva, quam supponit et ad quam refertur. Quicquid 
igitur huic deest, idem etiam ill! deesse debet." Wolf, 
Psyckologia Empirica, §. 828. 



28 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

square, or a bilinear Jigure, is, as a form* of speech, 
quite as possible as a straight line, or an equilateral 
triangle. The .mere juxtaposition of words does 
not indicate the possibility or impossibility of the 
corresponding notion, until we attempt to construct 
in imagination an individual object in accordance 
with it. Till this criterion is applied, the act of 
conception is rather a substitute for consciousness 
than a mode of consciousness itself. The sign is 
substituted for the thing signified; a step which 
considerably facilitates the performance of complex 
operations of thought, but in the same proportion 
endangers the logical accuracy of each successive 
step ; since we do not, in each, stop to verify our 
signs. Words, as thus employed, resemble alge- 
braical symbols, which, during the process of a 
long calculation, we combine in various relations 
to each other, without at the moment thinking of 
the original signfication assigned to each. But 
those who, on this account, would reduce the 
whole of thought to an algebraical computation, 
overlook the most important feature, the verifi- 
cation, namely, of the result, according to the 
logical conditions of conception, after the alge- 
braical process is finished. It may be convenient, 
in the course of a complicated reasoning, to assume 
the logical accuracy of the subordinate parts, and 
to employ their respective symbols on this as- 
sumption. But what the concept gains in flexibility 
it loses in distinctness ; and the logical and alge- 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 29 

braical perfections are thus in an inverse ratio to 
each other. It therefore becomes necessary, at 
the end of the process, to submit the result to the 
logical test, to which each step has been tacitly 
supposed to conform ; that of the possible co- 
existence of the several attributes in an individual 
object 4 . 

The above remarks will necessitate some modi- 
fication of the doctrines ordinarily taught in logical 
treatises concerning general notions, or, as they 
are commonly though not very happily called, 
abstract ideas. We are told that the mind ex- 
amines a number of individual objects, agreeing 
in some features and differing in others, that it 
separates the points in which they agree from 
those in which they differ, and makes, of the 
former only, an abstract idea or general notion, 



d •• Plerumque, presertim in analysi longiore, non totam 
simul naturam rei intuemur, sed rerum loco signis utimur, 
quorum explicationem in prasenti aliqua cogitatione com- 
pendii causa sol em us preetermittere, scientes, aut credentes 
nos earn habere in potestate : ita cum chiliogonum, seu poly- 
gonum mille cequalium laterum cogito, non semper naturam 
late rig, et eequalitatis, et millenarii (seu cubi a denario) con- 
sidero, sed vocabulis istis (quorum sensu obscure saltern, 
atque imperfecte menti obversatur) in animo utor loco 
idearum, quas de iis habeo, quoniam memini me significa- 
tionem istorum vocabulorum habere, explicationem autem 
nunc judico necessariam non esse ; qualem cogitation em 
cfficam, vel etiam symbolicam appellare soleo, qua et in 
Algebra, et in Arithmetica utimur, imo fere ubique." 
Leibnitz, Meditationes de Cognitions, Veritate et Ideis. 



30 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

which is indifferently applicable to all the indi- 
viduals from which it was derived, and by virtue 
of which they are all called by a common name. 

The reality of this process of Abstraction 6 , and 
of the idea to which it is supposed to give rise, has 
been matter of considerable controversy among 
modern philosophers. Bishop Berkeley, and sub- 
sequently Hume, denied altogether the possibility 
of such an operation, on the following grounds. 
The general idea of a triangle, it was argued by 
Locke f , is an imperfect idea, wherein parts of several 
different and inconsistent ideas are put together. 
As limited to no particular kind of triangle, but 
comprehending all, it must be neither oblique 
nor rectangle, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor 
scalene, but all and none of these at once. The 
abstract idea, as thus described, Berkeley easily 
perceived to be self-contradictory, and the doctrine 
suicidal. " I have a faculty," he says, u of imagining 
or representing to myself the ideas of those parti- 



• Drobisch observes that the term Abstraction is used 
sometimes in a psychological, sometimes in a logical sense. 
In the former, we are said to abstract the attention from 
certain distinctive features of objects presented, (abst rakers a 
differentiis^ ) In the latter, we are said to abstract certain 
portions of a given concept from the remainder, (abstrahere 
d ifferentiae) The former sense must be understood here, 
where we are considering the mental process by which 
concepts are formed. To the latter, as a conscious process 
of thought, the following remarks do not apply. 

' Essay, book iv. ch. 7. §. 0. 



PROLEGOMENA LOOtCA. 31 

cular things I have perceived, and of variously 
compounding and dividing them. I can imagine a 
man with two heads, or the upper parts of a man 
joined to the body of a horse. I can consider the 
hand, the eye, the nose, each by itself, abstracted 
or separated from the rest of the body. But then 
whatever hand or eye I imagine, it must have some 
particular shape and colour. Likewise the idea of 
man that I frame to myself, must be either of a 
white, or a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a 
crooked, a tall, or a low, or a middle-sized man. 
To be plain, I own myself able to abstract in one 
sense, as when I consider some particular parts or 
qualities separated from others, with which though 
they are united in some object, yet it is possible 
they may really exist without them. But I deny 
that I can abstract one from another, or conceive 
separately, those qualities which it is impossible 
should exist so separated ; or that I can frame a 
general notion by abstracting from particulars in 
the manner aforesaid *." 

" It is, I know," continues the Bishop, " a point 
much insisted on, that all knowledge and demon- 
stration are about universal notions, to which I 
fully agree : but then it doth not appear to me 
that those notions are formed by abstraction in the 
manner premised; universality, so far as I can 
comprehend, not consisting in the absolute, positive 
nature or conception of any thing, but in the relar- 

* Principles of Human Knowledge, Introduction, §. x. 



32 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

tion it bears to the particulars signified or repre- 
sented by it : by virtue whereof it is that things, 
names, or notions, being in their own nature 
particular, are rendered universal. Thus when I 
demonstrate any proposition concerning triangles, 
it is to be supposed that I have in view the universal 
idea of a triangle ; which ought not to be understood 
as if I could frame an idea of a triangle which was 
neither equilateral, nor scalenon, nor equicruraL 
But only that the particular triangle I consider, 
whether of this or that sort it matters not, doth 
equally stand for and represent all rectilinear tri- 
angles whatever, and is in that sense universal. .... 
Though the idea I have in view whilst I make the 
demonstration be, for instance, that of an isosceles 
rectangular triangle, whose sides are of a deter- 
minate length, I may nevertheless be certain it 
extends to all other rectilinear triangles, of what 
sort or bigness soever. And that, because neither 
the right angle, nor the equality, nor determinate 
length of the sides, are at all concerned in the 
demonstration. It is true, the diagram I have in 
view includes all these particulars, but then there 
is not the least mention made of them in the proof 

of the proposition And here it must be 

acknowledged, that a man may consider a figure 
merely as triangular, without attending to the 
particular qualities of the angles or relations of 
the sides. So far he may abstract : but this will 
never prove that he can frame an abstract general 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 33 

inconsistent idea of a triangle \" On the other 
hand, it was argued by Reid, that if a man may 
consider a figure simply as triangular, without 
attending to the particular qualities of the angles 
or relations of the sides, he must have some con- 
ception of this object of his consideration ; for no 
man can consider a thing, which he does not 
conceive. He has a conception, therefore, of a 
triangular figure, merely as such ; and this is all 
that is meant by an abstract general conception of 
a triangle 1 . 

In this controversy, the question has been need- 
lessly confused by the vague and inaccurate use of 
terms. Idea has been indifferently employed by 
modern philosophers, to denote the object of 
thought, of imagination, and even (under the re- 
presentative hypothesis) of perception k . Concep- 
tion, again, has not been sufficiently distinguished, 
on the one side, from imagination, and, on the 
other, from a mere understanding of the meaning 
of words ; and too little attention has been paid 
to the office of language, both as a substitute for 

h Ibid. §. xv. xvi. 

1 Intellectual Powers, Essay v. ch. 6. 

k As it is sometimes convenient to have a general term 
indifferently applicable to any object of internal conscious- 
ness, I have in the present work occasionally availed myself 
in this extent of the term Idea, rejecting, however, the repre- 
sentative idea of perception. The term, however, has been 
avoided, wherever it is necessary to distinguish between two 
different states of consciousness. 



34 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

consciousness, and as contributing to the distinct- 
ness of consciousness itself. It is not strictly 
correct to say that the individual alone is perceived 
first, and the general notion formed from it by 
abstraction ; for, without the assistance of the 
general notion, the individuals themselves and 
their several parts could not be distinguished from 
each other. If I am to form a general notion of 
man by examining the individuals Peter, James, 
and John, and separating the accidents in which 
they differ from the essential points in which they 
agree, it is clear that I must previously have 
formed general notions of the parts thus separated 
from each other. In order to separate, by an act 
of thought, the figure common to a number of 
men from the accidents of stature, complexion, &c. 
peculiar to each, I must first be able to form 
distinct notions of the human figure on the one 
side, and of the several statures, complexions, &c. 
on the other. Abstraction thus presupposes con- 
ception, no less than conception presupposes 
abstraction ; and we have still to learn how either 
process can be a preliminary condition to the other. 
The fact is, that our earliest consciousness is 
neither of the individual discerned as an individual, 
nor of the universal discerned as an universal, but 
of a confused mixture of the two, which it requires 
a further development of thought to analyse into 
the one or the other 1 . Whatever we perceive 

1 See Sir WJIamilton's Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. ii. p. 827. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 35 

occupies a definite position in time and space ; it 
is seen now and here; so far it is an individual. 
But position in time and space does not constitute 
a mark by which this individual can be distinguished 
from that; I cannot by these relations alone 
determine whether the object seen now and here 
is or is not the same individual that was formerly 
seen elsewhere. To discern the individual as such 
or the universal as such, I must by an act of 
thought discern certain attributes as characteristic 
of one, and certain others as common to many ; 
and this power of discernment is gradually im- 
parted to each of us in practice by the use of 
language, in which our earliest abstractions are 
given to us already made. In this gradual form- 
ation of distinct thought from confused intuition, 
it may in one sense indeed be said that our know- 
ledge of the class is prior to that of the individual. 
For resemblances are noticed earlier than differ- 
ences 01 ; and the names distinctive of individuals 
are at first associated only with their general 
features. €€ Children," says Aristotle, " at first 
call all men father, and all women mother, but 
afterwards they distinguish one person from 
another"." By degrees the individual attributes 

m A contrary theory on this point is the source of most of 
the difficulties which Rousseau professes to find in accounting 
for the origin of general language from the names given to 
individuals. 

n Phtp.Ausc. I. 1. 

d2 



36 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

are discerned and separated from the generic ; but 
in the first instance the name is applied to 
different objects before we have learned to analyse 
the growing powers of speech and thought, to ask 
what we mean by each several use of this or that 
appellation, and to correct and fix the signification 
of words at first used vaguely and obscurely. 
Such is the actual service performed by language 
in the education of mankind under the existing 
conditions of social intercourse. What was the 
origin of language itself, and how far the same 
description will apply to the mental development 
of the first man, is matter rather of ingenious 
conjecture than of scientific explanation. 

Berkeley therefore was clearly right in denying 
the existence of any such process of Abstraction 
as that described by Locke. The error of the 
latter consisted in regarding Abstraction as a 
positive act of thought, instead of the mere 
negation of thought. Abstraction is nothing more 
than non-attention to certain parts of an object : 
we do not positively think of a triangle as neither 
equilateral, isosceles, nor scalene ; but we think of 
the figure as composed of three sides, without 
asking the question whether those sides are equal 
or unequal. But on the other hand, Berkeley, 
in maintaining that all notions are in their own 
nature particular, has overlooked the fact that 
thought, and language as the instrument of 
thought, is necessary to distinguish the particular 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 37 

as particular, no less than the universal as uni- 
versal ; and that we are thus enabled, partially in 
intuitive and wholly in symbolical cognition, to 
discern generic attributes, and to constitute them 
an object of conception, without being conscious 
of the particulars by which they are accompanied. 
Berkeley is right in denying that we can imagine 
the universal entirely apart from the particular, 
but, owing to the vague signification of the word 
idea, he seems to speak of imagination as if it were 
coextensive with conception. In symbolical cog- 
nition, the latter process may be carried on apart 
from the former, subject however, as has been 
already observed, to the condition of being tested 
as valid or invalid by the power of imagining a 
corresponding object. This distinction has been 
clearly indicated by Berkeley in another of his 
works ; and perhaps his whole discussion needs 
only a more exact distinction between the per- 
ception of individuals in time and space and the 
recognition of them by their peculiar attributes, to 
render it philosophically unexceptionable. 

In speaking of Imagination as the test of 
Conception, we do not accede to the ultra- 
sensationalism of Condillac, nor even to the 
modified doctrine of Laromigutere, who derives 
from the senses the whole .matter of our know- 
ledge. Individualize your concepts, does not mean 
sensationalize them, unless the senses are the only 
° Minute Philosopher, Dial. vii. §. 8. 



38 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

sources of presentation. If I am immediately 
conscious, for example, of an exercise of will, as 
an individual act taking place within me, the 
phenomena of volition become a distinct class of 
presentations, coordinate with, not subordinate to, 
those of the senses, and capable, like them, of 
being represented by the imagination and thought 
upon by the understanding. If I am conscious 
of emotions of joy or sorrow, of anger or fear, 
existing as present individual states of mind, 
distinct from sensible impressions, these, in like 
manner, must be considered as data for thought, 
furnished by intuition. If, on the perception of 
certain individual acts performed by myself or by 
another, I am immediately conscious of an idea of 
right or wrong, I have again a distinct class of 
intuitions, simple and undefinable, the laws and 
common features of which may furnish matter of 
further reflection, but the existence of which, as 
individual facts, is the indispensable condition of 
all moral speculation. 

The possibility, therefore, of any branch of 
scientific inquiry depends upon the psychological 
question, how many preventative faculties has man ? t 

p In speaking of the human mind as possessing a plurality 
of faculties, it is perhaps hardly necessary to protest against the 
misinterpretation of this language, as if it implied that these 
faculties were distinct and independent portions of the mind, 
like the separate members of the body. Sir W. Hamilton 
(Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. ii. Lect. xx.) has shewn that the 
contrary opinion has been the one generally prevalent, that 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 39 

Every such faculty may furnish distinct materials 
for thought. Physical Science is possible, if the 
senses present us with material phenomena, whose 
relations and laws thought may investigate. Moral 
Science is possible, if we are presented with the 
feet of moral approbation and disapprobation of 
this or that action, in itself, and for its own sake ; 
and the question for thought to investigate is, 
whence do these feelings arise, and on what laws 
are they dependent ? iEsthetical Science is again 
possible as a distinct branch of inquiry, if the 
emotions arising from the contemplation of beauty 
in the works of nature or of art can be shewn to 
be distinct from any communicated by their mere 
relation to the senses. And Metaphysics must 

the vast majority of philosophers have either openly asserted 
or silently assumed that the faculties of mind are nothing 
more than modes in which the simple indivisible principle of 
thought may act and exist. As thus explained, the term is 
unobjectionable. It may be that in mental, as in physical 
mechanics, we know force only from its effects ; but the con- 
sciousness of distinct effects will then form the real basis of 
Psychology. The faculties may then be retained as a con- 
venient method of classification, provided the language is 
properly explained, and no more is attributed to them than 
is warranted by consciousness. The same consciousness 
which tells me that seeing is distinct from hearing, tells me 
also that volition is distinct from both ; and to speak of the 
faculty of will does not necessarily imply more than the con- 
sciousness of a distinct class of mental phenomena. No one 
but an advocate of the grossest materialism could understand 
such an expression as implying numerically distinct organs 
of mind, as of body. 



40 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

submit to the same criterion. Rational Cosmology 
and Rational Psychology are possible, only if 
Matter and Mind, as distinct from their several 
phenomena, can be shewn to be in any way pre- 
sented, as the objects of an immediate intuition. 

This distinction between the presentations of 
intuition and the representations of thought, which 
is thus the key to all the most valuable appli- 
cations of Psychology, is intimated with more or 
less accuracy in the writings of several modern 
philosophers. The often-quoted passage of Locke, 
in which the operations of thought are compared 
to the productions of art, furnishes in this respect, 
when understood in its proper latitude, an unex- 
ceptionable description of the respective provinces 
of the intuitive and discursive faculties. u It is 
not in the power of the most exalted wit, or en- 
larged understanding, by any quickness or variety 
of thought, to invent or frame one new simple 
idea in the mind. The dominion of man, in this 
little world of his own understanding, being much 
the same as it is in the great world of visible 
things ; wherein his power, however managed by 
art and skill, reaches no farther than to compound 
or divide the materials that are made to his hand ; 
but can do nothing towards the making the least 
particle of new matter, or destroying one atom of 
what is already in being V The Ideas of Sensation 
and Ideas of Reflection of the same philosopher, 

i Essay, b. ii. ch. 2. §. 2. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 41 

however unfortunate may be the original choice 
of terms, and however inconsistent their subsequent 
employment, point correctly enough to the two 
great sources of external and internal intuition'. 
A further step in accuracy is gained in the Im- 
pressions and Ideas of Hume, though the dis- 
tinction loses most of its value in his hands, by 
the absurd ground of distinction which he has laid 
down between them, and by the unfortunate 
metaphor which declares every idea to be an 
image of an impression . Kant, who took up 
the discussion where Hume left it, with the 
advantage of a new philosophical language, un- 
encumbered with the associations of earlier sys- 
tems, is the earliest philosopher whose writings 
have disentangled the confusion universally follow- 

r Reflection, in consistency with etymology, ought to have 
been limited to the operations of thought ; in which sense 
we can reflect upon sensible objects as upon all other things. 
Locke only escapes from Reid's criticism on this point, by 
using reflection improperly, as Stewart has observed, as 
synonymous with [internal] consciousness. This use of the 
term however is not peculiar to Locke. See Sir W. Hamilton's 
Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. i. p. 284. vol. ii. p. 199. 

1 According to Hume, Ideas and Impressions differ from 
each other only in their different degrees of force and vivacity; 
and Belief he defines as " a lively idea associated with a 
present impression;" a doctrine which almost justifies the 
sarcastic application of Beid, " it will follow, that the idea of 
a lion is a lion of less strength and vivacity. And hence may 
arise a very important question, whether the idea of a Hon 
may not tear in pieces and devour the ideas of sheep, oxen, 
and horses, and even of men, women, and children." 



42 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

ing on the use of the term idea, and exhibited this 
most important distinction with any degree of 
accuracy and precision 1 . It is one of the most 
valuable principles of the Critical Philosophy, that 
y/ the understanding has no power of intuition; a 
principle which does not, however, necessitate the 
adoption of the Kantian division of the mental 
faculties, nor even the determination of the 
question, whether the mind possesses numerically 
distinct faculties at all. It simply means, that 
the act of Thought cannot create its own object : 
that, being mediate and representative, it requires 
to be based on an immediate and presentative fact 
of consciousness. 

It cannot therefore be maintained that the senses 
are the sole criteria of truth and of reality, unless 
we assume, in defiance of all consciousness, that 

* In this respect, nothing can be more unfair than Stewart's 
sneers at the obscurity and new technical language of Kant. 
The philosophical terms of English and French writers are 
derived from the same source and subject to the same varieties 
of application. The purism of German writers has given to 
all subsequent thinkers the inestimable advantage of contem- 
plating the same thoughts under a new phraseology, and 
with new associations of etymology and metaphor; an ad- 
vantage which no one has appreciated more highly, or ex- 
plained more happily, than Stewart himself, on another 
occasion. As it is impossible to comply exactly with the 
precept of Locke, to judge of ideas in themselves, their 
names being wholly laid aside, the next best course is, to 
examine them, as far as possible, through the medium of two 
independent languages. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 43 

there exist no immediate mental phenomena, but 
those communicated by sensation. Any one pre- 
sentation is as true and as real as any other. 
Falsehood and unreality can only begin with 
thought The immediate judgment of present- 
ation, that I am at this moment conseious of a 
certain object, is equally true as regards any class 
of presentations. Unreality, in this case, can only 
consist in the distinctness of one class of present- 
ations from another, which latter we have arbi- 
trarily selected as the test of reality ; and falsehood, 
in the assertion of the identity of distinct classes, or 
of the distinctness of identical ones. But such a 
selection or assertion involves an act of thought ; 
it is a judgment concerning intuitions as classified 
under certain concepts. If I choose arbitrarily to 
select the senses as the sole test of reality, the 
phantasms of imagination are so far unreal ; but 
their unreality implies no more than that they are 
not perceived by the senses. If I say, " a centaur 
exists as an image in my mind, therefore it exists 
in nature," the assertion is false, because, by an act 
of thought, I judge that to be an object of possible 
sense, which is only given to me as an object of 
imagination : its reality in relation to the latter 
faculty remains undisturbed. 

This view of the reality of all presentations, as 
such, could not indeed be consistently held by the 
advocates of a representative theory of perception. 
If, in all intuition, I am immediately conscious only 



44 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

of certain ideas or modifications of my own mind, 
I am reduced to the alternative, either of disbelieving 
the existence of an external world altogether, or 
of drawing a distinction between such ideas as are 
representative and indicate the existence of objects 
without my mind, and such as are purely imaginary 
and have no objective reality corresponding 11 . The 
former will then be distinguished as real, the latter 
as unreal presentations. But if, in perception, I 
am immediately and presentatively conscious of a 
non-ego, (and such is the soundest view, both in 
common sense and in philosophy,) the repre- 
sentative idea and its supposed claim to superior 
reality vanishes altogether. Every presentation 
is real in itself, some as immediately informing me 
of the existence of states of my own mind, others 
as immediately informing me of the existence of 
objects without; and my judgment about each is 
equally true, when I assert it to be what it is, and 
equally false, when I assert it to be what it is not. 
In this respect, the philosophers of the school of 
Common Sense have not always consistently adhered 
to their fundamental principle, in the distinction 
which they have drawn between perception and 
imagination x . 



• See Locke, Essay, b. iv. ch. 4. §. 8 — 12. 

* See Reid, Inquiry, cb. ii. §. 3, and the antagonist remarks 
of Stewart, Elements, vol. i. ch. 3. Both discussions might have 
been cleared of some confusion, by determining accurately 
what is meant by reality in presentations. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 45 

But though it is not true that the whole matter 
of knowledge is furnished by the senses, it cannot 
be denied that it is entirely furnished by the pre- 
tentative faculties. And this may throw some light 
on a distinction, concerning which there frequently 
exists considerable confusion, the distinction be- 
tween what are, vaguely enough, termed positive 
and negative ideas. A positive intuition is one which 
has been presented to us in actual consciousness, 
real or imaginary: a positive concept is one whose 
component parts are capable of being so presented 
in combination. A negative concept on the other 
hand, which is in fact no concept at all, is the 
attempt to realize in thought those combinations 
of attributes of which no corresponding intuition 
is possible. The inability may be absolute or 
relative, owing to the general limitations of all 
human consciousness, or to peculiar deficiencies 
in the experience of this or that individual. Thus 
a blind man may be said to have a negative idea 
of colour, when he attempts to supply the defects 
of his experience by analogy from other sensations; 
as in the case mentioned by Locke, of the man 
who supposed the colour of scarlet to resemble 
the sound of a trumpet 7 . But in like manner any 
man, though in the full possession of his faculties, 
can only negatively conceive those simple ideas" 

y Essay y b. iii. ch. 4. §. 11. 

* By simple ideas are meant the immediate objects of 
sensation or reflection in Locke's sense of the terms, such as 



46 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

which have never been actually presented in their 
proper intuition. The nature of the presentation 
will of course depend upon the faculty to which 
that class of intuitions belongs. If I have never 
seen objects of any other colour than white and 
red, I have a positive idea of these, a negative idea 
of blue and yellow. If I had all my lifetime been 
subject to coercion, and had never performed an 
act of volition, I should have a negative idea of 
free agency. If I had never in my life found my 
volition opposed, I should have a negative idea of 
coercion. As it is, I have a positive idea of both. 
I desire to thrust my arm out in open space, and 
my desire is carried into effect. Here is the positive 
consciousness of freedom. I try to thrust it through 
a wall, and am resisted. Here is the positive con- 
sciousness of coercion a . When Locke declared 



colour and sound, which can be apprehended only by actual 
sight or hearing; perception and volition, which can be 
known only by the actual experience of self-consciousness. 
Complex notions may be formed from these by an act of 
pure imagination, but the elements must be given beforehand. 
Compare Locke, I. c. 

a Some philosophers represent the idea of freedom as a 
negative one. Thus Kant (Recht&lehre, p. £8. ed. Schubert) 
and Fichte (Eritik alter Offenbarung, §. 2.) describe it as merely 
an absence of the feeling of compulsion. This description 
would be correct, if we had never performed an act in our 
lives, except under coercion. As it is, the idea of freedom is 
as positive as that of restraint, both being at different times 
presented in actual consciousness. The same is the case 
with heat and cold, good and evil, and other pairs of con- 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 47 

infinite space and infinite duration to be negative 
ideas, he was right, if we grant his hypothesis of 
their origin. The former he derived from sensation ; 
and all the space which we can actually perceive 
by the senses is finite : the latter he derived from 
reflection ; and every duration which we have 
personally experienced is finite also. Those who 
do not accede to his conclusion ground their 
dissent on a denial of his premises \ The language 
in which the concept is expressed is in this respect 
altogether indifferent. We may speak of the same 
act as voluntary, or not constrained, as compulsory, 
or not voluntary. The test of its positive or negative 
character is to be found in the question, Has it ever 
been realized in an intuitive presentation ? 

Those ideas whose negative character depends 
merely on the deficiencies of individual experience, 
and which may therefore be described as acci- 
dentally or relatively negative, are beyond the 
consideration of pure Logic, or pure Metaphysics, 
which deal only with those conditions of thought 
which are common to all mankind. Hence the 

traries, each of which, as a phenomenon of consciousness, is 
as positive as the other. What may be their respective 
relations to a transcendental cause beyond the sphere of 
consciousness, we have no means of determining. 

b See Cousin, Hutoire de la Philosophic, lecon xviii. On 
the other hand, Locke's conclusion is supported, though on 
different grounds, by Sir W. Hamilton, Discussions, p. 606, 
who shews that an absolutely first unit of Space or Time, and 
an infinite extent of either, are both equally inconceivable. 



48 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

only negative ideas with which the logician or 
metaphysician as such is concerned are those 
which arise from an attempt to transcend the 
universal conditions of all human thought. If the 
human mind is subject to laws and limitations 
which it is unable to transgress by any effort of 
thought, (and that this is the case will be shewn 
at a further stage of our inquiry,) there will arise 
in relation to these a class of notions which may 
be 4 distinguished as essentially or absolutely negative. 
Such negative notions however must not be con- 
founded with the absence of all mental activity. 
They imply at once an attempt to think, and a 
failure in that attempt . The language by which 
such notions are indicated is not like a word in an 
unknown tongue which excites no corresponding 
affection in the mind of the hearer : it indicates a 
relation, if only of difference, to that of which we 
are positively conscious, and a consequent effort 
to pass from the one to the other. Thus if it be 
true that the infinite is not a positive object of 
human thought, it will not follow that the word 
is to us wholly unmeaning. We may attempt to 
separate the condition of finiteness from our con- 
ception of a given object, though the result may 
ultimately involve a self-contradiction. We may 
attempt in like manner to conceive a space enclosed 
by two straight lines, and it is not till after the 
attempt has been made that we become aware that 
e See Sir W. Hamilton's Discussions, p. 602. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 49 

the expression bilinear figure admits of no corre- 
sponding notion. And it may frequently happen, 
owing to the use of language as a substitute for 
positive thought, that a process of reasoning may 
be carried on to a considerable length, without the 
reasoner being aware of the essentially incon- 
ceivable character of the terms which he is em- 
ploying. If we assume without inquiry the 
possible existence of a circular square, we may 
demonstrate of it in succession all the properties 
of the circle and all those of the square, without at 
the moment perceiving their incompatibility with 
each other. Such a self-deception is still easier 
when the negative character depends, not on the 
union of attributes which cannot be conceived in 
conjunction, but on the separation of those which 
cannot be conceived apart. We may easily 
analyse in language that which it is impossible 
to analyse in thought. Thus we can neither 
perceive nor imagine colour without extension; 
an unextended colour is therefore a purely 
negative notion. Yet many philosophers of emi- 
nence have maintained that the connection between 
these two ideas is merely one of association, and 
have reasoned concerning colour apart from ex- 
tension with as much confidence as if their 
language represented a positive thought. The 
speculations concerning the seat of the soul may 
be cited as another instance of the same kind. 
Position in space and occupation of space are 

E 



50 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

correlative notions ; neither is conceivable apart 
from the other. Yet the above speculations for 
the most part proceed on the tacit assumption that 
it is possible to assign a local habitation to an 
unextended substance. Such is the influence of 
language, even when representing, not thought, 
but its negation. 

If thought is operative only within the field of 
possible experience, it follows, that we are not 
entitled, in any act of thought, to add to the data 
given in the concept, without a fresh appeal to 
intuition. I have in my mind the notion of a 
centaur, as a creature with the upper parts of a man 
and the lower parts of a horse. But this concept 
does not in itself contain the attribute of existence 
in space as an object of possible perception. I am 
therefore not warranted in thinking of the centaur 
as so existing, until the attribute is supplied from 
its proper source of presentation, which in this case 
is sensible experience. If my notion of man does 
not contain the attribute of mortality, I may think 
of man as mortal or as immortal, but I cannot 
determine which of these judgments is true ; i. e. is 
in accordance with the corresponding intuition, 
without comparing them with the fact as presented 
by experience. In the mere notion of two straight 
lines, it is not contained that they cannot inclose 
a space ; and in the mere notions of the numbers 
7 and 5, it is not contained that their sum is 12. 
Neither of these judgments therefore can be 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 51 

determined to be true, without an appeal to some 
fact or other of intuition. This limitation of 
the province of thought implies some important 
consequences, which will appear when we come to 
consider the character of the laws of pure thinking 
recognised by Logic. 

Before taking leave of this part of our subject, 
it may be useful to point out one or two question 
of controversy, to which the distinction between 
Thought and other facts of consciousness may be 
applied with advantage. 

It has been remarked by Sir William Hamilton \ 
that the whole controversy of Nominalism and 
Conceptualism is founded on the ambiguity of the 
terms employed ; on the want, that is, of an accurate 
distinction, such as is furnished by the German 
Anschauung and Begriff, between the individual 
intuitions of sense and imagination, and the general 
concepts of the understanding. We may observe 
further, that the controversy between Nominalism 
and Realism may be, if not absolutely decided, 
at least considerably simplified, by attending 
to the same distinction. Some recent critics, in 
examining this question, have managed to introduce 
additional confusion into what was sufficiently 
confused before. It is asked, for example, whether 
the great division of animal, vegetable, and mineral 
is not to be regarded as the work of nature, rather 
than as the arbitrary product of man's classifica- 

<* Reid's Works, p. 412. 
E 2 



52 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

tion. Undoubtedly : but what has that to do with 
the question of the existence of Universals out of 
the mind? We admit, that is, that nature has 
stamped on certain locally distinct individuals, a 
number of prominent features of resemblance, 
which cannot fail to strike the eye of an observer. 
But has she thereby produced any thing more 
than one set of attributes existing in one individual 
in one place, and another similar set existing in 
another individual in another place ? But when, 
by an act of mind, we have abstracted from the 
existence in space under which all objects of sense 
are presented, and, by virtue of that abstraction, 
have advanced from individual similarity to specific 
unity, from the similar attributes of several objects 
to the mutual relation of all, the results of the 
process can only be regarded as the offspring of 
our minds. This consideration does not indeed 
prove decisively the impossibility of universals 
a parte rei, but it shews that nor argument in 
favour of their existence can be drawn from the 
observed uniformities of nature 6 . 

Another subject of dispute between different 
schools of philosophy is, What are the limits of 
definition? The Scholastic Logicians, holding 
that definition was by genus and differentia, very 
consistently laid it down as a canon, that no object 

e Since the publication of the first edition of this work, 
I have been gratified at finding the same view maintained in 
an able discussion by M. de Remusat, Abelard, vol. ii. p. J 25. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 53 

was definable which could not be regarded as a 
Species. Summa genera and individuals were by 
this rule incapable of definition. On the other 
hand, Descartes and Locke, rejecting this re- 
striction, maintain that simple ideas alone cannot 
be defined. Both are right, according to th oil- 
different meanings of definition. With the former, 
it signifies the resolution of a complex general 
concept, into the simpler concepts which it com- 
prehends. With the latter, it is the resolution of 
a complex individual object of sense, into the sim- 
pler objects of which it is composed. The one 1* 
a mental analysis of notions, the other a sensible 
analysis of intuitions. No definition, as Locke 
truly observes, will convey the idea of whiteness 
to a blind man ; i. e. it will not enable him to form 
a sensible image of the colour. But no definition 
(in the scholastic sense) was ever intended to 
accomplish this object. The far-famed animal 
rationale does not do it for man ; and for the very 
sufficient reason, that concepts, as such, are not 
capable of being presented in sense or imagin- 
ation. If the purpose of logical definition were to 
enable us to form an idea, i.e. a representative 
image of an object, pointing it out with the finger 
would be a far more satisfactory definition than 
any verbal analysis'. But ideas, in this sense, have 
no connection with logical definition. Locke's 

f Arist. Anal. Posl. II. 7. ov yhp ty &«'£« yt rjj aio-dqcet Ij ry 
baKTvky. Cf. Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 183. 



54 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

ideas of sensation, simple or complex, are all 
excluded from the province of definition, as being 
individuals, i. e. as not being concepts at all. 
On the other hand, the concept whiteness, as a 
species of colour, is capable of definition by its 
optical differentia, as a colour produced by equal 
mixture of the simple rays. An example adduced 
by Descartes, as well as by Locke and Leibnitz g , 
will illustrate the distinction still more clearly. 
The concept of a chiliogon is a regular polygon 
of 1000 sides. As addressed to the sense, this 
definition would not enable any man to distinguish 
an individual figure of the kind by sight from 
another which had 999 sides ; but, as addressed to 
the understanding, it is sufficient for the demon- 
stration of the mathematical properties of the 
figure. Yet even here, intuition, though not 
directly applied, is the virtual test of the possibility 
of the conception. I may not be able distinctly 
to represent in an image or construct in a figure a 
thousand sides at once ; but it is from my intuitive 
consciousness of the same attributes as existing on 
a more limited scale, that I know that there is 
nothing incompatible between the number of a 
thousand sides and the property of enclosing a 
space. Under this conviction the symbolical 
takes the place of the intuitive cognition; and 
we are enabled, by the aid of language, to think 

* See Descartes, Meditatio Sexta; Locke, Essay, ii. 29, 18; 
Leibnitz, Nouveaux Essais, ii. U9 t 13. 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 55 

of the figure in certain relations, without actually 
-constructing it with the hand or in the mind. 

The same distinction will furnish a ground for 
criticising certain popular systems of logical no- 
tation. If Logic is exclusively concerned with 
Thought, and Thought is exclusively concerned 
with Concepts, it is impossible to approve of a 
practice, sanctioned by some eminent Logicians, 
of representing the relation of terms in a syllogism 
by that of figures in a diagram. To illustrate, for 
example, the position of the terms in Barbara, by 
a diagram of three circles, one within another, is 
to lose sight of the distinctive mark of a concept, 
that it cannot be presented to the sense, and 
tends to confuse the mental inclusion of one 
notion in the sphere of another, with the local 
inclusion of a smaller portion of space in a 
larger h . The diagrams of Geometry in this respect 
furnish no precedent; for they do not illustrate 

h " Da der Mensch die Sprache hat," says Hegel, " als das 
der Vernunft eigenthiimliche Bezeichnungsmittel, so ist es 
ein mussiger Einfafl, sich nach einer unvoUkommnern 
Darstellungsweise umsehen und damit qualen zu wollen. 
Der Begriff kann als solcber wesentlich nur mit dem Geiste 
aufgefasst werden. Es ist vergeblich, ihn durch Raumfiguren 
und algebraische Zeichen zum Behufe des aimerlichen Auges 
und einer begrifflosen, mechanischen Behandlungsweise, ernes 
Calculs, festhalten zu wollen." While dissenting totally from 
the Hegelian view of Logic, I cannot resist quoting the above 
passage, as applicable to every view of the Science which 
recognises the essential distinction between thought and 
intuition. 



56 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

the form of the thought, but the matter, not 
the general character of the demonstration as* a 
reasoning process, but its special application as a 
reasoning about magnitudes in space. Still less 
is such a practice justified by the test of con- 
ceivability which has been mentioned above, the 
possibility, namely, of individualising the attri- 
butes comprehended in a concept. For, whereas 
that test is employed to determine the conceiv- 
ability of the actual contents of each separate 
concept, the logical diagrams are designed to 
represent the universal relations in which all 
concepts, whatever be their several contents, 
formally stand towards each other. The contrast 
between these two, as legitimate and illegitimate 
appeals to intuition, will more fully appear in the 
sequel. 



CHAPTER II. 

ON THE THREE OPERATIONS OP THOUGHT. 

Concerning the threefold division of the mental 
operations usually acknowledged by Logicians, it 
has been questioned, whether they are properly to 
be regarded as distinct acts of Thought or not. 
The question may be considerably simplified, by 
discriminating between different principles of 
identity or distinctness, as applicable severally to 
mental and material objects. The only natural 
and necessary principle of distinction between 
objects is the numerical diversity of individuals. 
In this respect, not only the several acts of 
Simple Apprehension, Judgment, and Reasoning, 
but every single act of each class is distinct from 
every other. An act of reasoning which I per- 
form to-day is numerically distinct from any act 
performed yesterday, though both may be governed 
by the same laws and applied to the same objects. 
Beyond this, any principle of specific identity or 
diversity is to a certain extent arbitrary and arti- 
ficial. The only ground of distinction between a 
natural and an unnatural classification of indi- 
viduals depends upon the frequency with which 



58 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

we have occasion to view them in this or that 
relation ; in other words, on the respective utility 
of different points of view for certain given pur- 
poses. On this ground, Apprehension, Judgment, 
and Reasoning are rightly and necessarily regarded 
as distinct classes of mental operations, relatively 
to Logic, inasmuch as their several products, the 
Concept, the Judgment, and the Syllogism, exhibit 
distinct logical forms, and require a distinct logical 
treatment. 

Psychologically, the question must be examined 
on somewhat different grounds. It may be urged, 
for example, on the one side, that the several 
operations are the product of the single faculty of 
Comparison; that they are not in act ever separable 
from each other, Apprehension being always accom- 
panied by Judgment, and Judgment by Appre- 
hension, and Reasoning by both ; that the mind, 
one and indivisible, is wholly employed in each. 
On the other side, it may be answered, that acts 
of Comparison may be regarded as specifically 
distinct, as engaged on distinct objects ; that the 
comparison of attributes with each other, of con- 
cepts, immediately in themselves, or mediately 
with a common third concept, are pro tanto 
distinct acts; that the same mind is not always 
equally skilful in all three ; and other arguments 
of the like kind. Both these opposite opinions 
may be accepted as true, if we attend to the 
different points of view which render the decision 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 59 

of all such matters of controversy in some degree 
arbitrary. 

The distinction between the faculties and parts 
of the mind is based on a principle exactly the 
reverse of that by which a similar distinction is 
made relatively to the body. The members of 
the latter are given as logically and numerically 
distinct, and thus furnish a preexisting basis for 
the classification of their several operations. 
Thus, seeing and hearing are distinguished from 
each other, as the operations of the eye and the 
ear respectively ; and the use of the pen, the 
brush, and the chisel may in this point of view 
be classified together, as operations of the hand. 
Whereas, in the mind, the distinctness of the 
operations is itself the ground on which, for mere 
convenience of discussion, we classify and distin- 
guish different parts and faculties, as belonging 
to the mind itself*. The acts, therefore, must, 
on independent grounds, be determined to be 
identical or distinct, before we unite or separate 
them, as related to the same or diverse mental 
powers. 

a " Nous ne savons que lame humaine possede certaines 
facultes, que parce que nous voyons en elle certains pheno- 
menes se produire. Ainsi, parce que nous observons qu'elle 
sent, qu'elle pense, qu'elle se souvient, nous en concluons 
qu'elle a la capacite de sentir, la capacite de penser, la capacite 
de se souvenir; et ce sontces capacites que nous appelons ses 
facultes." Jouffroy, Des facultes de Vdme humaine, {Melanges 
Philosophiques, p. 313. 2d Ed.) 



60 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

Hence it appears that the classification of 
operations, relatively to distinct mental faculties, 
is contingent upon the adoption of some inde- 
pendent principle for classifying the same operations 
in themselves. In the present state of Psychology, 
much must be left to the discretion of individual 
inquirers; no one division having been so universally 
adopted by philosophers, or having led to such im- 
portant results, as to render imperative its adoption 
as the division #ear cgoxrjv of psychologers. But 
to suppose a distinct mental faculty for each of 
the three logical operations, solely on the ground 
of the distinct objects compared in each, is, to say 
the least, to make Psychology unnecessarily com- 
plicated, and to offend against a rule of great 
weight in all systems of classification, Entia non 
sunt multiplicanda prceter necessitate™. Indeed the 
several phenomena of conception, judgment, and 
reasoning, viewed merely as mental acts, and with- 
out reference to the diversity of the data from 
which the act commences and with which it deals, 
appear to furnish far more prominent features of 
similarity than of difference. They are effected 
by the same means; they are governed by the 
same laws; they are confined within the same 
limits; they admit of the same distinctions of 
material and formal validity. The psychological 
analysis of any one may be applied, almost in the 
same words, to the others ; and so far as thought 
alone is concerned, (though not always in the 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 61 

possession and management of the materials upon 
which thought is exercised,) the same mental 
qualities are manifested in the right performance 
of each. In a psychological point of view, to 
enumerate separate mental faculties, as giving rise 
to the various products of thought, is, to say the 
least, to encumber the science with unnecessary 
and perplexing distinctions. It will be sufficient 
to refer them to the single faculty of Thought, the 
operation of which is in all cases Comparison*. 

But the faculty of Thought, though uniform in 
its own nature and in the manner of its operation, 
may yet give rise to different products, according 
to the diversity of the materials upon which it 
operates ; and this difference, as has already been 
observed, forms the basis of the classification 
usually adopted in Logic. Hence from the dif- 
ferent point of view in which thought is contem- 
plated by the two sciences, there arises some 
diversity of detail, which it is desirable to point 
out more particularly. 

Extending the terms Apprehension and Judg- 
ment beyond the region of Thought proper*, it may 



b See Sir W. Hamilton's Lectures on Metaphysics, Lect. xxxiv. 

• The division into Simple Apprehension, Judgment, and 
Seasoning is usually given as one of the discursive faculties. 
Yet even Logicians have extended it to the powers of percep- 
tion and imagination. Indeed, these several faculties have 
shared in the confusion arising from the vague use in modern 
philosophy of the terra idea. A striking instance is afforded 



62 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

be laid down, as a general canon of Psychology, that 
the unit of consciousness is a judgment ; in other 
words, that every act of consciousness, intuitive or 
discursive, is comprised in a conviction of the 
presence of its object, either internally in the mind 
or externally in space. The result of every such 
act must thus be generally stated in the proposi- 
tion, " this is here." Consequently, at least with 
reference to the primary and spontaneous, as dis- 
tinguished from the secondary and reflex acts of 
consciousness, it is more correct to describe Appre- 
hension as the analysis of Judgments, than Judg- 
ment as the synthesis of Apprehensions 4 . 

In a psychological point of view, therefore, it is 
incorrect to describe Simple Apprehension as the 
first operation of the mind. In one sense, indeed, 
the relation of prior and posterior is altogether 
out of place. Chronologically, inasmuch as every 
Apprehension is simultaneous with a Judgment, 
and every Judgment with an Apprehension ; and 
logically, inasmuch as Judgment cannot exist 
without Apprehension, nor Apprehension without 
Judgment. In another sense, however, we may 
properly say that Judgment is prior to Appre- 
hension ; meaning that the subject and the object 
are first given in their mutual relation to each 

by Wolf, in his account of Apprehension and Judgment. 
Phil. Rat. §. 33—39. 

d See Reid, Intellectual Powers, Essay iv. ch. 3. with Sir 
W. Hamilton's Commentary. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 63 

other, before either of them can itself become 
a separate object of attention. But when a corre- 
sponding division is adopted of the operations of 
Thought, properly so called, the same order of 
priority cannot be observed. Every operation of 
thought is a judgment, in the psychological sense 
of the term : but the psychological judgment must 
not be confounded with the logical. The former 
is the judgment of a relation between the conscious 
subject and the immediate object of consciousness: 
the latter is the judgment of a relation which 

Co objects of thought bear to each other. The 
•mer cannot be distinguished as true or false, 
inasmuch as the object is thereby only judged 
to be present at the moment when we are con- 
scious of it as affecting us in a certain manner ; 
and this consciousness is necessarily true. The 
latter is true or false, according as the relations 
thought as existing between certain concepts 
are actually found in the objects represented by 
those concepts or not. The logical judgment 
necessarily contains two concepts, and hence must 
be regarded as logically and chronologically pos- 
terior to the conception, which requires one only. 
The psychological judgment is coeval with the 
first act of consciousness, and is implied in every 
mental process, whether of intuition or of thought. 
It cannot, therefore, be called prior or posterior to 
any other mental operation, for there is no mental 
operation in which it does not take place ; but the 



64 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

judgments of intuition are logically and chronolo- 
gically prior to the judgments of thought*. Con- 
ception is a psychological judgment, but not a 
logical one, and is properly ranked as the first 
operation of Thought, inasmuch as it is the simplest. 
As the design of the present essay is not to 
consider Psychology in itself, but Psychology in its 
relation to Logic, I shall content myself with 
accepting the three operations of Thought as they 
are commonly distinguished by Logicians, examin- 
ing them with the view of ascertaining what light 
Psychology can throw on the province and laws 
of each. Other points of view and other prin- 
ciples of classification need not be further discussed 

• Of the important distinction between chronological and 
logical priority, (the tempore and natura of the scholastic post- 
predicaments,) it will be sufficient to quote one ancient and 
one modern exposition. Aristotle, (for name and thing,) 
Categ. ch. 12. Hp6rcpov Mpov mpov Xcyrrtu rcrpax&r, np&rov phr 
Ka\ KvpUrrara *ar& x/xfow, waff h wptofivrtpop crcpov Mpov Kak fraXauf- 
rcpop XcyFTvu. . . . Acvrcpor dc r6 pi) avriorpityov *ar£ r^v rov «i*eu 
axoXovOrjo-iv, olov r6 to t&p bvo irp6rcpoir bvolv piv y&p 6vtv>v <utoXov6rt 
dOvs t6 to tivai, Ms te Bvtos ovk dpaytcaiov duo (tvcu. Metaph. viii. 
8. 2. Uatrrjs ty rrjt routurrjs wportpa c<rrii> g Mpytui xai \6ytp xai tj} 
overt'?' XP* V 9 ? *<"•* P** &t> 1<rrt 6* «* o0. Cousin, Programme 
d'un court de Philosophie. •• Une connaissance est anterieure 
a une autre dans l'ordre logique, en tant qu elle l'autorise ; 
elle est alors son antecedent logique. Une connaissance est 
anterieure a une autre dans Tordre psychologique, en tant 
qu'elle se produit avant elle dans 1 'esprit humain; elle est 
alors son antecedent psychologique." For some admirable 
applications of the above distinction, see the same author's 
criticism ef Locke, Cours de Philosophie, lecon 17. 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 65 

in this place. In relation to their several logical 
products, the three operations may be distinguished 
as follows. 

Conceiving has been already explained as the 
individualising of certain attributes comprehended 
in a general notion and expressed in a general 
term; the representation, namely, of such attri- 
butes as coexisting in a possible object of intuition. 
Language, as before observed, is, in its earliest 
operations, a sign, not of concepts, but of in- 
tuitions. Its earliest terms are employed as the 
proper names of individual objects. Conception 
does not take place till after we have learned to 
give the same name to various individuals pre- 
sented to us with certain differences of attributes, 
and hence to associate it with a portion only, not 
with the whole, of what is presented in each. This 
may be distinguished as Abstraction, a spontaneous, 
though not always a voluntary act, the concen- 
tration of the mind on certain portions only of 
a given object in relation to its name. This 
must not be treated, as is frequently done by 
Logicians, as a conscious process of thought, 
being only a preliminary condition to thinking, 
taking place in the majority of cases uncon- 
sciously, during the gradual acquisition of speech' 

' Abstraction, as described by Stewart, Elements, vol. i. 
ch. 4. answers in essential points to what I have here de- 
scribed. It should be observed, however, that by language 
as it now operates, whatever may have been the case in 

F 



66 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

Our names thus gradually acquire a signification, 
being transformed from proper names to appel- 
latives. Finally, the act of conception consists in 
contemplating the attributes thus combined in 
the signification of a name as coexisting, along 
with individual features, in a possible object of 
intuition, and hence, apart from the individual 
features, as indifferently representing all such 
objects. This representative collection of attri- 
butes, combined by means of a sign, is a Concept. 

In the above remarks, the office of language is 
considered as it now exists and is taught, not as it 
might possibly have been originally created. We 
do not form our own language, but receive it 
ready formed ; and its teaching, whether true or 
deceitful, whether promoting or distorting the 
right development of the mind, does, as matter of 
fact, impress us from our infancy upwards with 
certain associations, and casts our earliest thoughts 
in a certain mould, from which no future effort 
can wholly emancipate us. I am not now con- 
sidering what might have been the course of our 
mental' growth, had we been the original inventors 
of our mother tongue, or if we had been born 
among a people with whom (as in a hypothesis 

its first formation, the question as to what attributes shall 
be abstracted and what retained, is in a great measure deter- 
mined for us. The process must thus be distinguished from 
the voluntary abstraction implied in all operations of thought. 
On Abstraction, as distinguished from Attention, see Tissot, 
Anthropologie, vol. i. p. 142. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 67 

of ReidV) every sound represented a complete 
sentence. Language is not here considered as it 
might have been invented by a conclave of ima- 
ginary philosophers, or as it may have influenced 
the thoughts of Adam in Paradise; but as it 
does influence the thoughts of children born into 
the world, the offspring of articulately-speaking 
parents. 

As in Conception a single general notion is 
considered in its relation to a possible object of 
intuition, so in Judgment two such notions are 
considered as related to a common object. When 
I assert that A is B, I do not mean that the attri- 
butes constituting the concept A are identical 
with those constituting the concept B ; for this is 
only true in identical judgments; but that the 
object in which the one set of attributes is found 
is the same as that in which the other set is found. 
To assert that all philosophers &re liable to error 
is not to assert that the signification of the term 
philosopher is identical with that of liable to 
error ; but that the aftributes comprehended in 
these two distinct terms are in some manner 
united in the same subject. To ask what con- 
stitutes unity or identity in a subject of attributes 
is to enter on a deep metaphysical question, the 
discussion of which must be postponed to a later 
stage of our inquiry ; it is sufficient for the present 

e Correspondence, Letter xi. to Dr. James Gregory. Seo 
p. 71. of Sir W. Hamilton's edition. 

f2 



68 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

to observe, that the common language and com- 
mon thought of mankind universally acknowledge 
something of the kind, assuming, whether they 
can explain it or not, that a certain smell and 
colour and form, which are distinct attributes, are 
in some way related, as parts or qualities, to some 
one thing which we call a rose ; and that, when 
I assert that the rose is fragrant, I imply that 
the thing which affects in a certain way my power 
of sight is in some manner identical with that 
which affects in a certain way my power of smell. 
The metaphysical problem thus lies at the bottom 
both of Conception and of Judgment, and, whether 
it admits of satisfactory explanation or not, must 
be included as a fact in any description of the 
several operations of Thought. 

Reasoning is the most complex of the three 
operations, as in it two concepts are determined 
to be in a certain manner related to each other, 
through the medium of their mutual relations to a 
third concept This operation is therefore treated 
last in order*. The nature of the several relations 

h "Judicium notiones conjungit vel separat, adeoque eas 
supponit Ratiocinando ex notionibus et judiciis praviis 
elicttur judicium ulterius, adeoque ratiocinatio notiones et 
judicia supponit. Ergo notio est operatio prima, judicium 
secunda, discursus tertia." Wolf, Phil. RaU §. 58. But 
Wolf, as before observed, has not accurately distinguished 
between the perceptive and discursive faculties. His remark 
is true, though only in a much narrower sense than tyiat 
in which he designed it. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 69 

asserted in the premises and deduced in the con- 
clusion, are the same as those implied in Judgment, 
and lead to the same metaphysical difficulties. 
These, together with the logical and psychological 
character of the Laws of Thought, will be con- 
sidered in a future chapter. For the present, it 
will be sufficient to attempt, in accordance with 
the above observations, a definition of the products 
of the several acts of Thought, the Concept, the 
Judgment, and the Syllogism, the legitimate objects 
of Formal Logic. 

A Concept is a collection of attributes, united 
by a sign, and representing a possible object of 
intuition. 

A Judgment is a combination of two concepts, 
related to one or more common objects of possible 
intuition. 

A Syllogism is a combination of two judgments, 
necessitating a third judgment as the consequence 
of their mutual relation. 

The definition above given of a Judgment 
renders necessary a few remarks on a class of 
propositions, whose true logical character has been 
considerably misapprehended by eminent autho- 
rities. According to the above definition, every 
judgment in Logic must be regarded as a com- 
bination of concepts ; every term of such judg- 
ment, as the sign of a concept. This is no less, 
true of singular than of common judgments, and 
the neglect of it has given rise to some errors in 



70 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

the logical treatment of propositions. " Proper 
names," says Mr. Mill, "denote the individuals 
who are called by them; but they do not indicate 
or imply any attributes as belonging to those 
individuals. When we name a child by the name 
Mary, or a dog by the name Caesar, these names 
are simply marks used to enable those individuals 
to be made subjects of discourse. It may be said, 
indeed, that we must have had some reason for 
giving them those names rather than any others : 
and this is true; but the name, once given, 
becomes independent of the reason. A man may 
have been named John, because that was the 
name of his father ; a town may have been named 
Dartmouth, because it is situated at the mouth of 
the Dart. But it is no part of the signification of 
the word John, that the father of the person so 
called bore the same name ; nor even of the word 
Dartmouth, to be situated at the mouth of the 
Dart 1 ." 

These remarks are true, so far as the name 
alone is concerned, or as regards the reason of its 
being imposed, at a certain time, on a certain man. 
But then the man, as an individual existing at 
some past time, cannot become immediately an 
object of thought, and hence is not, properly 
speaking, the subject of any logical proposition. 
If I say, t€ Caesar was the conqueror of Pompey," 

1 Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 40. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 71 

the immediate object of my thought is not Caesar 
as an individual existing nearly two thousand years 
ago, but a concept now present in my mind, com- 
prising certain attributes, which I believe to have 
coexisted in a certain man. I may historically 
know that these attributes existed in one indi- 
vidual only ; and hence my concept, virtually 
universal, is actually singular, from the accident 
of its being predicable of that individual only. 
But there is no logical objection to the theory 
that the whole history of mankind may be repeated 
at recurring intervals, and that the name and 
actions of Caesar may be successively found in 
various individuals at corresponding periods of 
every cycle. 

" Alter erit turn Tiphys, et altera quee vehat Argo 
Delectos heroas : erunt etiam altera bella ; 
Atque iterum ad Trojam magnus mittetur Achilles." 

These remarks will suggest a correction of the 
ordinary logical account of the quantity of pro- 
positions, which should have been made long ago. 
The subjects of all logical judgments are concepts : 
the true singular proposition in Logic is not one 
in which the concept is materially limited to an 
individual by extralogical considerations, but one 
in which it is formally so limited by a sign of indi- 
viduality. In scholastic language, only individua 
demonstrative!, and not, as is vulgarly taught, 
individua signata, are properly the subjects of 



72 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

singular propositions'. Indefinite, or, as they 
should rather be called, indesignate k propositions 
are an anomaly in Logic, no less when the subject 
is a singular, than when it is a common term. In 
both, the quantity can only be known by the 
matter, and, in both, an appeal to the matter is 
extralogical. 

The same considerations will also shew the 
propriety of Aristotle's limitation of the logical 
verb to the present tense only. All thought is 
a consciousness of present mental acts, and its 
object is not the past event, but the present con- 
cept of it. Hence the office of the verb in Logic 
is not to declare the past or future connection of 
an attribute with its subject in the represented fact, 
but to declare the present coexistence of two con- 
cepts in the representative act of thought 1 . 

Before quitting this portion of the subject, it 

J Cf. Fries, System der Logik, §. 22. His principle is 
sound, though some of his instances are inaccurate. 

k Properly speaking, particular propositions are indefinite, 
singulars and universals definite. For when I say, Some 
A is B % I leave it altogether undetermined how many, and 
whether any given A is included or not For this reason, it 
is better to adopt the term Undesignate, suggested by Sir 
W. Hamilton. 

1 " Copula non est nisi verbum substantivum prasentis tem- 
poris. Denotat enim nexum inter subjectum et prsedicatum 
intercedentem, qualis nempe representatur in ideis nostris. 
Cum igitur in omni judicio nexus ille semper sit aliquid 
presens, copula non esse potest nisi verbum substantivum 
praesentis temporis." Wolf, Phil. Rat. §. 202. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 73 

will be desirable to compare the conclusions arrived 
at with those of two eminent philosophers, from 
both of whom they appear, verbally at least, to 
differ in a slight degree. 

Locke's well-known definition of knowledge, 
" the perception of the agreement or disagreement 
of two ideas," has been somewhat severely com- 
mented on by his illustrious critic, M. Cousin m . 
The French philosopher shews clearly that, in 
many of our judgments, we cannot be said to 
have distinct notions of the terms united, prior to 
pronouncing on the fact of their agreement. The 
distinctions drawn in the preceding remarks will, 
I think, furnish a ground for a more exact decision 
of the point at issue, than has been given either 
by the English philosopher or his French censor. 
Locke's definition abounds in verbal inaccuracy, 
for which, however, the author is not entirely 
responsible, as it is partly owing to the unsettled 
signification, in his day, of philosophical terms, 
which have since been more accurately determined. 
Taking Perception in the strict sense to which it 
has been determined by Reid and his successors, 
it is not correct to say, in general terms, that the 
agreement of ideas is in all cases perceived. Ex- 
tending Knowledge, as Locke himself does, to 

¦ Court de Philosophic, lecon 23. Compare Jouffroy's Reid, 
Preface, p. 130, 333, sqq. For other criticisms, see Reid, 
Intellectual Powers, Essay I. ch. 7. Essay VI. ch. 3. Leibnitz, 
Nouveaux Essati, IV. ] . 



74 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

include the evidence of the senses , it is incorrect 
to say that, in all knowledge, we have a distinct 
consciousness of two ideas and their agreement. 
And the term Idea itself, used loosely by Locke, 
as by Descartes, for any object of consciousness, 
admits of a variety of subordinate senses, in some 
of which the definition is assuredly inaccurate* 
But, as limited to the logical judgment proper, 
as it has been above distinguished from the psy- 
chological, the definition is substantially correct, 
though susceptible of some verbal improvement 
In every logical judgment there is a union of 
concepts; and every concept is represented by 
a sign. The concepts themselves must be re- 
garded as existing in the mind before their 
union ; and, the signs being practically furnished 
by the existing terms of a language, the 
logical judgment may be properly described as 
formed by the combination of concepts ; as its 
representative, the proposition, is formed by the 
combination of terms. But to the judgments 
distinguished as psychological the definition of 
Locke is inapplicable, and here the objections of 
M. Cousin may be urged with full effect. Such 
are all the spontaneous judgments of the per- 
ceptive and imaginative faculties. Such too is the 
Cartesian cogito, ergo su??i, a primitive judgment, 
not of the senses, but of the internal consciousness, 
which the opponents of Descartes, from Gassendi 

¦ Essay, B. IV. ch. 2. §. 14. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 75 

to Kant, have misrepresented as a logical reason- 
ing from concepts . The definition of Locke is 
therefore correct, as far as regards judgments of 
thought, properly so called ; judgments forihed by 
means of concepts, and, consequently, of language, 
and whose constituent parts are given piecemeal in 
words, and put together by the mind in the act of 
judging. It is incorrect, as regards all judgments, 
whether concerning the ego or the non-ego, which 
the mind forms for itself, by an immediate act of 
consciousness, without the aid of verbal or other 
signs of voluntary institution. 

From the definition of Locke, we proceed to 
consider that of Kant. In the Critical Philosophy, 
Thought and Judgment are synonymous and the 
act of the understanding. The understanding may 
be defined indifferently, the faculty of thinking, or 
the faculty of judging ; for all thought is cognition 
by means of concepts ; and all concepts are the 
predicates of possible judgments, and are, by such 
judgments, referred to objects of sensible intuition, 
either immediately, or through the interposition of 



° See an article in Cousin s Fragments Philosopkiques, 
" Sur le vrai sens du cogito, ergo, sum" To this I am indebted 
for the following quotation from Descartes himself, " Cum 
itaque quis advertit se cogitare, atque inde sequi se existere, 
quamvis forte nunquam antea quaesiverit quid sit cogitatio 
nee quid existentia, non potest tamen non utramque satis 
nosse, ut sibi in hac parte satisfaciat." Responsio ad sesttas 
objectiones. See also Clauberg, Logica, Qu. clx. 



76 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

lower concepts p . The intuitions of sense being, 
according to Kant's theory of perception, imme- 
diate representations of objects, the judgment is 
thus the mediate cognition of an object, or the 
representation of a representation" 1 . 

In a psychological point of view, the Kantian 
definition of Judgment is too narrow ; as it virtually 
denies that any act of Judgment whatever is per- 
formed in the exercise of the intuitive faculties ; 
a denial which the author repeats still more 
explicitly in other passages r . In a logical point 
of view, it is too wide ; the province of Judgment 

p « Wir konnen alle Handlungen des Vers tan des auf Ur- 
theile zuriickfuhren, so dass der Verstand iiberhaupt als ein 
Vermogen zu urtheilen vorgestellt warden kann. Denn er 
ist nach dem Obigen ein Vermogen zu denken. Denken ist 
das Erkenntniss durch Begriffe. Begriffe aber beziehen sich, 
als Pradicate moglicher Urtheile, auf irgend eine Vorstellung 
?on einem noch unbe9timmten Gegenstande." Kritik der r. V. 
p. 70. ed. Bosenkranz. 

* " Da keine Vorstellung unmittelbar auf den Gegenstand 
geht, als bios die Anschauung, so wird ein Begriff niemals 
auf einen Gegenstand unmittelbar, sondern auf irgend eine 
andre Vorstellung von demselben (sie sey Anschauung oder 
selbst scbon Begriff) bezogen. Das Urtheil ist also die 
mittelbare Erkenntniss eines Gegenstandes, mithin die Vor- 
stellung einer Vorstellung desselben." Kritik der r. V. 
p. 69. 

r " Wahrheit oder Schein sind nicht im Gegenstande, 
so feme er angeschaut wird, sondern im Urtheile iiber den- 
selben, so feme er gedacht wird. Man kann also zwar 
rich tig sagen : dass die Sinne nicht irren, aber nicht darum, 
well sie jederzeit richtig urtheilen, sondern weii sie gar nicht 
urtheilen." Kritik der r. V. p. 238. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 77 

being made coextensive with the whole of Thought, 
including, therefore, under it, Conception or Simple 
Apprehension. Every concept, according to Kant, 
is the predicate of a possible judgment, in which it 
may be affirmed of any of the objects of intuition 
included within its sphere. He might have gone 
further, and said that, in all positive thinking, 
the possible judgment becomes an actual one. 
But it is a psychological, not a logical judgment. 
It affirms only the mental existence of the object, 
as now present in thought; and the affirmation 
is necessarily true, whatever be the nature of the 
object. To make the doctrine of Kant consistent, 
the province assigned to Judgment must be either 
extended or contracted. It must either be extended, 
to denote every consciousness of a relation between 
subject and object, i. e. to every operation of mind, 
or it must be contracted, to denote the conscious- 
ness of a relation between two objects of thought ; 
in which case it does not extend beyond the logical 
judgment by means of, at least, two concepts. 

Having thus pointed out the distinction of 
Thought from other mental acts, and its various 
subdivisions relatively to Logic, I shall proceed to 
offer a few observations on the nature of Law, in 
so far as that term is applicable to a conscious 
subject. 



CHAPTER III. 

ON LAW, AS RELATED TO THOUGHT AND OTHER OBJECTS. 

The following passage from Archbishop Whately's 
Logic may serve as an appropriate introduction 
to this part of our subject. " What may be 
called a mathematical impossibility, is that which 
involves an absurdity and self-contradiction ; e. g. 
that two straight lines should inclose a space, is 
not only impossible but inconceivable, as it would 
be at variance with the definition of a straight 
line. And it should be observed, that inability to 
accomplish any thing which is, in this sense, im- 
possible, implies no limitation of power, and is 
compatible, even with omnipotence, in the fullest 
sense of the word. If it be proposed, e. g. to 
construct a triangle having one of its sides equal 
to the other two, or to find two numbers having 
the same ratio to each other as the side of a 
square and its diameter, it is not from a defect of 
power that we are precluded from solving such a 
problem as these ; since in fact the problem is 
in itself unmeaning and absurd : it is, in reality, 
nothing, that is required to be done\" 

» Whately's Logic, p. 853 (Sixth Edition.) 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 79 

Substantially, perhaps, this is not far from the 
truth. But it may be stated in a more satisfactory 
form, by divesting it of a hypothesis, which, even 
if true, (and this we have no means of ascertain- 
ing,) may for the present purpose be dispensed 
with b . 

When any thing is said to be inconceivable, it 
is thereby acknowledged that the human mind is 
not altogether unrestricted in its operations. It is 
bounded, not only as regards the sphere of objects 
of which it is permitted to take cognisance, but 
also as regards the manner in which it is capable 
of thinking about objects within that sphere. In 
other words, there are laws under which the mind 
is compelled to think, and which it cannot trans- 
gress, otherwise than negatively, by ceasing to 
think at all. 

The existence, then, of laws of thought, is a 
fact of which our every-day consciousness assures 
us. Necessity, of whatsoever kind, implies a ne- 
cessary agent, that is, an agent acting under a law. 
If, then, any question can be proposed to the mind 
of man, which he feels himself compelled to decide 
in one way only, that compulsion is at once an 

b In venturing to criticise this note, one of the most 
valuable portions of the Archbishop's work, I beg to state, 
that it is to the wording only of the first part that my 
remarks are intended to apply. With the just and philo- 
sophical distinction laid down in the same place between the 
three senses of the word impossibility, I have only to express 
full concurrence. 



80 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

evidence of the existence of laws which as a 
thinker he is compelled to obey. 

And this admission is all that is required for 
the solution of such difficulties as that suggested 
above. If our whole thinking is subject to certain 
laws, it follows that we cannot think of any object, 
not even of Omnipotence itself, except as those 
laws compel us. The limitation does not lie in 
the object of which we think, but in the thinking 
subject. " Whatsoever we imagine," says Hobbes, 
" is finite. Therefore there is no idea or con- 
ception of any thing we call infinite. No man can 
have in his mind an image of infinite magnitude; 
nor conceive infinite swiftness, infinite time, or 
infinite force, or infinite power. When we say 
any thing is infinite, we signify only, that we are 
not able to conceive the ends and bounds of the 
things named ; having no conception of the thing, 
but of our own inability V 

It may be, indeed, that the conditions of possible 
thought correspond to conditions of possible being, 
that what is to us inconceivable is in itself non- 

c Leviathan, i. 8. (p. 1 7. ed. Molesworth.) This opinion of 
Hobbes has been severely censured by Cudworth, Intellectual 
System, B. I. ch. v. sect. 1. who however mistakes the meaning 
of the assertion, both in what it expresses and in what it 
implies. The error of Cudworth in this respect has been 
corrected by his learned translator Mosheim, who, though no 
friend to Hobbes's views in general, admits that in this par- 
ticular his doctrine is not liable to the objections urged 
against it. See Harrison's edition of Cudworth, vol* ii. 
p. 522. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 81 

existent 4 . But of this, from the nature of the 
case, it is impossible to have any evidence. If 
man as a thinker is subject to necessary laws, he 
cannot examine the absolute validity of the laws 
themselves, except by assuming the whole question 
at issue. For such examination must itself be 
conducted in subordination to the same conditions. 
Whatever weakness, therefore, there may be in 
the object of criticism, the same must necessarily 
affect the critical process itself. 

We may indeed believe, and ought to believe, 
that the powers which our Creator has bestowed 
upon us are not given as the instruments of 
deception. We may believe, and ought to believe, 
that, intellectually no less than morally, the pre- 
sent life is a state of discipline and preparation for 
another ; and that the portion of knowledge which 
our limited faculties are permitted to attain to 
here may indeed, in the eyes of a higher Intel- 
ligence, be but partial truth, but cannot be 
absolute falsehood. But in believing thus, we 
desert the evidence of Reason to rest on that of 
Faith, and of the principles on which Reason 
itself depends it is obviously impossible to have 
any other guarantee. 

d In itself, distinguished from, as an object of thought As 

the latter, it is of course impossible. The distinction between 

•things per **, and things as objects of thought, will be familiar 

to every reader of Kant : it is, in fact, the cardinal point of 

the whole Critical Philosophy. 

G 



82 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

But such a faith, however well founded, has but 
a regulative and practical, not a speculative appli- 
cation. It bids us rest content within the limits 
which have been assigned to us : it cannot enable 
us to overleap them, or to exalt to a more abso- 
lute character the conclusions obtained by finite 
thinkers concerning finite objects of thought 6 . 
For the same condition which disqualifies us from 
criticising the laws of thought must also deprive 
us of the power of ascertaining how much of the 
results of those laws is true in itself, and how 
much is relative and dependent upon the parti- 
cular bodily or mental constitution of man during 
the present life. To determine this question, it 
would be necessary to examine the same con- 
clusions with a new set of faculties f and under 
new conditions of thought, so as to separate what 
is merely relative to the existing state of human 

e When Kant (Kritik der r. V. p. 49.) declares that the objects 
of our intuition are not in themselves as they appear to us, he 
falls into the opposite extreme to that which he is combating: 
the Critic becomes a Dogmatist in negation. To warrant 
this conclusion, we must previously have compared things as 
they are with things as they seem ; a comparison which is, em 
hypothesi, impossible. We can only say, that we have no 
means of determining whether they agree or not And, in the 
absence of proof on either side, the presumption is in favour 
of what is at least subjectively true. The onus probandi lies 
with the assailant, not with the defender, of our faculties. 
Cf. Royer-Collard, Jouflroy's Re id, vol. iv. p. 412. 

f See Reid, InteLL Powers, Essay vi. ch. 5. (p. 447. ed. 
Hamilton.) 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 83 

consciousness, from what is absolute and common 
to other intelligences 8 . 

In accordance with these views, we are natu- 
rally led to regard all the hitherto unsolved pro- 
blems of Metaphysics, as requiring to be treated 
from a psychological, instead of an ontological 
point of view. Instead of asking what are the 
circumstances in the constitution of things, by 
virtue of which they present such and such diffi- 
culties and contradictions to human understanding, 
we must ask what are the circumstances of the 
human understanding itself, by virtue of which a 
distinction exists between the conceivable and the 
inconceivable. Such, in fact, was the revolution 
introduced by Kant into metaphysical speculation ; 
a revolution which he aptly compares to that 
effected in Astronomy by Copernicus, when he 
thought of investigating the apparent motion of 

* Truth relative to no intelligence is a contradiction in 
terms, as it implies a relation existing after one of the cor- 
relatives has been annihilated. Our only possible notion of 
absolute truth, is a truth relative to all intelligences. If all 
truth is subjective which implies a cognitive power, Omni- 
science itself has but subjective truth. " Aux termes de la 
philosophic de Kant," says M. Cousin, "la raison divine 
serait done aussi frappee de subjectivite, par cela mSme que 
cette raison reside dans un sujet determine qui est Dieu." 
(Lemons sur Kant, p. 350.) Within the limits of human 
knowledge the same principle is allowed by Kant himself, 
44 so bedeutet die objective Giiltigkeit des Erfahrungsurtheils 
nichts anders, als die nothwendige Allgemeingiiltigkeit des- 
selben." Prolegomena, §. 18. 

o2 



84 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

the heavens from the side of the spectator, instead 
of from that of the objects. The advantages of 
such a treatment are obvious. From the objective 
view, we obtain only the fact, that certain questions 
have up to the present time remained unsolved. 
From the subjective view, we learn why they are 
insoluble ; and the answer to this question deter- 
mines the laws and limits of thought The abuse 
of the method appears in the attempts of the suc- 
cessors of Kant, especially of Schelling and Hegel, 
to construct a philosophy of the absolute from the 
subjective side, by denying in certain relations the 
validity of those laws of thought which they 
acknowledge in others, and endeavouring thereby 
to do away with relation in consciousness alto- 
gether. Such a system, with whatever ability it 
may be constructed, carries in its fundamental 
conception the germ of its own refutation. It 
commences by giving the lie to consciousness ; it 
proceeds by dividing the human mind against 
itself, the understanding against the reason, and 
the reason against the understanding ; it ends by 
leaving no test by which its own truth can be 
determined. But the philosophy of Kant is like 
the spear of Achilles, and possesses virtue to heal 
the wounds which it has itself inflicted. While it 
is impossible to deny the lineal descent of the 
philosophy of Schelling and of Hegel from a one- 
sided view of Kantian principles, it is equally clear, 
that the only satisfactory refutation of the extra- 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 85 

vagances of that philosophy must be based on a 
sober acknowledgment of those laws and limits of 
the mental faculties which Kant has been mainly 
instrumental in pointing out. 

We must admit, then, that our present faculties 
are trustworthy guides to that portion of know- 
ledge which God designs us to attain to in our 
present state ; that the laws to which these faculties 
are subjected, though perhaps not absolutely bind- 
ing on things in themselves, are binding upon our 
mode of contemplating them ; that, while we obey 
these laws, we seek after truth, according to our 
kind and in conformity with the end of our intel- 
lectual being; and that, when we neglect them, 
we abandon ourselves to every form of error ; or 
rather, we lose all power of discerning between 
error and truth ; we commence by an act of intel- 
lectual suicide, and construct a system which, by 
virtue of its fundamental principle, must disclaim 
all superiority over, and decline to combat with, 
any rival theory ; its sole claim to attention being, 
that it may, for aught we know, be true, or false, 
or both, or neither. 

To apply these principles to the question with 
which we commenced. Among the limitations to 
which even Omnipotence is regarded as subject, 
none is of older birth, or has been more frequently 
alleged, than the impossibility of undoing an act 
already done, 

ft/ivov yoig avtov xa) Qebg <rr&qi<rx8Tat, 
ayiyi/jfra, woisTv aW av jj awgay/xeva. 



86 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

Now it may be that Time and Space are, as Kant 
maintains, merely subjective conditions of human 
sensibility. As such, they limit the whole exercise 
of human thought. But the limits of the thinking 
faculty are limits of things as objects of thought 
only ; and beyond that sphere we know nothing. 
It may be that the whole distinction of past, 
present, and future, has no place relatively to other 
intelligences than ours. Still, that distinction con- 
tinues to influence all human thought ; and every 
act, as an object of thought, must be regarded as 
taking place according to the conditions of temporal 
succession. If we cease to regard it in this light, 
we do not extend our knowledge, but abandon the 
problem as (humanly speaking) unthinkable. The 
limitation, then, is not of Omnipotence in itself, but 
of all power as the object of human thought h . The 
ultimate consequence of this admission will be, that 
the unlimited is not an object of human thought 
at all 1 . It may be an object of human belief, but 
the two provinces are not coextensive. 

So again with reference to the impossibility of 

b This distinction is drawn by Locke in his Second Reply 
to the Bishop of Worcester. " But it is further urged, that 
we cannot conceive how matter can think. I grant it : but to 
argue from thence, that God therefore cannot give to matter 
a faculty of thinking, is to say God s omnipotency is limited 
to a narrow compass, because man's understanding is so; 
and brings down God's infinite power to the size of our 
capacities." 

1 See the admirable Article on M. Cousin's Philosophy by 
Sir W. Hamilton, Discussions, p. 1. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 87 

reversing a necessary truth, such as those of 
Geometry. To whom is the problem, to construct 
a triangle, one of whose sides shall be greater than 
the other two, u unmeaning ?" Clearly to the 
Geometer, whose science has already shewn him 
the necessary truth of a contradictory proposition. 
By a law of thought, he is compelled to deny that 
two contradictory assertions can be true at the 
same time. Why they may not both be true at 
different times, why a mathematical proposition 
once demonstrated is held always and every where 
true, and its contradictory always and every where 
false ; while other truths, however certain at pre- 
sent, are allowed only to a limited extent under 
temporal or local restrictions, requires some further 
consideration. 

Necessity is the result of law, and law implies 
an agent whose working is regulated thereby \ 
But it is a law only to that which works under 
it : to an observer, who sees the results of the law 
without being subject to its influence, it is no more 
than a fact evidenced by or inferred from sensible 
observation, and can never obtain higher value 
than that of a generalization from a more or less 
extended experience. Hence arise two very dif- 

k " All things that are, have some operation not violent or 
casual. . . . That which doth assign unto each thing the kind, 
that which doth moderate the force and power, that which 
doth appoint the form and measure, of working, the same we 
term a Law." Hooker, E. P. i. 2. 



88 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

ferent kinds of necessity, the results respectively of 
laws of the ego and of the n<m-ego } ; of laws under 
which I feel myself compelled to think, and of 
laws under which I see other agents invariably 
working. These two, it is essential to all sound 
thinking to distinguish from each other ; and the 
more so, inasmuch as they have been perpetually 
confounded together; the distinctive features of 
each have been overlooked by the disciples of 
opposite schools : by one party, laws of thought 
have been degraded to generalizations from expe- 
rience; by another, empirical laws have been 
invested with the character and authority of 
original principles of mind m . And yet, apart from 
the psychological tenets of any particular school, 

1 It is much to be wished that these expressions, or some 
equivalent, were more naturalized in English philosophy. In 
Germany and France they are fully established as technical 
terms, and the foundation of the most important distinctions 
in mental science. In adopting here the Latin expressions 
instead of English equivalents, I have been guided by the 
authority of Sir W. Hamilton, Beid's Works, p. 100, supported 
by that of Mr. Hall am, Literature of Europe, vol. ii. p. 436. 
(second edition.) The latter observes of the term Ego, •« It 
seems reasonable not to scruple the use of a word so con- 
venient, if not necessary, to express the unity of the conscious 
principle. If it had been employed earlier, I am apt to 
think that some great metaphysical extravagances would 
have been avoided, and some fundamental truths more clearly 
apprehended." 

m The opposite theories of Dr. Whewell and of Mr. Mill, 
on the nature of axiomatic principles, exhibit the extreme 
views in a remarkable degree. See Appendix, note A. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIG4'. 89 

it would seem as if a distinctive criterion might 
a priori be determined, from a mere analysis of 
the notion of law and its operation. 

Setting aside, for an instant, the question, how 
the mind of man is actually constituted, let us 
suppose an intelligent being, subject to laws under 
which he is compelled to think, and placed in the 
midst of a world of material agents, subject to laws 
under which they must act. What would be the 
distinctive character presented to his mind by these 
respective laws of himself and of the world without ? 
The laws of the planetary motions are absolutely 
binding on the moving bodies themselves, inde- 
pendently of the existence of astronomical science. 
But it is optional with, an intelligent being to 
study astronomy or not ; and, when he does so, he 
observes, as matter of fact, how such laws influence 
their own subordinate agents ; but he does not 
himself become an agent under their influence. 
As facts of his experience 11 , they are known solely 
in and through his observation ; as laws within 
their own sphere, they are independent of his 
knowing aught about them. But the laws of his 
mind come into operation as laws when the act of 
thinking commences, and are binding, not on this 

n Les verites primitives sont de deux sortes, com me les 
derivatives. Elles sont du nombre des verites de raison, ou 
des verites de fait. Les verites de raison sont necessaires, 
et celles de fait sont con tin gen tes." Leibnitz, Nouv. Essais, 
iv. 2. 



90 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

or that class of physical phenomena, but upon 
the thinker himself in the contemplation of all of 
them. Hence it is not optional with him whether 
he will think according to these or other conditions: 
choose what object of study he will, he cannot 
think at all, he cannot conceive his liberty of 
choosing, without being ipso facto under their 
influence. Hence arises an obvious criterion. 
A law which is not binding upon me as a thinker 
may at any time be reversed, without affecting my 
mode of observing the same agents under their 
new conditions. And I have no difficulty in 
conceiving such a reversal as at any moment 
possible, because, antecedent to experience, I had 
no internal bias which required the recognition 
of the existing law rather than of any other. I 
have only to discard an adventitious knowledge. 
But the reversal of a necessary law of thought, 
supposing that there are such, is, from the nature 
of the case, inconceivable; for conception is 
itself the servant of the law, and, ex hypothesi, 
cannot rebel against it I cannot, by an act of 
thought, annihilate the conditions by which all 
thought is governed. I can, indeed, admit the 
possibility that there may be other beings thinking 
under other laws; but I can form no positive 
conception of their nature. Such a supposition 
is not thought, but its negation. A mind cannot 
think by other laws than its own. 

Now how far is this hypothesis supported by 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 91 

facts? Is it a matter of fact, that men are ac- 
quainted with certain truths which they acknow- 
ledge to be necessary only while the present laws 
of nature remain in force, and which they can 
conceive as reversible at any moment, and others 
which they are compelled to regard as necessary 
under all circumstances of which they are capable 
of thinking. Is it a matter of fact, that men do 
not attribute the same necessity and universality to 
physical as to mathematical truths ? Do they not 
acknowledge that, while the laws of the physical 
world continue as they are, seed-time and harvest, 
and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and 
day and night, shall never cease; and yet, have 
they any difficulty in conceiving the earth's motion 
stopped by some superior power, and one half 
of the globe left from that time forth in perpetual 
daylight ? Or do they see the least improbability, 



" Tous les exemples qui connrment une verite generate, 
de quelque nombre qu'ils soient, ne suffisent pas pour etablir 
la necessite universelle de cette meme verite : car il ne suit 
pas, que ce qui est arrive arrivera toujours de menie. Par 
example, les Grecs et les Bomains et tous les autres peuples 
ont toujours remarque, qu'avant le decours de vingt quatre 
heures le jour se change en nuit, et la nuit en jour. Mais on 
se seroit trompe si Ton avoit cru, que la meme regie 8 'observe 
partout, puisqu'on a vu le contraire dans le sejour de Nova 
Zembla. Et celui-la se tromperoit encore, qui croiroit, que 
c'est au moins dans nos climats une verite necessaire et 
etemelle, puisqu'on doit juger, que la Terre et le Soleil mdme 
n 'existent pas necessairement, et qu'il y aura peut-6tre un 



92 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

not to say impossibility, in the supposition, that in 
some remote part of space there may exist worlds in 
which the alternations of the seasons have no place? 
On the other hand, can they conceive the same power 
forming a triangle with more or less than two 
right angles? can they conceive an occurrence 
taking place in any portion of space without a cause ? 
or an object possessing neither of two contradictory 
attributes ? If such a distinction exists, and our 
daily consciousness assures us that it does, the fact 
at once affords at least a strong presumption, that 
the necessity in the one case is a necessity of 
observation only, depending on the laws of the 
world without, in the other a necessity of thought, 
depending on the laws of our mental constitution. 
But granting that Thought has its laws, how are 
these to be discovered ? Only by reflection upon 
the phenomena of actual thinking, and the restric- 
tion to which, in all cases, we experience it to be 
subject. To learn how we think, we must in the 
first place actually think ; and a multitude of suc- 
cessive acts of thought will be necessary, before 
we become aware that certain conditions are 
contingent and limited to some of those acts only, 
while others are necessary and cannot but be 
present in all p . If, therefore, Experience be taken 

terns, ou ce bel astre ne sera plus avec tout son Systeme, au 
mo ins en sa p resent e forme." Leibnitz, Nouveaux Essais, 
Avant-Propos. 

p See Hamilton on Reid, p. 772. and Cousin, Cours de 
Philosophie, Ley. 22. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 93 

in a wide sense, as coextensive with the whole of 
consciousness, to include all of which the mind is 
conscious as agent or patient, all that it does from 
within, as well as all that it suffers from without, — 
in this sense, the laws of thought as well as the 
phenomena of matter, in fact, all knowledge what- 
ever, may be said to be derived from experience*. 
But further, experience in its narrower and more 
common meaning, as limited to the results of 
sensation and perception only 1 , is, though not the 
source, the indispensable condition of discovering 
the laws of mind as well as of matter. For, to 
think actually, we must think about something; 
this something, the object-matter of thought, what- 
ever it may be, must in the first instance be 
supplied through the medium of the senses ; for 
thought itself does not become an object of thought 
till after it has been called into exercise by objects 
presented from without'. But while the material 

i In this extended sense, Wolf derives the principle of con- 
tradiction from experience : " Experiri dicimur, quicquid ad 
perceptiones nostras attenti cognoscimus. Solem lucere cog- 
noscimus ad ea attenti, quae visu percipimus. Similiter ad 
nosmet ipsos attenti cognoscimus, nos non posse assensum 
prebere contradictoriis, v. gr. non posse sumere tanquam 
verum, quod simul pluat vel non pluat." Ph. Rat. §. 664. 
Here it should be observed that perception is used in a wider 
sense than that to which Beid and the Scottish Philosophers 
after him restrict it. 

r 'E#e fuv oZv alcr&T)(r€G>s yiWreu lAvrffiq, « & fiyfj^rjs noWdxts tov 
airov yipofuvrjs £fX7T€ipia. Arist. Anal. Post. ii. 19. 

¦ Gf. Arist. De Anima, iii. 4. 7. 



94 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

or external element varies with every successive 
act of thought, the formal or internal remains the 
same in all ; and thus the necessary law, binding 
on the thinker in every instance, is distinguished 
from the contingent objects, about which he 
thinks on this or that occasion. 

The last consideration necessitates a further 
division of those truths, which have already been 
distinguished as necessary, and therefore not de- 
rived from experience. While we maintain that 
all necessary truths must have their origin in the 
constitution of the mind itself, and are virtually 
prior to all experience, they cannot all of them be 
referred to Laws of Thought properly so called. 
For thought, as thought, cannot be limited to 
any special class of objects : its laws must operate 
in all cases alike, whatever be the matter on which 
it is engaged. That every triangle has its angles 
equal to two right angles, is indeed a necessary 
truth ; but it is true of triangles only, and cannot 
be applied to any other object. But that the 
same subject cannot possess contradictory attri- 
butes, is a principle equally applicable to the 
objects of geometrical demonstration and to the 
most contingent facts of sensible experience. It 
is equally certain, that no man can at once be 
standing and not standing, as that the angles of a 
triangle cannot be both equal and unequal to two 
right angles. Hence the criterion of absolute 
necessity, though valid as far as it goes, is not 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 95 

adequate to determine the whole question. It 
serves to distinguish judgments a priori from 
judgments of experience : it does not distinguish 
between different classes of the former, nor explain 
their several relations to the mind, which is the 
common source of all. Of the various judgments 
which have been enumerated by philosophers as 
necessary truths, it will be sufficient for our present 
purpose to select three classes, which may be 
severally distinguished as Mathematical, Meta- 
physical, and Logical Necessity. All these, being 
in different ways regarded as absolutely and 
universally necessary, must be considered as in 
different ways dependent on laws of our mental 
constitution. From all, must be distinguished 
what is commonly called Physical Necessity, or 
belief in the permanence of Laws of Nature. 
The several distinctions may be represented by 
the following questions. 

II Why do I judge, that a triangle can under 
no circumstances whatever have its angles greater 
or less than two right angles ? 

II. Why do I judge, that every sehsible quality 
must belong to some subject, and that every 
change is and must be brought about by some 
cause ? 

III. Why do I judge, that two contradictory 
attributes can under no circumstances whatever 
coexist in the same subject ? 

IV. Why do I judge, that the alternations of 



96 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

day and night will not, under the existing circum- 
stances of our globe, cease to take place ? 

The last of these obviously stands on a different 
ground from the other three. I am immediately 
cognisant of law only as I am conscious of its 
obligation upon myself. The law itself may be 
physical, intellectual, or moral ; but to know it as 
a law, I must know it as a condition which I 
cannot or ought not to transgress. Law, in this 
sense, as a discerned obligation, can obviously 
exist only in relation to a conscious agent; and 
even with regard to conscious agents, other than 
myself, I only infer the existence of the law from 
a supposed similarity between their constitutions 
and my own. But, as regards unconscious agents, 
Law means no more than a constantly observed 
fact in its highest generalization. When I speak 
of the alternations of day and night as consequent 
on a law of nature, I mean no more than that the 
alternation has invariably been observed to take 
place : and, when I resolve such alternations into 
the law of the earth's rotation, I mean only that 
the earth does constantly revolve on her axis once 
in twenty-four hours. Or, if I could resolve all 
the phenomena of the material world into an 
universal law of gravitation, I should obtain no 
more than the universal fact, that all particles of 
matter in the universe do gravitate towards each 
other, and that certain subordinate combinations 
of those particles present certain phenomena in so 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 97 

doing. But I have not, by this resolution, got any 
nearer to necessity ; for the gravitation of bodies 
in the inverse ratio of the square of the distance 
is, like the ebb and flow of the tides, or the 
elliptical orbits of the planets, an observed fact 
in the order of nature, and it is no more*. My 
belief in the continuance of this observed order 
may perhaps be explained by some law of my 
mental constitution ; but, as thus explained, it is 
a law of mind, and not of matter. Under what 
circumstances certain facts of nature may be 
resolved into others, and what kinds of experiment 
and observation will contribute to this end, are 
questions which, with all their importance, are 
totally distinct from those which form the object 
of the present inquiry. 

I shall only observe here, that to call such 
questions a portion of Logic, that is, to regard the 
New Organon as a supplement to the Old, and 
both as forming parts of the same Science, is to 
confound two essentially distinct branches of 
knowledge, distinct in their end, in their means, 
and in their evidence 11 . " We do not enlarge the 
sciences," says Kant, " but disfigure them, when 
we suffer their boundaries to run into one another." 
The confusion produced in the present instance 

* See Stewart, Elements, vol. ii. ch. 2. sect. 4. 

u On this distinction some excellent remarks will be 
found in M. Jouflroy's Preface to his translation of Reid, 
p. 43. 

H 



98 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

is perhaps the most injurious of all to sound 
thinking, a confusion between the mental self 
and its sensible objects, the ego and the* non-ego, 
the positive and negative poles of speculative 
philosophy. 



CHAPTER IV. 

ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTER OF MATHEMATICAL NECESSITY. 

It has been already observed, that whatever 
truths we are compelled to admit, as every where 
and at all times necessary, must have their origin, 
not without, in the laws of the sensible world, but 
within, in the constitution of the mind itself*. 
Sundry attempts have, indeed, been made to derive 
them from sensible experience and constant asso- 
ciation of ideas 11 ; but this explanation is refuted 
by a criterion decisive of the fate of all hypotheses ; 
it does not account for the phenomena. It does 
not account for the fact, that other associations, 
as frequent and as uniform, are incapable of pro- 
ducing a higher conviction than that of a relative 

* " La preuve originaire des verites necessaires vient du 
seul entendement, et les autres verites viennent des expe- 
riences ou des observations des sens. Notre esprit est 
capable de connoitre les unes et les autres, mais il est la 
source des premieres, et quelque nombre d'experiences parti- 
cular es qu'on puisse avoir d'une verite universelle, on ne 
sauroit 8 'en assurer pour toujours par l'induction, sans en 
connoitre. la necessite par la raison." Leibnitz, Nouv. Essais, 
1. i. ch. 1. 

b See, for example, Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 805. 

h2 



100 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

and physical necessity only. And, indeed, this 
might have been expected beforehand : for the 
utmost rigour in a law of the sensible world may 
furnish a sufficient reason why phenomena must 
take place in a certain manner, but furnishes no 
reason at all why I must think so. 

But it is one thing to recognise the operation 
of a mental law, and another to discover the law 
itself. The distinction above noticed between 
Mathematical, Metaphysical, and Logical Neces- 
sity, implies, that, although the origin of all is to 
be sought for in the mind itself, they are in some 
way differently related to one or other of the 
special faculties of their common source. We 
must further inquire, what is the peculiar relation 
of the mind to mathematical ideas*, by virtue of 
which, not merely the general laws of all thinking, 
but the special applications of those laws in Arith- 
metic and Geometry, possess a necessity which is 
not found when they are applied to concepts 
generalized from experience. How is it that in 
some reasonings both matter and form can be 
furnished by the mind itself, while in others the 
form alone is from the mind, the matter being 
derived from experience ? 

Before entering upon this question, it will be 

c The word idea is here used intentionally, as, in modern 
philosophy, the most vague and indeterminate that could be 
selected. It would be an anticipation of what has yet to be 
determined to give any more definite expression. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 101 

necessary to give some account of Kant's cele- 
brated distinction between Analytical and Syn- 
thetical Judgments. An Analytical or Explicative 
Judgment contains nothing in the predicate but 
what has been already implied in the conception 
of the subject. For example : since the con- 
ception of body implies extension, the proposition, 
" all bodies are extended/' is an Analytical Judg- 
ment. Of this character are all propositions in 
which, in scholastic language, the predicate is said 
to be of the essence of the subject ; whether a part 
of the essence, as in the predication of genus or* 
differentia, or the sum of the parts, as in a 
definition*. In a Synthetical or Ampliative Judg- 
ment, on the other hand, the predicate adds an 
attribute to the subject which has not been already 
thought therein. Thus the proposition, •• all bodies 
ar$ heavy," is a Synthetical Judgment, the attribute 
heavy not being thought in the mere conception 
of body. Of this kind are all propositions in which 
the predicate is said to be joined to the essence of 
the subject, as a property or accident . 

All Analytical Judgments are formed by the mind 
a priori, whether the notion analysed be empirical 
or not. For the mind, having once gained this 
notion as a subject, has no occasion for any addi- 
tional experience to determine the predicate which 

d The substitution of definition for species is intentional. 
• See Kant, Kritik der r. V. p. 21. Prolegomena, p. 16. 
ed. Bosenkranz. 



102 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

is already given therein'. Any Science whatever 
may therefore have abundance of necessary truths 
of this kind : but such do not contribute in any 
way to the extension of our knowledge, but only 
to a more distinct consciousness of what we 
already possess. A Synthetical Judgment, on the 
other hand, is a positive extension of our know- 
ledge, but requires for its formation something 
more than the concept which stands as its subject. 
All empirical judgments are synthetical 8 : but 
mathematical necessity requires that the mind 
should be able to form for itself synthetical judg- 
ments not dependent on experience. 

The axioms of Geometry contain specimens of 
both kinds of judgment. Those which relate ex- 
clusively to geometrical objects, such as, "a straight 
line is the shortest distance between two points V 
" two straight lines cannot enclose a space," " two 
straight lines which, being met by a third, make the 
interior angles less than two right angles, will meet 
if produced," have been shewn by Kant to be syn- 
thetical 1 : and it is with reference to these that he 

1 Kant, ProUg. p. 17. 

« Kant, Kritik der r. V. p. 700. Proleg. p. 18. 

h This is sometimes given as a definition, but it is properly 
synthetical. 

1 " Dies sind die Axiome, welche eigentlich nur Grossen als 
solche betreffen." Kant, Kritik der r. V. p. 143. cf. p. 703. &c. 
Proleg. p. 20. Hence the error of Leibnitz, in maintaining 
that all axioms (excepting, of course, identical judgments 
themselves) may be demonstrated from definitions and the 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 103 

discusses the well-known question, How are syn- 
thetical judgments a priori possible? But those 
axioms which are not peculiar to Geometry, the 
common principles of Aristotle k , such as, "the whole 
is greater than its part," " things that are equal to 
the same are equal to each other," " if equals be 
added to equals, the sums are equal," are analytical 1 . 
The two last, indeed, may be easily shewn to be 
merely various statements of the Principle of 
Identity, " Every thing is equal to itself," or, 
" A = A." Thus, if the common magnitude of the 
first pair of equals be represented by A, and that 
of the second by B, the axiom, " if equals be added 
to equals, the sums are equal," is expressed in the 
identical judgment, « A + B = A + B". m 

judgments of identity. (Opera, Erdm. p. 81 ) He selects, as a 
specimen, the analytical judgment, "the whole is greater than 
its part," and of such his theory is correct ; but no synthetical 
judgment can be proved solely from analytical premises; and, 
without synthetical axioms, Geometry is impossible. 

k Synthetical axioms are not included, as they should have 
been, under the peculiar principles (tduu apxai) of Aristotle, 
which are divided into definitions and hypotheses. With the 
exception of this omission, Aristotle's account of geometrical 
demonstration is far more accurate than any that can be 
found in modern philosophy before Kant. 

1 Cf. Kant, Krtiik der r. 7. p. 148. 

¦ Dr. Whewell, Phil. hid. 8c. voL i. p. 134. speaks of this 
axiom as a condition of the intuition of magnitudes. This is 
a confusion of the common axioms of Logic with the peculiar 
axioms of Geometry. Stewart, Elements, vol. ii. ch. I. falls 
into the opposite error, regarding all the truths of Geometry 
as deduced from definition*. 



104 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

The former claps of axioms determine the pecu- 
liar character of all the conclusions of Geometry : 
the latter have no peculiar relation to Mathematics, 
but depend on the general conditions of all think- 
ing whatever, and have therefore a logical, not a 
mathematical necessity. The whole question of 
the superior necessity of Geometry to Physical 
Science depends upon the manner in which we 
account for the origin of the synthetical axioms 
relating to magnitudes as such. As an instance, 
we may take the proposition, " Two straight lines 
cannot enclose a space/' 

An eminent writer of the present day has laboured 
hard to prove that this principle is nothing but a 
generalization from experience, and, consequently, 
that our belief in the superior necessity of mathe- 
matical as compared with physical truths is a mere 
self-deception. He lays much stress on one of 
the characteristic properties of geometrical forms, 
their capacity of being painted in the imagination 
with a distinctness equal to reality : in other words, 
the exact resemblance of our ideas of form to the 
sensations which suggest them 11 . But while it is 
impossible to deny the ability with which Mr. Mill 
combats the notion of an a priori necessity in 
Mathematics, it is impossible to assent to an argu- 
ment which contradicts the direct evidence of 
consciousness. Nor does his reasoning against 
Dr. Whewell, however powerful as an argumentum 
" Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 809. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 105 

ad hominem, meet the real question at issue. What 
is required is to account, not for the necessity of 
geometrical axioms as truths relating to objects 
without the mind, but as thoughts relating to objects 
within. Mathematical judgments are true of real 
objects only hypothetically. If there exist any 
where in the world a pair of perfect straight lines, 
those lines cannot enclose a space. But if such 
lines exist no where but in my imagination, it is 
equally the case that I cannot think of them as 
invested with the contrary attribute. That which 
is to be accounted for is, not the physical fact that 
certain visible objects possess certain properties, 
but the psychological fact that, in the case of 
geometrical magnitudes, I am compelled to invest 
imagined objects with attributes not gained by 
mere analysis of the notion under which they are 
thought ; — a compulsion of which I am not conscious 
with regard to the most uniform associations of 
phenomena within the field of sensible experience. 
A sensible object may have been familiar to me from 
childhood; but, suppose the external reality de- 
stroyed, I can assert nothing with certainty of its 
imaginary representative, except what is contained 
in the concept itself. So long as I have to conform 
my judgments, not to the actual laws of the exist- 
ing course of nature, but to the possible conditions 
of an imaginary state of things, I have no difficulty 
in attributing contradictory attributes successively 
to the same object. I may imagine the sun rising 



106 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

and setting as now for 100 years, and afterwards 
remaining continually fixed in the meridian. Yet 
my experience of the alternations of day and night 
has been at least as invariable as of the geo- 
metrical properties of bodies. I can imagine the 
satne stone sinking 99 times in the water, and 
floating the 100th ; but my experience invariably 
repeats the former phenomenon only. Whereas, 
in the case of two straight lines, which, so far as 
they are objects of experience, stand only on a 
level with the above and similar instances, the 
mind finds itself compelled to assert as necessary 
one attribute, not contained in the concept, and 
to reject its contradictory as impossible. 

The possibility of forming synthetical judgments 
a priori in Geometry admits of only one adequate 
explanation : viz. that the presentative intuition, as 
well as the representative notion, is derived from 
within, not from without : in other words, that 
both the matter and form of the judgment are 
determined subjectively. If it can be shewn that 
the object of which pure Geometry treats is not 
dependent on sensibility, but sensibility on it ; that 
it is a condition under which alone sensible 
experience is possible, it is obvious that its charac- 
teristics must accompany all our thoughts con- 
cerning any possible object of such experience; 
that its laws must be equally binding upon the 
imaginary representation as upon the sensible 
percept ; for, abstract as we may from this or that 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 107 

particular phenomenon of experience, we are clearly 
incompetent to deprive it of those conditions under 
which alone experience itself is possible. 

Such a condition is furnished to us by the intui- 
tion of Space. That this is a subjective condition 
of all sensible perception, and not a mere empirical 
generalization from a special class of phenomena, 
is evident from the fact, that it is impossible, by any 
effort of thought, to contemplate sensible objects, 
save under this condition. We may shift our atten- 
tion at will from this object to that ; but we can 
think of none, save as existing in space. We may 
conceive the whole world of sensible phenomena 
to be annihilated by the fiat of Omnipotence; but 
the annihilation of space itself is beyond the power 
of thought to contemplate. That things in them- 
selves must exist in space, and, as such, must be so 
presented to every possible intelligence, is more 
than we may venture to affirm ; but this much is 
certain, that man, by a law of his nature, is com- 
pelled to perceive and to think of them as so 
existing. 

Upon this law of the mind depends the certainty 
of Geometrical axioms, as thoughts, though not as 
truths. The peculiar figures of space must, indeed, 
be originally suggested empirically, from observ- 
ation of the actual figures of body ; but this expe- 
rience is still'subject to the same condition. Bodies 
cannot be perceived or imagined, but in space: 
bodies of this or that figure cannot be perceived or 



108 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

imagined, but as occupying a similarly figured 
space. The modifications originally suggested by 
the former become an object of thought as 
existing in the latter ; and the features exhibited 
now and here in the one, we are compelled to 
think as existing always and every where in the 
other. 

The sensationalist is, therefore, in a certain sense 
right, in deriving geometrical axioms from expe- 
rience. It must be conceded to him that, had 
we never seen two straight lines, had we never 
observed that as a matter of fact they did not in 
that particular instance enclose a space, we should 
never have arrived at the conviction that they 
cannot do so in any instance. But this is equally 
true of any product of the imagination. If I had 
never seen separately the upper parts of a man 
and the lower parts of a horse, I could not unite 
them together in the fantastic image of a centaur. 
If I had never seen any black object, I could not 
combine that colour with a known form, so as to 
produce the imagination of a black swan. But 
why is it, that in the one case I find no difficulty 
whatever in going beyond or against the whole 
testimony of my past experience, while in the 
other such transgression is altogether out of my 
power? Experience has uniformly presented to 
me a horse's body in conjunction with a horse's 
head, and a man's head with a man's body ; just 
as experience has uniformly presented to me space 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 109 

enclosed within a pair of curved lines, and not 
within a pair of straight ones. Why do I, in the 
former case, consider the results of my experience 
as contingent only and transgressible, confined to 
the actual phenomena of a limited field, and 
possessing no value beyond it ; while, in the latter, 
I am compelled to regard them as necessary and 
universal? Why can I give in imagination to a 
quadruped body what experience assures me is 
possessed by bipeds only ? And why can I not, 
in like manner, invest straight lines with an attri- 
bute which experience has uniformly presented in 
curves ? 

Can it be said that the ideas in the latter case 
are contradictory, and that their union is therefore 
forbidden by the laws of formal thinking? By 
no means. Straight and curved, viewed merely as 
objects of sense, are opposed only as black and 
white, or as biped and quadruped; they cannot, 
that is, be thought as existing at the same time in 
the same subject : but that property which expe- 
rience testifies to have universally accompanied 
curved lines is not, merely by virtue of that expe- 
rience, more incompatible with straight ones, than 
the head which has uniformly accompanied a 
biped body is incompatible with a quadruped one ; 
or than the form which experience has uniformly 
connected with a white surface is incompatible 
with a black one. Nor does the impossibility 
arise from any defect in the simple ideas, such as 



110 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

exists in the case of a man who can form no idea 
of a colour which he has never seen. We have 
all the simple ideas, or combinations of simple 
ideas, which experience can give : man's head and 
horse's body, in the one case ; straight lines and 
space inclosed, in the other. Why is not the 
latter conjunction as easy to the imagination as 
the former ? 

That it is not so, is a matter, not of this or 
that theory, but of psychological fact; and, as 
such, requires explanation, under any theory what- 
ever. In fact, we may demand, as a sine qua turn, 
of every hypothesis concerning the character of 
human knowledge, that it shall accept and account 
for this fact, instead of neglecting or denying it. 
Only two theories can be mentioned as having 
fairly attempted to fulfil this condition. The one 
is that of Leibnitz, who treats mathematical prin- 
ciples as mere analytical judgments, dependent 
on the laws of formal thought. On this sup- 
position, the distinction between Logical and 
Mathematical necessity vanishes altogether . But 
the solution, though applicable to the general 
axioms which Geometry, in common with all other 
Sciences, tacitly or openly presupposes in so far 
as it contains reasoning at all, fails, when applied 
to those on which all that is especially Geometrical 
depends. By no mere analytical process, as Kant 

° Opera, ed. Erdmann, p. 81. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. Ill 

has shewn p , can the conception of not enclosing 
a space be elicited from that of two straight lines. 
In this, and all similar principles, the predicate of 
the proposition is not developed out of, but added 
to the subject. 

The other, and far more satisfactory solution, is 
that of Kant himself. Whatever we are compelled 
to regard as necessary, must be so in consequence 
of laws, not of the object, but of the subject. But 
there are subjective laws of the presentations of 
sense, as well as of the representations of thought. 
We can perceive only as permitted by .the laws of 
our perceptive faculties, as we can think only in 
accordance with the laws of the understanding. 
If, then, by a law of my sensibility, I am compelled 
to regard all external objects as existing in space, 
any attributes which are once presented to me, 
as properties of a given portion of space, the 
same must necessarily be thought as existing 
in all space, and at all times. For to imagine a 
space in which such properties are not found, 
would not be to imagine merely a different com- 
bination of sensible phenomena, such as continually 
takes place without any change in the laws of 
sensibility : it would be to imagine myself as per- 
ceiving under conditions other than those to which, 
by a law of my being, I am subjected. The attempt 
to realize such imagination is not a new train of 

p Prolegomena, $. 2. 



112 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

thinking ; it is the refusal to think at all. It does 
not inquire what new objects may possibly be 
presented to my present faculties : it requires me 
to determine how objects may appear to a being 
whose faculties are differently constituted from 
mine. Thought, as has already been observed, is 
representative, and can only be exercised on objects 
presented to it. It is therefore restricted by the 
conditions under which alone such presentation 
is possible. If I am to exercise my thought on 
sensible objects at all, I must think of such objects 
under such determinations as the conditions of my 
sensibility require. 

Geometrical principles cannot, therefore, pro- 
perly be called laws of thought; inasmuch as 
they do not govern every operation of the think- 
ing faculty, but only regulate the application of 
thought to a special class of objects. But they 
are laws relative to the subjective condition of one 
portion of our intuitions, those, namely, which are 
presented to the senses, the condition of their 
presentation being Space. But a condition is 
discernible only in conjunction with that of which 
it is the condition. Space, therefore, and its laws, 
can be made known to consciousness only on the 
occasion of an actual experience of sense. Hence 
the twofold character of Geometrical principles : 
empirical, as suggested in and through an act of 
experience ; necessary as relating to the conditions 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 113 

under which alone such experience is possible to 
human faculties 4 . 

The same considerations will explain another 
important feature of Geometrical judgments, ip 
which they represent a striking contrast to truths 
properly called empirical. Imagination plays its 
part in both ; but in the former case it determines, 
in the latter it is determined by the phenomena 
given in experience. The mental image, which 
I can form of this or that individual, possesses 
more or less of truth and reality, as it represents 
with more or less accuracy the features of the 
sensible object; just as the value of a portrait 
depends on the accuracy with which it represents 
the features of the original. The imagination, 
again, may of itself form new combinations of 
attributes; but these also are hypothetically re- 
garded as real or fictitious, according as we may 
or may not hereafter discover such combinations 
to exist in sensible objects. But in Geometry 
the case is reversed. Its propositions are primarily 

i This character of the special axioms of Geometry is 
remarkably expressed in the language of Aristotle. For 

example, ala$rjais t ov% tj tS>v ibl&v, oXX' olq. alcr0av6fi€$a &ri 
t6 iv tois fia0T)furriKois Ztrxarov rpiy&vov. Eth. Nic. vi. 9. And 
again, Tavra d* iariv otov Spav rfj vorjati. Anal. Post, i. 12. 
With which may be compared the language of Kant, Logik, 
J. 35. " Die ersten konnen in der Anschauung dargestellt 
werden." Had Aristotle been aware of the distinction between 
the analytical and the synthetical axioms, he might almost 
have anticipated Kant's view of the whole question. 



114 PROLEGOMEN A LOGIC A. 

and necessarily true of objects existing in the imagin- 
ation ; they are only secondarily and hypothetically 
true of sensible objects, in so far as they conform 
to the imaginary model. If there is such a thing 
in the visible world as a perfect triangle, its angles 
are equal to two right angles. But if there is not, 
the proposition is still true of the triangle as it 
exists in my imagination. And the whole of Geo- 
metry, as a speculative science, would be unaffected 
by the annihilation of every material square or 
triangle in existence ; whatever might become of 
its merely approximate applications to purposes of 
practical utility. Whereas the truths of Zoology, or 
Botany, or Mineralogy, are dependent entirely on 
the existence of animals, or plants, or minerals, not 
as images within the mind, but as entities without 
The cause of this distinction is manifest from what 
has been said above. The truths of Geometry, 
though subsequent to, are not consequent on, ex- 
perience : they relate, not to the empirical figures 
of body, but to the figures of that space upon 
which sensible experience is dependent. They 
are therefore unaffected by the destruction of the 
visible bodies, and could only become fictitious by 
the annihilation of space itself. But the truths of 
Physical Science depend upon experience alone: 
they are true of the objects only as actually pre- 
sented to the senses; and their reality depends 
entirely on the real existence of the sensible type. 
As Geometry is a science of necessary truths 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 115 

relating to continuous quantities or magnitudes, so 
Arithmetic is a science of necessary truths relating 
to discrete quantities or numbers. The two sciences, 
however, present some important features of 
distinction. Almost all the truths of Geometry 
are deductive. It contains very few axioms, pro- 
perly so called, L e. synthetical judgments, derived 
immediately from the intuition of space ; and its 
processes consist in the demonstration of a multi- 
tude of dependent propositions, from the combin- 
ation of these axioms with' analytical principles. 
On the other hand, the fundamental operations of 
Arithmetic, Addition, and Subtraction', present to 
us a vast number of synthetical judgments ; each 
of which, however, is derived immediately from 
intuition, and cannot, by any reasoning process, be 
deduced from any of the preceding ones'. Pure 
Geometry cannot advance a step without demon- 
stration; and its processes are therefore all reducible 
to the syllogistic form. Pure Arithmetic contains 

r " Though in some things, as in numbers, besides adding 
and subtracting, men name other operations, as multiplying 
and dividing, yet are they the same ; for multiplication is but 
adding together of things equal; and division, but subtracting 
of one thing, as often as we can." Hobbes, Leviathan, part i. 
ch. 5. 

• Subtraction may be demonstrated from Addition, if all the 
truths of the latter be supposed given, or vice versa ; though 
it is simpler to regard Subtraction as an independent process 
of denumeration, as is done by Condillac, Lanyue des Calculs, 
ch. i. But no result of either can be derived from a preceding 
result of the same operation. 

i2 



116 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

no demonstration ; and it is only when its calculus 
is applied to the solution of particular problems, 
that reasoning takes place, and the laws of syllo- 
gism become applicable. It is not reasoning which 
tells us that two and two make four* ; nor, when 
we have gained this proposition, can we in any 
way deduce from it that two and four make six. 
We must have recourse in each separate case to 
the senses or the imagination, and, by presenting 
to the one or the other a number of individual 
objects corresponding to each term separately, 
envisage the resulting sum 11 . The intuition thus 

1 Nothing at first sight can appear more satisfactory than 
Leibnitz's proof of this proposition. Nouv. Essais, 1. iv. ch. 7. 
But that demonstration assumes the definitions of the higher 
numbers, (2 is 1 -f- 1 ; 3 is 1 -f 1 -J- 1, &c.) and this, as will 
hereafter appear, is in fact begging the whole question. The 
real point at issue is not whether 4 and 2 + 2 are at bottom 
identical ; so that, both being given, an analysis of each will 
ultimately shew their correspondence ; but whether the former, 
notion, definition and all, is contained in the latter. In other 
words, whether a man who has never learned to count beyond 
two, could obtain three, four, five, and all higher numbers, by 
mere dissection of the notions which he possesses already. 
This remark applies also to Stewart, Elements, vol. ii. ch. 1. 
and to Hegel's attempted critique of Kant, Werke, vol. v. 
p. 275. 

See Kant, Kritik der r. V. p. 703. I have availed myself 
of the term envisage, as the best English equivalent that has 
yet been proposed to the German anschauen, a word which is 
applied generally to any presentation of individual objects, in 
sense or imagination. Etymologically, both the German and 
the English word are drawn from the sense of sight only. 
If uniformity alone were to be consulted, the substantive 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 117 

serves nearly the same purpose as the figure in a 
geometrical demonstration; with the exception, 
that in the latter case the construction is adopted 
to furnish premises to a proposed conclusion ; while 
in the former, it gives us a judgment which we 
have no immediate purpose of applying to any 
further use. 

An apparent objection, which meets us at the 
outset, must not be left unnoticed. If the results 
of Arithmetic are altogether intuitive, how is it 
that they extend to cases of which sense has never 
furnished us with the occasion of judging? I may 
have never seen a thousand objects of any kind 
together, yet I am as fully convinced that 976 + 
24 = 1000, as I am that 2 + 2 = 4, of which 
I see instances every day of my life. And, even if 
I have seen examples of the former as well as of 
the latter, how far does the observed fact help in 
the formation of the judgment? Is my sight so 
acute, that I can distinguish at a glance a group of 
1000 objects from one of 999 ? Can I then in any 
case be said to have seen the fact verified ? And if 
not, how is it that I do not merely know that what 
I have seen in a single case must be true univer- 
sally, but even can be assured of the necessity of 
truths which I have never accurately observed in 
any actual instance ? 

This objection is based on a confusion of intui- 

Awchauung, usually translated intuition, should be rendered 
by envisaging. 



118 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

tion in general with the special presentations ol 
sight*. When the propositions of Arithmetic are 
said to be intuitive, it does not follow that their 
truth must have been observed in visible instances; 
that we must have seen, for example, that two and 
three make five, in lines, or pebbles, or the fingers 
of the hand. It implies only that we must have 
perceived the truth of the proposition in some 
individual series, it may be of visible objects, it may 
be of audible sounds, it may be of states of our own 
minds present to internal observation. In none 
of these cases do we deal with representative con- 
cepts, but with individual objects presented to the 
external or internal sense. 

Now how, as a matter of fact, are arithmetical 
judgments usually formed ? We see inexperienced 
calculators arrive at their results by running 
through, orally or mentally, the several units of 
the numbers to be added together. If we do not 
remember that 18 and 7 make 25, as readily as that 
2 and 2 make 4, we supply the defect by summing 
up severally, 19, 20, 21, &c. The artificial aids to * 
which we have recourse in larger sums, by adding 
up, for instance, the corresponding digits in separate 
columns, are but abbreviated steps of the same 
process. 

* A confusion to which Kant himself has perhaps in some 
degree contributed, by representing (Proleg. §. 2.) five visible 
points as the intuition of the number ; thus by implication 
connecting Arithmetic with space rather than with time. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 119 

Setting aside, as belonging to art rather than 
science, all those methods whose aim is merely to 
extend or facilitate already existing processes, the 
psychological foundation of Arithmetic is to be 
found in the consciousness of successive mental 
states; and its earliest actual process consists 
in giving names to the several members of the 
series. Such a process, which may be denomi- 
nated natural, as distinguished from artificial 
numeration, would proceed steadily forward, from 
one member arbitrarily selected as the starting 
point, acknowledging no relation between the 
several steps, beyond that of succession to its 
predecessor, until the computation ceased from 
the inability of the memory to carry on the series. 
Such a system, however limited in its practical 
results, would rest on precisely the same found- 
ation as the more perfect methods which art has 
supplied us, and will consequently contain all the 
data required for determining the nature of the 
necessary truths of Arithmetical Science. 

As Arithmetic, as well as Geometry, contains 
such truths, it must equally be regarded as founded 
on an internal law or condition of our mental 
constitution. This condition is that of Time, a 
condition which governs not merely our external 
perceptions, but our universal consciousness of all 
that takes place within or without ourselves. 
Every successive modification of the conscious 
mind can be made known to us only as a change 



120 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

of state.; a change which is only possible under 
the condition of succession in time, — a transition 
from an earlier to a later phase of consciousness. 
Of Time, as an absolute existence, we cannot 
form any idea whatever : it is made known to us 
only as the condition or form of successive states 
of consciousness. To ask, therefore, whether 
Time has any existence out of .our own minds, 
is, in the only intelligible mode of putting the 
question, to ask whether other orders of intelligent 
beings are subject to the same conditions of intel- 
ligence as ourselves; whether they, like us, are 
conscious of various mental states, one succeeding 
another. Put in this form, the question is suf- 
ficiently intelligible, but obviously one which we 
have no data for determining: put in any other 
form, it is absolutely void of meaning, it contains 
not the material for thought, but only a negation 
of all thinking whatever. 

It might indeed be argued, with some show of 
probability, that the condition of successive con- 
sciousness is essentially the condition of a finite 
and imperfect intelligence, consequent only upon 
its very limited power of simultaneous conscious- 
ness 7 . The scholastic doctrine of an eternal Now, 
or nunc stans, so contemptuously treated by Hobbes, 
in this respect contains assuredly no prima facie 
absurdity". The error of such speculations is of 

y Vide Boeth. De Comol. Phil. lib. v. pros. vi. 

* It is surprising to see how nenr some of the earlier views 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 121 

another kind. It consists in mistaking the negation 
of all thought for an act of positive thinking. As 
our whole personal consciousness is subject to the 
condition of successiveness, we can form no positive 
notion of a different state : we only know that it 
is something which we have never experienced. 
The nature and attributes of an Infinite Intel- 
ligence must be revealed to us in a manner 
accommodated to finite capacities : how far the 
accommodation extends, we have no means of 
determining ; as we cannot examine the same data 
with a different set of faculties. The importance 
of this distinction between positive and negative 
thinking will be more closely examined hereafter. 



on this point approached to, without actually arriving at, the 
doctrine of Kant. Had the question been considered sub- 
jectively as well as objectively, on the psychological as well as 
on the metaphysical side, the most important conclusion of 
the critical philosophy would have been anticipated. When 
Hobbes, in his controversy with Bramhall, said, " I never 
could conceive an ever-abiding now" he was right; but be 
was wrong in supposing that this was decisive of the point at 
issue. We can only conceive in thought what we have expe- 
rienced in presentation ; and all our past presentations have 
been given under the law of succession. But this does not 
enable us to decide what may be the condition of other than 
human intelligences. In this respect, the remark of Bramhall 
is exactly to the purpose. " Though we are not able to com- 
prehend perfectly what God i3, yet we are able to comprehend 
perfectly what God is not ; that is, He is not imperfect, and 
therefore He is not finite." Keid (IntelL Powers, Essay iii. 
ch. 3.) treats the nunc stans as a contradiction, which it is 
not. 



122 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

But to return to the question of mathematical 
necessity. To construct the whole science of 
Arithmetic, it is only requisite that we should be 
conscious of a succession in time, and should be 
able to give names to the several members of the 
series. And since in every act of consciousness 
we are subject to the law of succession, it is im- 
possible in any form of consciousness to represent 
to ourselves the facts of Arithmetic as other than 
they are. To the art, not to the science, of 
Arithmetic belong all the methods for facilitating 
calculation which imply any thing more than the 
mere idea of succession. Such a method, and a 
powerful one, is afforded by the invention of Scales 
of Notation, in which, to the idea of succession is 
added that of recurrence ; the series being regarded 
as commencing again from a second unit, after 
proceeding continuously through a certain number 
of members, ten, for example, as in the common 
system. Hence we are enabled to repeat over 
again, in the second and subsequent decades, the 
operations originally performed in the first, and 
thus indefinitely to extend our calculus in the 
form of a continually recurring series; but the 
calculus, though thus rendered infinitely more 
efficacious as an instrument, remains in its psy- 
chological basis unaltered. 

From these considerations it follows, that the 
several members of an arithmetical series are 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 123 

incapable of definition. Succession in time, and 
the consciousness of one, two, three, &c. are not 
complex notions abstracted from and after a multi- 
tude of intuitions, but simple immediate intuitions, 
differing, as far as numeration is concerned, only in 
the order of their presentation. They are not by 
any act of thought compounded, the later from 
the earlier: they cannot be resolved into any 
simpler elements of consciousness, presentative or 
representative, being themselves the a priori con- 
ditions of consciousness in general. Hence the 
failure of all attempts to analyse numerical calcu- 
lation as a deductive process. Leibnitz, and sub- 
sequently Hegel, have endeavoured to represent 
the arithmetical processes as operations of pure 
analysis. Assuming, for example, 12 and 7 and 5, 
as given concepts, they shew that the first may be 
ultimately analysed into the same constituent units 
as the two last ; and this is regarded as an expla- 
nation of the whole process of Addition. They 
overlook the fact that, in that process, 12 is not 
given, but has to be determined by the addition of 
the other two numbers. Arithmetic is not, like 
Geometry, a science whose definitions are genetic 
and preliminary to its processes. The analysis of 
any number into its constituent units presupposes 
the whole operation which it professes to give rise 
to. We may call, if we please, such an analysis 
definition ; but we must not suppose that it in any 



1 24 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

degree correspond to the definitions of Geometry, 
or answers the same purpose in the operations of 
the science*. 

The above considerations are sufficient for our 
present purpose, which is to determine the psycho- 
logical basis of mathematical judgments, and their 
consequent special character as necessary truths, 
in a distinct sense from that in which the term is 
applied to logical or physical principles. Mathe- 
matical judgments are synthetical, based on the 
universal conditions of our intuitive faculties, and 
are necessary, not, properly speaking, as laws of 
thought, but because thought can only operate in 
conjunction with matter given by intuition, and 
intuition cannot be emancipated from its own sub- 
jective conditions. Hence we are compelled to 
think of our intuitions under the same laws accord- 
ing to which they are invariably realized in con- 
sciousness. Judgments of logical necessity, on the 
other hand, are analytical, and rest on the laws of 



a Writers of a very different school from that of Leibnitz 
or Hegel have fallen into a similar error with regard to the 
nature of arithmetical processes. Mr. Mill, for example, 
regards the whole science of numbers as derived from the 
common axioms concerning equality, and the definitions of 
the several numbers. Stewart appears to have been of the 
same opinion. On the contrary, the whole essentials of the 
science must be in existence before the so-called definitions 
can be formed. The applications of the calculus as an instru- 
ment must not be confounded with its essential constituents 
as a science. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 125 

thought properly so called. Their analytical 
character is a necessary consequence of the con- 
stitution of the thinking faculty, and is so far from 
being a proof of the unsoundness or frivolity of 
logical speculations, that it is the strongest 
evidence of their truth and scientific value, and 
leads to most important consequences, both in 
Logic and in Psychology. 

The nature of these judgments, as well as of 
those distinguished as metaphysically necessary, 
will be examined in the following chapters. 



CHAPTER V. 

ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTER OF METAPHYSICAL NECESSITY. 

A distinction between necessary and contingent 
matter is found, somewhat out of place it is true, 
but still it is found, in most of the older, and, 
among English writers, in most also of the recent 
treatises on Logic*. The boundaries of each, 
however, are. not in the majority of instances de- 
termined with any approach to accuracy. Among 
the schoolmen, the favourite example of a pro- 
position of the highest degree of necessity was 
omne animal rationale est risibile; an example con- 
sistent enough with the mediaeval state of physical 
science, but which in the present day will scarcely 
be allowed a higher degree of certainty than be- 

* Matter in this sense must not be confounded with the 
modality recognised by Aristotle and by most of the modern 
German Logicians. The former is an understood relation 
between the terms of a proposition ; the form of the pro- 
position being in all cases " A is B ;" and is supposed to be 
of use in determining the quantity of indefinites. The latter 
is an expressed relation ; the form of the necessary proposition 
being "A must be B;" and this is applicable to universal and 
particular propositions indifferently. The admission of the 
latter is still a point of dispute among eminent authorities : 
the admission of the former will be tolerated by no Logician 
who understands the nature of his own science. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 127 

longs to any other observed fact in the constitution 
of things. An eminent modern Logician gives as 
an example of a proposition in necessary matter, 
"all islands are surrounded by water;" an example 
which is only valid in so far as the predicate forms 
part of the notion of the subject, and which, there- 
fore, has no other necessity than belongs to all 
analytical judgments, a necessity derived from the 
form, not from the matter b . The distinction itself, 
though altogether out of place when Thought is 
considered merely in its relation to Logic, is, in a 
psychological point of view, of considerable im- 
portance. The following remarks will, it is hoped, 
throw some light on its true character. 

All analytical judgments are necessary ; but they 
cannot properly be said to be in necessary matter. 
They are all ultimately dependent on the Principles 
of Identity and Contradiction, " Every A is A," 
and " No A is not A :" c principles, the necessity 

b Examples of this kind were indeed indiscriminately ad- 
mitted by the scholastic Logicians, who held any proposition 
to be in necessary matter, in which the predicate was part 
of the essence, or necessarily joined to the essence, of the 
subject But this classification, though tenable perhaps in 
connection with realist metaphysics, is inconsistent with an 
accurate discrimination between the matter and the form of 
thought. 

c Kant, Kritik der r. V. p. 188. Proleg. §. 2. He derives all 
analytical judgments from the Principle of Contradiction. 
It would be more accurate to distinguish this principle from 
that of Identity, and to derive the negative judgments from 
the former, the affirmative from the latter. 



128 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

of which arises solely from their form, without any 
relation to this or that matter. That every triangle 
has three sides, arises from a mere analysis of the 
notion of a triangle ; as that every island is sur- 
rounded by water, arises from a mere analysis of 
the notion of an island. This necessity is derived 
solely from the laws of formal thinking. 

Of synthetical judgments, every statement of a 
physical fact is in contingent matter; at least if 
the opposite term be used in its highest sense. 
However rigidly certain phenomena may be 
deduced from the assumption of a general law of 
nature, the law itself remains nothing more than 
an observed fact, of which we can give no other 
explanation, than that it was the will of the 
Creator to constitute things in a certain manner.* 
For example : that a body in motion, under certain 
conditions of projection, and attracted by a force 
varying inversely as the square of the distance, 
will describe an ellipse having the centre of 
attraction in one of the foci, — this is matter of 
demonstration : but that the earth is such a body, 
acted upon by forces of this description, is matter 
of fact, of which we can only say that it is so, and 
that it might have been otherwise. The original 
premise being thus contingent, all deductions from 
it are materially contingent likewise. 

The same is the case with all psychological 
judgments, so far as they merely state the fact 
that our minds are constituted in this or that 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 129 

manner. But there is one remarkable difference 
between this contingency and that which is pre- 
sented by physical phenomena. The laws of the 
latter impose no restraint on my powers of thought: 
relatively to me, they are simply universally ob- 
served facts. There is therefore no impediment 
to my uniting in a judgment any two notions once 
formed ; though the corresponding objects cannot, 
consistently with existing laws of nature, be united 
in feet. I may thus conceive a mountain moving, 
or a stone floating on the water ; though ray expe- 
rience has always presented to me the mountain as 
standing, and the stone as sinking. But as regards 
Psychology : the powers of my mind cannot b. 
presented to consciousness, but under one deter 
minate manifestation. The only variety is found 
in the objects on which they operate. I am thus 
limited in my power of forming notions at all, in 
all cases where I am, by mental restrictions, pre- 
vented from experiencing the corresponding in- 
tuition. I have thus a negative idea only of the 
nature of an intelligent being constituted in a 
different manner from myself; though I have no 
difficulty in supposing that many such exist. I 
can suppose, for instance, that there may exist 
beings whose knowledge of material objects is not 
gained through the medium of bodily senses, or 
whose understanding has a direct power of in- 
tuition ; but to conceive such a being is beyond 
my power; conception being limited to the field 



130 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

of positive intuitions. In another point of view, 
both physical and psychological judgments may 
be called necessary ; as the consequence of certain 
established laws, which laws, however, might have 
been otherwise. In this sense, both might be 
classified as hypotheticcdly necessary*; in opposition 
to another class of judgments, those relating to 
human actions, which, as will hereafter appear, 
are, in the fullest sense of the term, contingent. 
For logical purposes, however, the former clas- 
sification is preferable. 

On the other hand, mathematical judgments 
have been almost universally regarded as belong- 
ing to the province of necessary matter*. We 
can suppose the possibility of beings existing, 
whose consciousness has no relation to space or 
time at all. We can suppose it possible, that some 
change in our mental constitution might present 
us with the intuition of space in more than three 
dimensions. This is no more than to admit the 
possible existence of intelligent creatures other- 
wise constituted than ourselves, and consequently 
incomprehensible by us. But to suppose the 

d For this expression, see Leibnitz, Theodicee, §. 87. Duval- 
Jouve, Logique, p. 78. 

e Universally among those who have accurately distinguished 
intelligible from sensible magnitude. The objections of Sextus 
Empiricus in ancient, and of Hume in modern times, among 
sceptics, so far as they have any special relation to Geometry, 
as well as those of M. Comte and Mr. Mill, among sensational- 
ists, are mainly based on a confusion of these two. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 131 

existence of geometrical figures, or arithmetical 
numbers, such as those with which we are now 
acquainted, is to suppose the existence of space 
and time as we are now conscious of them ; and 
therefore, relatively to beings, whose mental con- 
stitution is so far similar to our own. Such a 
supposition, therefore, necessarily carries with it 
all the mathematical relations in which time and 
space, as given to us, are necessarily thought. 
For mathematical judgments strictly relate only 
to objects of thought, as existing in my mind; 
not to distinct entities, as existing in a certain 
relation to my mind. They therefore imply no 
other existence but that of a thinking subject, 
modified in a certain manner. Destroy this sub- 
ject, or change its modification, and we cannot 
say, as in other cases, that the object may possibly 
exist still without the subject, or may exist in a* 
new relation to a new subject; for the object exists 
only in and through that particular modification 
of the , subject, and, on any other supposition, 
is annihilated altogether. It is thus impossible 
to suppose, that a triangle can, in relation to 
any intelligence whatever, have its angles greater 
or less than two right angles, or that two and two 
should not be equal to four ; though it is possible 
to suppose the existence of beings destitute of the 
idea of a triangle or of the number two. This is 
necessary matter, in the strict sense of the term ; a 
relation which our minds are incapable of reversing, 

k2 



132 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

not merely positively, in our own acts of thought, 
but also negatively, by supposing others who can 
do so. 

There is one other science which has frequently 
been supposed to share this necessity with Mathe- 
matics. Metaphysics, though, so far as it deals 
in merely analytical judgments, it has been suf- 
ficiently shewn by Kant to be incapable of leading 
to any scientific results, is frequently regarded as 
possessing a certain number of synthetical axioms, 
which, under the various names of Principles of 
Necessary Truth, Fundamental Laws of Human 
Belief, and sometimes even (however incorrectly) 
of Laws of Thought', have held a prominent 
place in various systems of philosophy down to 
the present time. Two of these principles may 
be especially selected for examination, partly on 
account of the importance attached to them by 
eminent writers, and partly on account of their 
relation to the Forms of Thought recognised by 
Logic. 

f This nomenclature is sanctioned by the authority of 
M. Royer-Collard. " Trois lois de la pensee concourent 
dans la perception. 

1°. L'etendue et l'impenetrabilite ont un sujst auquel eiles 
sont inherentes, et dans lequel elles coexistent. 

2°. Toutes les choses sont placees dans une duree absolue, 
a laquelle elles participant comme si elles etaient une seule 
et meme chose. 

3°. Tout ce qui commence a ezister a et£ produit par une 
cause." Jouffroy's Reid, vol. iv. p. 447. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 133 

1. The Principle of Substance. All objects of 
perception are Qualities which exist in some 
Subject to which they belong. 

2. The Principle of Causality*. Whatever be- 
gins to exist must take place in consequence of 
some Cause. 

"I perceive/ says Reid, "in a billiard ball, 
figure, colour, and motion; but the ball is not 
figure, nor is it colour, nor motion, nor all these 
taken together; it is something that has figure, 
and colour, and motion. This is a dictate of 
nature, and the belief of all mankind 11 ." 

On the other hand, Bishop Berkeley had laboured 
hard to prove that it was much more consonant to 
nature, and to the common sense of mankind, to 
deny altogether the existence of this imperceptible 



* Called also the Principle of Sufficient Reason, or of Deter- 
mining Reason; though these expressions, as Sir W. Hamilton 
has observed, are used ambiguously to denote, conjunctly and 
severally, the two metaphysical or real principles; 1°. Why a 
thing is; 2°. Why a thing becomes or is produced; and, 3°. The 
logical or ideal principle, Why a thing is known or conceived. 
(Hamilton on Reid, p. 624.) Cf. Leibnitz's fifth Letter to 
Clarke, §. 1 25. where he states the principle in three forms. 
" Ce principe est celui du besoin d'une raison suflisante, pour 
qu'une chose existe, qu'un evenement arrive, qu'un e verite ait 
lieu." For a criticism on the principle as thus given, see 
Herbart, Lehrbuch zur EinUitung in die Philosophic, §. 89. 

b Intellectual Powers, Essay ii. ch. 19. Compare Descartes, 
Meditatio Secunda, who adduces the changes in a piece of wax, 
as an argument to shew that the thing itself is conceived as 
something distinct from its sensible qualities. 



134 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

substance, the supposed support of perceptible 
attributes. " I do not argue," he says, " against 
the existence of any one thing that we can appre- 
hend, either by sense or reflection. That the things 
I see with mine eyes and touch with my hands do 
exist, really exist, I make not the least question. 
The only thing whose existence we deny, is that 
which philosophers call matter, or corporeal sub- 
stance. And in doing of this, there is no damage 
done to the rest of mankind, who, I dare say, will 
never miss it The atheist indeed will want the 
colour of an empty name to support his impiety ; 
and the philosophers may possibly find, they have 
lost a great handle for trifling and disputation." 

" It will be urged," he continues, " that thus 
much at least is true, to wit, that we take away all 
corporeal substances. To this my answer is, that 
if the word substance be taken in the vulgar sense, 
for a combination of sensible qualities, such as 
extension, solidity, weight, and the like : this we 
cannot be accused of taking away. But if it be 
taken in a philosophic sense, for the support of 
accidents or qualities without the mind; then indeed 
I acknowledge that we take it away, if one may 
be said to take away that which never had any 
existence, not even in the imagination 1 ." 

But after Berkeley came Hume, who applied to 
the phenomena of internal perception the same 
process of reasoning which Berkeley had applied 

1 Principle* of Human Knowledge, xxxv. xxxvii. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 135 

to the external. Within myself, he argued, I am 
conscious only of impressions and ideas. The 
substance called Mind is a mere fiction, imagined 
for the support of these, as the substance called 
Matter is imagined for the support of sensible 
qualities \ In opposition to these sceptical con- 
clusions, Reid and his disciples appealed to the 
authority of certain universally acknowledged 
axioms, distinguished as Principles of Common 
Sense, or Fundamental Laws of Human Belief, of 
which we can give no other account than that 
such is our constitution, and we must think accord- 
ingly. One of these is the Principle of Substance, 
mentioned above. 

It is necessary to speak with diffidence on a 
point disputed by philosophers of such eminence ; 
but if there be any truth in the psychological dis- 
tinction between Thought and Intuition, noticed 
in my first chapter, it will appear that the Scottish 
philosophers, in endeavouring to overthrow Hume 
and Berkeley at once, abandoned the only position 
from which an attack might have been successfully 
made on either of them separately. Hume's philo- 
sophy is not a legitimate development of Berkeley's, 
unless we allow that our consciousness of mind, as 
well as of matter, is representative only. If it be true 
that neither mental nor material substance, as distin- 
guished from the various states and attributes of 
either, is in any manner presented intuitively, the 

k Treatise of Human Nature, part iv. sect, 5,6. 



136 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

two theories must stand or fall together. And this 
point is over and over again conceded by Reid and 
Stewart 1 . 

Under this concession, the appeal to a funda- 
mental law of belief is insufficient. Such a law 
can only state the fact, that we are by our consti- 
tution compelled to believe in a certain relation 
between two given notions : it does not explain how 
either of such notions could have entered into the 
mind in the first instance. But the appeal becomes 
self-contradictory, in the hands of any one who 
admits the views of Locke, or of Kant, concerning 
the limits of the understanding 111 . Either a pre- 



1 For example, " The attributes of individuals is all that we 
distinctly conceive about them. It is true, we conceive a 
subject' to which the attributes belong ; but of this subject, 
when its attributes are set aside, we have but an obscure and 
relative conception, whether it be body or mind." Eeid, Int. 
Powers, Essay v. ch. 2. " It is not matter, or body, which I 
perceive by my senses ; but only extension, figure, colour, and 
certain other qualities, which the constitution of my nature 
leads me to refer to something which is extended, figured, 
and coloured. The case is precisely similar with respect to 
mind. We are not immediately conscious of its existence, 
but we are conscious of sensation, thought, and volition ; 
operations which imply the existence of something which 
feels, thinks, and wills." Stewart, Elements, In trod, part i. 

m Yet Kant, no less than Eeid, allows that we are not 
immediately conscious of mind, but only of its phenomena. 
In his hands, however, the concession is perfectly suicidal, 
and forms the weak part of the Critical Philosophy. The 
reader who bears this inconsistency in mind, may perhaps 
find an easier solution to some of Kant's Paralogisms and 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 137 

sentative origin must be found for the notions of 
substance and cause, or we must admit that, in 
these instances, the act of thought has created its 
own objects. 

We are therefore compelled to ask, Is this 
asserted analogy between our modes of conscious- 
ness in relation to matter and mind really tenable ? 
Does it not rather appear a flat self-contradiction 
to maintain, that I am not immediately conscious 
of myself, but only of my sensations or volitions ? 
Who then is this / that is conscious, and how can 
I be conscious of such states as mine? . In this 
case, it would surely be far more accurate to say, 
not that I am conscious of my sensations, but that 
the sensation is conscious of itself : but, thus worded, 
the glaring absurdity of the theory would carry 
with it its own refutation n . 

Antinomies of Pure Reason than could have been given by 
the author himself. On this subject, the admirable remarks 
of M. Cousin, in his Sixth Lecture on Kant, should be 
consulted. 

n Since the publication of the first edition of this work, 
the Author has met with the following passage in Jouflroy's 
Nowveaux Melanges Philosophiques, p. 276, in which the above 
argument has been anticipated in substance, and almost in 
language : " These singuliere a soutenir que je ne saisis pas 
la cause qui est moi, que je sens ma pensee, ma volonte, ma 
sensation, mais que je ne me sens pas pensant, voulant, 
sentant! Mais d'ou saurais-je alors que la pensee, la volonte, 
la sensation que je sens, sont miennes, qu'elles emanent de 
moi, et non pas dune autre cause? Si ma conscience ne 
eaisissait que la pensee, je pourrais bien concevoir que la 
pensee a une cause; mais rien ne m'apprendrait quelle est 



138 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

The one presented substance, the source from 
which our data for thinking on the subject are 
originally drawn, is myself . Whatever may be 
the variety of the phenomena of consciousness, 
sensations by this or that organ, volitions, thoughts, 
imaginations, of all we are immediately conscious 
as affections of one and the same self. It is not 
by any after effort of reflection that I combine 
together sight and hearing, thought and volition, 
into a factitious unity or compounded whole : in 
each case I am immediately conscious of myself 
seeing and hearing, willing and thinking. This 
self-personality, like all other simple and immediate 

cette cause, ni si elle est moi ou toute autre. La pensee ne 
m'apparaiirait done pas comme mienne. Ce qui fait qu'elle 
m'apparait comme mienne, e'est que je la sens emaner de 
moi ; et ce qui fait que je la sens emaner de moi, c est que je 
sens la cause qui la produit et que je me reconnais dans 
cette cause." \ 

° Thus Descartes observes, (Meditatio Tertia,) " Ex iis vero 
quee in ideis rerum corporalium clara et distinctasunt,quaedam 
ab idea mei ipsius videor mutuari potuisse, nempe substantiam, 
durationem, numerum, et si quae alia sunt ejusmodi." This 
passage perhaps suggested the observation of an illustrious 
French disciple of the Scottish philosophy, who has thus 
supplied a marked deficiency in the system of his masters. 
"Le moi," says M. Koyer-Collard, "est la seule unite qui nous 
soit donnee immediatement par la nature; nous ne la ren- 
controns dans aucune des choses que nos facultes observent. 
Mais Tentendement qui la trouve en lui, la met hors de lui par 
induction, et d'un certain nombre de choses coexistantes il 
cree des unites artificielles." Jouflfroy's Eeid, vol. iv. p. 850. 
But the French writer to whom this portion of philosophy is 
most indebted is Maine de Biran. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 139 

presentations, is indefinable ; but it is so, because it 
is superior to definition. It can be analysed into 
no simpler elements, for it is itself the simplest of 
all : it can be made no clearer by description or 
comparison, for it is revealed to us in all the clear- 
ness of an original intuition, of which description 
and comparison can furnish only faint and partial 
resemblances. 

The extravagant speculations in which Metaphy- 
sicians attempted to explain the nature and pro- 
perties of the soul as it is not given in conscious- 
ness, furnish no valid ground for renouncing 
all inquiry into its character as it is given, as a 
power, conscious of itself*. That there are many 
metaphysical, or rather psychological difficulties, 
still unsolved, connected with this view of the sub- 
ject, must be allowed 9 ; but so long as we remain 
within the legitimate field of consciousness, we are 
not justified in abandoning them as insoluble. To 
this class belongs the question of Personal Identity, 
or the reference of earlier and later states of con- 
sciousness to the same subject ; an immediate con- 
sciousness being of present objects only. The 
following question may perhaps furnish a hint of 
the data from which the solution of this problem 
may be attempted. Time and Space are given as 

p See Cousin, Lemons sur Kant, p. 197. Dam iron, Psychologies 
1. i. ch. iv. 

q See Herbart, Lehrbuch zur Einleitung in die Philoaophie, 
$. 124. HauptpuncU der Metapkysik, §. 11, 12. 



1 4 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

forms or conditions of the several phenomena of 
internal or external consciousness; but are the 
same conditions strictly applicable to the conscious 
subject itself? I may speak, accurately enough, 
of my earlier or later thoughts or feelings ; but, apart 
from metaphor, can I, with any philosophical accu- 
racy, speak of an earlier or later self, even as a 
mere logical distinction for the purpose of after- 
wards identifying the two ? To identify is to connect 
together in thought objects given under different 
relations of space or time, as when I pronounce 
the sovereign now lying on my table to be nume- 
rically one with that which I received yesterday at 
the Bank. But is the conscious self ever given 
under these different relations at all? Is it not 
rather that from which our original notion of 
numerical identity was drawn, and which cannot 
be subjected to later and analogical applications of 
the same idea ? 

This one presented substance, myself, is the 
basis of the other notions of substance which are 
thought representatively in relation to other phe- 
nomena. When I look at another man, I do not 
perceive his consciousness. I see only a com- 
pound body, of a certain form and colour, moving 
in this or that manner. I do not immediately 
know that he perceives, feels, and thinks, as I do 
myself. He may be an exquisitely formed puppet, 
requiring perhaps more mechanical skill in the 
construction than has ever been attained by man, 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 141 

but still a mere machine, a possible piece of clock- 
work. When I attribute to him personality and 
consciousness, I mediately and reflectively transfei 
to another that of which I am directly cognisant 
only in myself. In this case, the phenomena are 
given in a sensible intuition; the substance is 
added to them by a representative act of thought. 

Beyond the range of conscious beings, we can 
have only a negative idea of substance. The name 
is applied in relation to certain collections of sensible 
phenomena, natural or artificial, connected with 
each other in various ways; by locomotion, by 
vegetation, by contributing to a common end, by 
certain positions in space. But here we have no 
positive notion of substance distinct from phe- 
nomena. I do not attribute to the billiard ball a 
consciousness of its own figure, colour, and motion ; 
but, in denying consciousness, I deny the only form 
in which unity and substance have been presented 
to me. I have therefore no data for thinking one 
way or the other on the question. Some kind of 
unity between the several phenomena may exist, or 
it may not; but if it does exist, it exists in a 
manner of which I can form no conception ; and if 
it does not exist, my faculties do not enable me to 
detect its absence. 

Such an acknowledgment of the negative cha- 
racter of certain supposed thoughts, i. e. of their 
not being really thoughts at all, is very different 
from scepticism. It does not teach a distrust of 



142 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

our faculties within their proper limits, but only 
tells us that they have limits, and that they cannot 
transgress them. In this there is no more of 
paradox, than in asserting that we cannot see a 
man or a tower at a thousand miles' distance. 
The fault of Berkeley did not consist in doubting 
the existence of matter, but in asserting its non- 
existence. If I cannot see a spot a thousand 
miles off, I am, as far as sight is concerned, equally 
incompetent to assert that there is or is not a 
tower standing upon it. In like manner, it is 
characteristic of all mere negative notions, that 
we have no direct evidence whether their supposed 
objects exist or not. To maintain that matter is 
a fiction, invented for the support of attributes, is 
to dogmatize in negation, and, after all, to give a 
partial solution only of the question : for fictions 
as well as facts have their psychological conditions, 
under which alone their invention is possible'. 
Had Berkeley's theory been accompanied by an 
inquiry into the origin of negative notions and 

*i •• It seems to be a judgment of nature," says Retd, (I. P. 
ii. 10.) " that the things immediately perceived are qualities, 
which must belong to a subject ; and all the information that 
our senses give us about this subject, is, that it is that to 
which such qualities belong." In point of fact, our senses 
tell us nothing of the kind ; and, were these our only intuitive 
faculties, we should never have supposed such a subject to 
exist. To refer any belief to a principle of our nature, is 
insufficient, unless we can at the same time psychologically 
account for the origin of the notions which that belief 
implies. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 143 

their influence on thought and language, it could 
scarcely have given rise either to the extreme 
scepticism of his successor, or to the strange mis- 
understandings of some of his adversaries. 

The conclusion to be drawn from the above 
remarks is sufficiently obvious. The general 
assertion, that all sensible qualities belong to a 
subject, cannot with any propriety be called a 
principle of necessary truth ; inasmuch as it is a 
principle which may be either true or false, and 
we have no means of determining which. Nor is 
it correct to call it a fundamental law of human 
belief; if by that expression is meant any thing 
more than an assertion of the universal tendency 
of men to liken other things to themselves, and to 
speak of them under forms of expression adapted 
to such likeness, far beyond the point where the 
parallel fails. The trite law or principle which 
connects attributes with a substance extends no 
further than to the phenomena of the personal 
consciousness, which are necessarily apprehended 
as attributes of myself; and this principle does 
not warrant us in asserting that the whiteness 
and roundness and hardness of the billiard-ball 
are attributes of the ball, in the same manner as 
my thoughts and feelings and sensations are attri- 
butes of me. Nevertheless, there is a real, though 
an incomplete analogy between the two cases; 
which may serve in some degree to account for 
the association which has led to the apparent 



144 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

recognition, in the universal language of mankind, 
of a relation which has no warrant in our imme- 
diate consciousness. Though bodily attributes 
are not perceived as related to a substance, they 
are in all cases perceived as related to each other. 
The perception by sense of any phenomenon of 
matter is necessarily accompanied by an intel- 
lectual apprehension of its relations to space, as 
occupying it and contained in it. Colour cannot 
be perceived without extension; nor extension 
without solidity; and solidity is not a single 
attribute, but includes in its comprehension the 
three dimensions of length, breadth, and thick- 
ness. But we can analyse in language what we 
cannot analyse in consciousness; and by the 
appropriation of distinct names to the related 
attributes, we are enabled to speak of them apart ; 
though we cannot perceive them, except in con- 
junction. This is the real distinction indicated 
by the use of concrete or abstract terms: the 
round, hard, white, body denotes the attribute as 
perceived in space; the roundness and hardness 
and whiteness severally denote the same attributes 
as separated in language. This real distinction 
is coupled with an association transferred from 
the personal consciousness; and men speak of 
the roundness and hardness and whiteness of the 
bally as they speak of my thoughts and my feelings 
and my desires; without being aware that the 
relation which in the latter case is a fact of 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 145 

consciousness, is in the other an imaginary parallel, 
which cannot be positively verified by conscious- 
ness, though for the same reason it cannot be 
positively denied. 

But, though there is thus no speculative reason 
for accepting or rejecting Berkeley's theory as true 
or false, or for attempting to adapt to it common 
forms of speech, there may, in certain philosophical 
inquiries, be a practical reason for accepting or 
rejecting it as convenient or inconvenient. If the 
method of metaphysical research can in any degree 
be simplified by divesting it of the hypothesis of 
a substratum of sensible attributes, this will be a 
sufficient reason for accepting the theory as pro 
tanto valid. Such simplification will not, however, 
be effected by taking the Berkleian theory in it*. 
whole extent. The admission of ideas as the 
immediate objects of perception, whether in 
Berkeley's form, as entities distinct from the mind, 
or in Fichte's, as modifications of the mind itself, 
and the necessary consequence, that nothing exists 
except when it is perceived, is too repugnant to 
the common sense of mankind to have any ulti- 
mate value in philosophy. There is still room, 
however, for an attempt to construct a similar 
theory, viewed from the objective side, which, 
banishing the hypothesis of a substratum, shall 
regard the sensible attributes as the things them- 
selves. Whether such a theory would offer any 
ground for constructing Metaphysical Science on 



146 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

a surer basis, or whether it would share the fate of 
preceding systems, remains to be seen'. 

Much of the above reasoning is applicable to 
the Principle of Causality likewise. I hold a 
piece of wax to the fire, and it begins to melt*. 
Here my senses inform me only of two successive 
phenomena; the proximity of the fire, and the 
melting of the wax. That the one is the pro- 
ductive cause of the other, is an addition to the 
sensible data, which, so far as this particular 
instance is concerned, is not given, but inferred. 
Here, again, it becomes necessary to inquire, 
whether we shall abandon the belief in Causes 
altogether; whether we shall concede that Thought 
alone is competent to create the notion; or 
whether we can discover any intuition in which 
Causality, as distinct from mere Succession, is 
immediately presented. 

Hume, and subsequently Brown, denied alto- 
gether the existence of Cause in this sense of the 



• Something of this sort may perhaps be attempted in 
connection with Sir William Hamilton's doctrine of Natural 
Realism. But that doctrine, admirable as it is in many of 
the fragments that have been published, is unfortunately 
least complete in its ontological relations. On the really 
weak side of Berkeley's Philosophy, see Appendix, note B. 

1 See Locke, Essay, b. ii. ch. 26. who erroneously regards 
the production of change as perceptible by the senses. The 
other and very different origin suggested by the same philo- 
sopher, Essay, b. ii. ch. 21. is the germ of the theory of Maine 
de Biran. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 147 

term. With these philosophers, a cause is nothing 
more than something prior to the change, and 
constantly conjoined with it. " We give the name 
of cause? says Brown, " to the object which we 
believe to be the invariable antecedent of a par- 
ticular change ; we give the name of effect reci- 
procally to that invariable consequent; and the 
relation itself, when considered abstractly, we 
denominate power in the object that is the invari- 
able antecedent, — susceptibility in the object that 
exhibits, in its change, the invariable consequent 
We say of fire, that it has the power of melting 
metals, and of metals, that they are susceptible of 
fusion by fire, — that fire is the cause of the fusion, 
and the fusion the effect of the application of fire ; 
but in all this variety of words, we mean nothing 
more than our belief, that when a solid metal is 
subjected for a certain time to the application of 
a strong heat, it will begin afterwards to exist in 
that different state which is termed liquidity,—- 
that in all past time, in the same circumstances, 
it would have exhibited the same change, — and 
that it will continue to do so in the same circum- 
stances in all future time*. 

Thus far Hume and Brown are at one. Into 
the subordinate question at issue between them, 
as to the origin of our belief in the uniformity of 
nature, it is foreign to my present purpose to 
enter. I have at present to do only with that 

* Inquiry into the relation of Cause and Effect, p. 13. 
L2 



148 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

portion of the theory in which both philosophers 
are agreed, — the resolution of cause into invariable 
antecedent ; concerning which Reid remarks, that 
we may learn from it that night is the cause of 
day, and day the cause of night: for no two 
things have more constantly followed each other 
since the beginning of the world. 

In the theory of causation, as above stated, two 
very distinct principles are fused into one; and 
the fusion is indicated by the two words inva- 
riable antecedent. Admitting for the moment that 
causation means no more than immediate ante- 
cedence in time, it is obviously one thing to say 
that every event must have some antecedent or 
other, and another to say that this particular 
event must always have this particular antecedent. 
The latter assertion, which implies the assumption 
of the uniformity of nature in her operations, is, 
«ven granting its universal truth, obviously a law 
of things and not of thought, the contradictory 
of which is at any time perfectly conceivable. 
There is no absurdity in the supposition, whether 
it be true or not as a fact, that the phenomenon 
C may at one time be preceded by A, and at 
another by B ; the other circumstances being in 
both cases exactly alike. Whether such a vari- 
ation actually takes place under the existing con- 
stitution of the world which we inhabit, is another 
question; but there is certainly no difficulty in 
conceiving that in an imaginary world it may 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 149 

take place. This portion of the principle being 
thus excluded from the class of necessary truths, 
the remaining portion will not be difficult to ex- 
plain. The assertion that every event must have 
some antecedent or other, implies no more than 
that we cannot conceive it as standing at the 
absolute beginning of all time, apart from any x 
relation to a preceding series of phenomena. 
This is an obvious result of the subjection of our 
consciousness to the law of time. For our con- 
sciousness of time is not of time in the abstract, 
but of phenomena as taking place in time; and 
the law which compels us to conceive every event 
as occurring in time, obviously compels us also to 
conceive it as related to some temporal antecedent*. 
But, as thus limited, the principle, however 
necessary, is obviously inadequate as a theory of 
causation. We cannot help feeling that there is 
a deficiency even in the original theory as stated 
by Hume : we feel that cause implies something 
more than invariable antecedent, and that Reid's 
instance of day and night, if it does not amount 
to a philosophical refutation of the theory, is at 
least a practical proof of its insufficiency. The 
feeling becomes still stronger when the element 

" In thus acknowledging one element of the principle of 
Causality to depend on the mental law of existence in time, 
I have partially adopted the theory of Sir W. Hamilton. For 
some observations on the remainder of that theory, see 
Appendix, note C. 



150 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

of invariability itself is shewn to be an adven- 
titious accretion, and the original principle is 
reduced to the mere acknowledgment of a tem- 
poral antecedent of some kind or other. Rightly 
or wrongly, all men do in fact unite with the 
idea of temporal antecedence that of productive 
power, and regard this addition as essential to 
the conception of a Cause. A belief so universal, 
even if it be delusive in a portion of its extent, 
can only be explained, even as a delusion, by 
the supposition that it has an origin in truth; 
that there is such a notion as power given in 
the actual facts of consciousness, however it may 
be extended in imagination beyond the data which 
suggested it. 

. The philosophers of the school of Reid could 
not fairly meet Hume's theory of causation, for 
the same reason that they could not fairly meet 
his theory of substance ; because they denied the 
existence of an immediate consciousness of mind, 
as distinguished from its several states. It was 
easy for Hume to shew that volition is but one 
phenomenon, and motion is but another, and tha^ 
the former is so far from being the necessary 
cause of the other, that a stroke of paralysis may 
put an end even to the uniformity of the sequence. 
It was also easy for him to shew that, as the 
motion of the arm is not the immediate consequent 
of the volition, but is separated from it by an inter- 
vening nervous and muscular action of which we 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 151 

are unconscious, the one cannot be directly given 
as produced by the other. The intuition of Power 
is not immediately given in the action of matter 
upon matter ; nor yet can it be given in the action 
of matter upon mind, nor in that of mind upon 
matter; for to this day we are utterly ignorant 
how matter and mind operate upon each other. 
We know not how the material refractions of the 
eye are connected with the mental sensation of 
seeing, nor how the determination of the will 
operates in bringing about the motion of the 
muscles. We can investigate severely the phe- 
nomena of matter and of mind, as we can examine 
severally the constitution of the earth, and the 
architecture of the heavens : we seek the boundary 
line of their junction, as the child chases the 
horizon, only to discover that it flies as we pur- 
sue it. 

There is thus no alternative, but either to 
abandon the inquiry after an immediate intuition 
of power, or to seek for it in mind as determining 
its own modifications 7 ; — a course open to those who 

* This is clearly and accurately stated by M. Cousin. 
" Cherche-t-on la notion de cause dans Taction de la bille 
sur la bille, comme on le faisait avant Hume, ou de la main 
sur la bille, et des premiers muscles locomoteurs sur leurs 
extremites, ou meme dans Taction de la volonte sur le muscle, 
comme Ta fait M. de Biran, on ne la trouvera dans aucun de 
ces cas, pas meme dans le dernier, car il est possible qu'il y 
ait une paralysie des muscles qui rende la volonte impuissante 
sur eux, improductive, incapable d'etre cause et par con- 



152 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

admit an immediate consciousness of self, and to 
them only. My first and only presentation of 
power or causality is thus to be found in my 
consciousness of myself as willing. In every act 
of volition, I am fully conscious that it is in my 
power to form the resolution or to abstain ; and 
this constitutes the presentative consciousness of 
free will and of power. Like any other simple 
idea, it cannot be defined; and hence the dif- 
ficulty of verbally distinguishing causation from 
mere succession. But every man who has been 
conscious of an act of will, has been conscious of 
power therein ; and to one who has not been so 
conscious, no verbal description can supply the 
deficiency. 

Here again, as in the case of substance, as soon 
as we advance beyond the region of consciousness, 
we find ourselves in the midst of negative notions, 

sequent d'en suggerer la notion. Mais ce qu'aucune paralysie 
ne peut empecher, c'est Taction de la volonte sur elle-meme, 
la production dune resolution, c'esta-dire une causation toute 
spirituelle, type primitif de la causalite, dont toutes les actions 
exterieures, a commencer par l'effort musculaire, et a finir par 
le mouvement de la bille sur la bille, ne sont que des symboles 
plus ou moins infideles." Fragments Philosophiques, Preface de 
la premiere edition. James Mill (Analysis of tlie Human 
Mind, vol. ii. p. 256.) speaks of the idea of power in the 
relation of cause and effect as " an item altogether imaginary." 
Such a thoroughgoing imagination is a psychological im- 
possibility : the item must be given in one relation before it 
can be imagined in another. No effort of imagination can 
create its object out of nothing. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 153 

which we can neither conceive, nor affirm, nor 
deny. Our clearest notion of efficiency is that of 
a relation between two objects, similar to that 
which exists between ourselves and our volitions". 
But what relation can exist between the heat of 
fire and the melting of wax, similar to that between 
a conscious mind and its self-determinations ? Or, 
if there is nothing precisely similar, can there be 
any thing in any degree analogous ? We cannot 
say that there is, or, if there is, how far the analogy 
extends, and how and where it fails. We can form 
no positive conception of a power of this kind : 
we can only say, that it is something different 
from the only power of which we are intuitively 
conscious. But, on the other hand, we are not 
warranted in denying the existence of any thing 
of the kind; for denial is as much an act of 
positive thought as affirmation, and a negative 
idea furnishes no data for one or the other. 

The principle of Causality is thus precisely 
analogous to that of Substance in its origin and 
legitimate application, as well as in its perversion. 
The idea of power cannot legitimately be extended 
beyond the phenomena of personal consciousness 
in which it is directly manifested. But the phe- 
nomena of matter are thus far similar to those of 
mind, that both alike are subject to the law of 
time ; the phenomena of nature being in all cases 
preceded by other phenomena, as the phenomena " 
1 See Reid, Active Powers, Essay i. ch. v. 



154 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

of volition are preceded by a productive energy of 
the person willing. The relation which is given 
in the latter alone is transferred by association to 
the former ; and men speak of the power of fire to 
melt wax, as they speak of their own power of 
self-determination; without being aware that, in 
departing from the field of consciousness, they 
have departed from the only province in which 
the term power has any positive significance*. 
What is meant by power in a fire to melt wax 1 
How and when is it exerted, and in what manner 
does it come under our cognisance? Supposing 
such power to be suspended by an act of Omni- 
potence, the Supreme Being at the same time 
producing the succession of phenomena by the 
immediate interposition of his own will, — could we 
in any way detect the change ? Or suppose the 
course of nature to be governed by a pre-established 
harmony, which ordained that at a certain moment 
fire and wax should be in the neighbourhood of 
each other, that, at the same moment, fire by 

• Thus M. Engel observes, *' Dans ce que nous appelons 
force d'attraction, d'affinite, ou meme d'impulsion, la seule 
chose connue (c'est a- dire representee k l'imagination et aux 
sens), c'est l'effet opere, savoir, le rapprochement des deux 
corps attires et attirant. Aucune langue n'a de mot pour 
exprimer ce je ne sais quoi (effort, tendance, nisus), qui reste 
absolument cache, mais que tous Jes esprits concoivent neces- 
sairement comme ajoute a la representation phenomenale." 
(See De Biran, Nouvelles Considerations, p. 28.) The ce je ne 
sais quoi expresses exactly the negative character of the notion 
in question. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 155 

itself should burn, and wax by its own laws should 
melt, neither affecting the other, — would not all 
the perceptible phenomena be precisely the same 
as at present ? These suppositions may be extra- 
vagant, though they are supported by some of the 
most eminent names in philosophy ; but the mere 
possibility of making them shews that the rival 
hypothesis is not a necessary truth; the various 
principles being opposed, only like the vortices of 
Descartes and the gravitation of Newton, as more 
or less plausible methods of accounting for the 
same physical phenomena. 

Before we can positively assert, as a principle of 
necessary truth, that all physical phenomena must 
have a cause, we must ascertain clearly what 
meaning we attach to the word cause. If we 
eliminate the notion of power, which has no 
positive significance in this relation, and confine 
ourselves to that of chronological succession, we 
may assign three different meanings to the term 
cause, and three different degrees of certainty to 
the corresponding principle. If we mean no more 
than that every event must have some chrono- 
logical antecedent, the principle is a necessary 
truth, dependent upon an original law of the human 
consciousness by which we are compelled to con- 
template all phenomena as taking place in time. 
If we advance a step beyond this, and add to the 
notion of succession, that of invariability, or repe- 
tition of similar phenomena under similar circum- 



156 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

stances, the principle may be stated in two different 
ways. We may interpret Cause to mean simply 
invariable antecedent, in which case the principle 
may be expressed as follows: Every phenomena 
which takes place in nature is preceded by some 
other phenomenon or aggregate of phenomena b , 
with which it is invariably conjoined. Or, secondly, 
regarding the invariability as one of consequence 
and not of antecedence, we may enunciate the 
principle in a somewhat more complex form : 
Every phenomenon which takes place has, among 
its immediate antecedents, some one phenomenon 
or aggregate of phenomena, which being repeated, 
the same consequent phenomenon will invariably 
recur." 

As stated in the first of the above forms, the 
Principle of Causality is no more than an induction 
from experience, and can never at highest amount 
to more than the assertion of a general fact in 
nature. We are not warranted in stating, prior to 
observation, that the two phenomena A and B are 
so invariably connected together that nature never 

b This last limitation is necessary: the cause, to speak 
accurately, is the sum total of the conditions, whose united 
presence is followed invariably by the effect. It is not any 
single phenomenon, unless we can, by successive experiments, 
eliminate all the concomitants save one, and thus shew that, 
as far as the given effect is concerned, they are indifferent. 
This however in practice is seldom the case. On this subject 
some valuable remarks will be found in Mill's Logic, book iii. 
ch. 5. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 157 

presents, and man can never produce, a single 
instance of the latter without the precedence of 
the former. Such a conclusion may be established, 
as a matter of fact, by a long course of observ- 
ation : it may be regarded as extremely probable 
beforehand, from what observation teaches us of 
the uniformity of nature in other instances : but 
in these cases it is not a principle of necessary 
truth ; it is an inductive law or general fact in the 
constitution of nature as now established by the 
will of God. It is thus, and it might be otherwise. 

In point of fact, the principle, as thus explained, 
is so far from being necessary, that it has not yet 
been ascertained to be true. As far as observation 
has hitherto gone, the same phenomenon occurs at 
different times with totally different antecedents. 
Thus, as Mr. Mill has observed, one set of observ- 
ations or experiments shews that the sun is a cause 
of heat, another that friction is a cause of it, others 
that percussion, electricity, and chemical action 
are also causes. It is very possible, indeed highly 
probable, that further observation may hereafter 
discover some one uniform feature running through 
these several sources ; but this is only a probability 
supported by the analogy of nature in other in- 
stances ; it is not a necessary law of our own minds 
compelling us, prior to experience, to pronounce 
that a plurality of physical causes is impossible. 

The second form of the principle is less open 
to exception. For though it may be a matter 



158 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

of question, whether the same phenomenon may 
not proceed from a variety of physical causes, it 
appears to be beyond all doubt that any one of 
those causes, whenever it takes place, will be 
adequate to the production of the effect Thus 
expressed, the law in question is identical with that 
belief in the universal connection of similar events, 
which Hume reduces to the result of association, 
which his antagonists of the Scottish school refer 
to an original principle of our nature, while Mr. 
Mill holds it to be itself an instance of induction, 
and induction by no means of the most obvious 
kind. 

None of these solutions is entirely satisfactory. 
That of Hume has been sufficiently refuted, even 
by the disciple of his general theory, Brown ; and 
the refutation holds good, whether we suppose, 
with Brown, that the theory in question is a 
dogmatic position maintained by Hume himself, 
or whether, with Sir W. Hamilton, we regard it 
merely as the reductio ad absurdum of the dog- 
matism then in vogue. That of an original prin- 
ciple of our nature, though true as far as it 
goes, is too vague, and confounds under one 
general term things which it should be the prin- 
cipal object of any mental classification to dis- 
tinguish. There are some original principles of 
our nature of immutable obligation ; and there are 
others which are perpetually leading us astray. 
There are some which lead us to truths which we 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 159 

cannot reverse even in thought; and there are 
others which point out only contingent and variable 
phenomena. Sight and hearing, appetite and 
desire, the law of conscience, and the intuitions of 
space and time, are all equally original principles 
of our nature ; that is, we can ultimately give no 
account of them, but that it has pleased our Maker 
so to constitute us. Mr. Mill's explanation over- 
looks the fact, that when the principle in question 
is found in apparent conflict with experience, it is 
invariably assumed to be in the right, and expe- 
rience in the wrong ; which is not the case with 
merely inductive laws: to say nothing of the 
paralogism of making the ground and principle of all 
induction itself dependent upon induction, and upon 
induction only. Our earliest and unphilosophical 
inductions appear as often to indicate variety in 
the operations of nature as uniformity. The sun 
rises and sets, the tide ebbs and flows, with regu- 
larity ; but storm and calm, rain and sunshine, 
appear to observe no fixed order of succession. 
But, in any instance whatever of physical causation, 
let an apparent repetition of the cause not be fol- 
lowed by that of the effect ; and all men alike, 
philosophical or unphilosophical, will at once 
assert that there was some latent variety in the 
circumstances, and not a change in the uniformity 
of their succession. 

The Principle of Causality, as thus exhibited, 
seems to combine in one formula two separate 



160 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

elements, the one necessary, the other empirical. 
That matter in every relation is subject to some 
law, by virtue of which a given antecedent admits 
at any one time of only one possible consequent, 
seems to be a necessary and unavoidable con- 
viction. That this law will be manifested by the 
production of similar phenomena on similar oc- 
casions, is the result of a combination of this 
necessary conviction with the experience of the 
actual evidence of law in our own world, in 
those cases which are most open to observation. 
I can suppose it possible that in another world 
the law may be manifested in another way, ac- 
cording to which the phenomena of matter may 
have no settled relations to each other, but 
phenomena at one time and in one place con- 
nected as cause and effect, may at another time 
or in another place have no connection at all. 
But even in this case, I can only conceive the 
material agents as passively obeying the law of 
their organization; not as enabled, by their own 
caprice, to obey or disobey on different occasions. 
Whether the perceptible results be more or less 
regular, I am still compelled to believe that, in 
any single instance, the antecedent circumstances 
being given, the consequent cannot but be deter- 
mined by them in one way and in one way 
only; whether a similar antecedent will on a 
future occasion be followed by a similar con- 
sequent or not. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 161 

At the same time I am not entitled to pro- 
nounce a priori that matter cannot possibly 
disobey its own law ; though assuredly I am unable 
to conceive how it can do so. And we have 
thus a remarkable parallel between the general 
law of causation, as applicable to physical pheno- 
mena, and the psychological facts of our own 
constitution, the reverse of which, as was observed 
at the beginning of the present chapter, may be 
supposed, but cannot be conceived. And this 
parallel, I am inclined to think, furnishes a key 
to the true character of the law. If we were 
told of an instance on our own globe, in which 
the repetition of exactly similar phenomena had 
apparently not been followed by the same effect, 
we should without hesitation account for it on one 
of two grounds. Either the phenomena were not 
really exactly similar, or the interposition of some 
intelligent being had prevented the natural result. 
And if we were asked, why these two alternatives 
alone are admissible, we should probably reply, 
" because matter cannot change of itself." And 
probably, if we were informed that in some other 
world, where the laws of matter are manifested 
otherwise than by regular succession, the natural 
relation had in any given instance not taken 
place, we should ascribe it in like manner to 
some external intervention, not to any power of 
obedience or disobedience residing in the matter 
itself. Whatever relation of cause and effect is 

M 



162 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

conceived as existing between two material phe- 
nomena, whether limited to a single occasion 
or repeated in orderly recurrence, we find it 
impossible to attribute to the phenomena at that 
particular time any thing like self-action, or a 
choice of alternatives to determine or be deter- 
mined in this way or that. Now why cannot 
we think of matter as acting by itself? Because 
power and self-determination have never been 
given to us, save in one form, that of the actions 
of the conscious self. What I am to conceive 
as taking place, I must conceive as taking place 
in the only manner of taking place iif which it 
has ever been presented to me. This reduces 
the law of Causality, in one sense indeed, to an 
empirical principle, but to an empirical principle 
of a very peculiar character; one, namely, in 
which it is psychologically impossible that ex- 
perience should testify in more than one way. 
Such principles, however empirical in their origin, 
are coextensive in their application with the whole 
domain of thought. They cannot, properly speak- 
ing, be called inductive truths; for they require 
no accumulation of physical experience. The 
course of Nature is thought as uniform, because, 
so long as Nature alone is spoken of, that element 
is absent which alone we can think of as origin- 
ating a change, Intelligence. And for the same 
reason, so long as the several phenomena of 
Nature are believed to be each under the control 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 163 

of a separate intelligence, the axiom of her uni- 
formity will admit of perpetual modification. The 
winds may blow north or south, as suits the 
caprices of yEolus; Xanthus may neglect the 
laws of his periodical rise and fall, to arrest the 
progress of Achilles ; and even the steady-going 
coachman, Phoebus, may alter upon occasion the 
pace of his chariot, to gratify the wishes of his 
roving parent. 

To call the Principle of Causality, as thus ex- 
plained, a Law of Thought, would be incorrect. 
We cannot think the contrary, not because the 
laws of thought forbid us, but because the material 
for thought is wanting. Thought is subject to 
two different modes of restriction : firstly, from 
its own laws, by which it is restricted as to it 
form ; and, secondly, from the laws of intuition, 
by which it is restricted as to its matter. The 
restriction, in the present instance, is of the latter 
kind. We cannot conceive a course of nature 
without causation, as we cannot conceive a 
being who sees without eyes or hears without 
ears; because we cannot, under existing circum- 
stances, experience the necessary intuition. But 
such things may notwithstanding exist ; and, under 
other circumstances, they might become objects 
of possible conception, the laws of the process of 
conception remaining unaltered. This will be 
more clearly seen hereafter, when we come to treat 
of Logical Necessity and the Laws of Thought. 

m 2 



164 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

The Principle of Causality may thus, as far as 
its necessity is concerned, be referred to an inter- 
mediate place between the axioms of mathematics 
and the generalizations of physical science, being 
contingent in some degree as compared with 
the former, and necessary in some degree as 
compared with the latter. It is contingent, inas- 
much as it relates to circumstances to which 
our experience is subjected in the present state 
of things, and those circumstances might possibly 
have been different. It is necessary, inasmuch 
as, while those circumstances remain as they are, 
the conviction produced by them is unavoidable, 
in thought no less than in fact. The necessity 
has thus a negative not a positive origin; and 
this origin suggests a practical caution, as regards 
the employment of the principle. Our immediate 
intuition of power, as has been before observed, 
is to be found in the consciousness of mind as 
modifying itself, the ego determining its own 
volitions. That mind operates upon matter, we 
are not immediately conscious : it is not given 
in any intuition that the determination of the will 
ads upon the muscles of the arm ; though the 
motion of % the latter follows the generation of the 
former. Hence, though we are compelled to 
ascribe all change to the only power of which we 
are conscious, we are unable to ascribe it in the 
only manner of operation of which we are con- 
scious. For purposes of scientific investigation, 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 165 

the principle is thus purely negative, though it 
serves to regulate our belief. We know not to 
this day, and we never can know in this life, how 
mind operates upon matter; though we must 
believe that, in some way or other, it does so 
operate. It is impossible, therefore, to construct 
deductively any system of Natural Philosophy 
from the Principle of Causality, or from any other 
axiom expressing the agency of mind upon matter. 
The value of such principles is purely psycho- 
logical. 

From the view above given of the Principle of 
Causality, some important consequences might be 
drawn relatively to other sciences; which, how- 
ever, my present limits do not permit me to 
attempt. One such remark, however, will, I trust, 
be tolerated, both from the intrinsic importance 
of the question to which it relates, and from its 
connection with the doctrines of an eminent 
author 6 , to whom I have been considerably in- 
debted in the preceding pages. If the view above 
taken be sound, we are enabled to detect a fun- 
damental fallacy in the argument in favour of 
necessity from the determination of the will by 
motives. If every thing in nature, it is argued, 
must have a cause or sufficient reason, the deter- 
minations of the will cannot be exempted from 
this general law. If I am determined by motives 

c For the argument of Mr. Mill, here alluded to, see 
Appendix, note D. 



166 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

in the formation of every act of volition, then 
there is something previous to such act which 
made it to be necessarily produced. If I am not 
so determined, there is an effect in nature without 
a cause. In this argument, there is a latent 
ambiguity of language. As applied to Physics, 
the cause of a phenomenon is a certain antecedent 
fact, which being repeated, the phenomenon will 
recur. This notion of cause is gathered from 
material phenomena, and can only by an imperfect 
analogy be applied to mental. In this sense, 
motives addressed to the will are not causes ; for, 
in every act of volition, I am fully conscious that 
I can at this moment act in either of two ways, 
and that, all the antecedent phenomena being 
precisely the same, I may determine one way 
to-day, and another way to-morrow. To speak 
of the determinations of the will as earned by 
phenomena, in the same sense in which the fusion 
of metal is caused by fire, is to give the lie to 
consciousness for the sake of theory. On the 
other hand, if cause be interpreted to mean an 
agent with power, my only positive notion of 
cause in this sense is derived from the conscious- 
ness of myself as determining, not as determined. 
Of the power of motives upon my will, conscious- 
ness tells me nothing; but only that the one is 
presented and the other follows ; not r however, 
as in Physics, uniformly. My notion of causes 
with power, other than myself, is derived from the 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 167 

primary intuition of myself as a cause, and cannot 
be made to react upon that intuition, without the 
fallacy of deducing the known from the unknown. 
Of myself as necessitated by motives, my imme- 
diate consciousness tells me nothing. It is a mere 
inference from a supposed general law of causality, 
which law is itself derived from the consciousness 
of the very reverse. You are conscious, says the 
necessitarian, of yourself as a determining cause ; 
therefore you must be a determined effect. By 
what logic does this follow? If these consi- 
derations suggest a limit to the universality of the 
principle of sufficient reason, so be it. No prin- 
ciple can consistently be allowed so ipuch uni- 
versality, as to overthrow the intuition from which 
it had its rise d . 

Another observation will not be deemed un- 
important by those who are aware how many 
philosophical theories have been constructed on 
the sole basis of philosophical phraseology 6 . Locke 

d The above cursory remarks are of course not designed as 
a full examination of the problem of necessity, but only as a 
hint for examining one of the arguments advanced in its 
support. More would be out of place here. A few additional 
observations will be found in the Appendix, note E. 

e It will scarcely be credited that a philosopher of Hegel's 
eminence should have connected a logical theory of judgment 
with the fact, that the German word Urtheil etymologically 
means original part. Such a method of philosophizing could 
hardly have been surpassed by Conradus Crambe, or his 
facetious relative, Mr. Swan, Gamester and Punster of the 
City of London. 



168 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

has laid some stress on the fact, that the names 
which stand for insensible actions and notions, 
are derived from those of sensible objects. " To 
imagine, apprehend, comprehend, adhere, conceive, 
instil, disgust, disturbance, tranquillity, &c. are all 
words taken from the operations of sensible things, 
and applied to certain modes of thinking. By 
which we may give some kind of guess what kind 
of notions they were, and whence derived, which 
filled their minds who were the first beginners of 
languages : and how nature, even in the naming 
of things, unawares suggested to men the originals 
and principles of all their knowledge f ." The 
fallacy of the theory attached to this fact by 
Locke himself, and by Home Tooke, has been 
fully exposed by Dugald Stewart; but it should 
also have been observed that, in point of fact, the 
obligation is not entirely on one side. While, as 
regards attributes and phenomena, the language 
of mental science has mostly been borrowed from 
that of sensation ; in all that relates to the notions 
of cause or force, as has been well remarked by 
Maine de Biran, the language properly belonging 
to the mental fact has been transferred by analogy 
to the physical. As the basis of a theory, the 
fact is of no great value ; but its weight, such as 
it is, should at least be acknowledged to bear on 
both sides of thfe question. 

Before closing the present remarks, it is necessary 

f Essay, b. iii. ch. i. §. 5. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 169 

to say a few words in reference to an objection 
which will probably have frequently suggested 
itself to those conversant with the literature of the 
subject The origin here assigned to the principle 
of causality, (and the same may in some degree be 
said of that of substance also,) may perhaps appear 
to be of too empirical a character to consist with 
the amount of universality assigned to the principle 
itself; besides being in some respects at variance 
with the opinions of those philosophers to whom 
the preceding pages are mostly indebted 8 . Sir 
William Hamilton has remarked that, if the con- 
ception of active power is derived, as Reid asserts, 
from our voluntary exertions, our notion of causality 
would be of an empirical derivation, and without 
the quality of universality and necessity \ Reid 
himself, in another passage, admits the same thing. 
" The proposition to be proved," he says, " is not a 
contingent but a necessary proposition. It is not 
that things which begin to exist commonly have a 
cause, or even that they always in fact have a 
cause; but that they must have a cause, and 
cannot begin to exist without a cause. Proposi- 
tions of this kind, from their nature, are incapable 
of proof by induction. Experience informs us only 
of what is or has been, not of what must be ; and 

* A point at issue between two eminent French philo- 
sophers, to whose writings I am under considerable obli- 
gations, will be considered in the Appendix, note F. 

b Reid's Works, p. 604. 



.170 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

the conclusion must be of the same nature with 
the premises." 

That experience is the chronological antecedent 
of all our knowledge, even of the most necessary 
truths, is now generally admitted. But a distinc- 
tion is frequently drawn, and has been more than 
once adverted to in the preceding pages, between 
truths or notions of which experience is the source, 
and those of which it is only the occasion. The 
mind, instead of being compared to a tabula rasa, 
on which experience impresses the whole writing, 
is likened to a seed, which must indeed be planted 
before it will grow ; but contact with the soil is 
only the occasion which calls forth the hidden 
germ of the plant. Both analogies are imperfect ; 
and both, as regards the present question, tend 
rather to darken than to illustrate. The point 
may be better explained by laying aside, as far as 
is possible, physical imagery altogether, and by 
examining separately the relation to experience of 
notions or concepts, and of judgments ; instead of 
confounding both under the vague expression, 
origin of ideas. 

Every general concept is in one sense empirical ; 
for every concept must be formed from an intuition, 
and every intuition is experienced. But there are 
some intuitions which, from our constitution and 
position in the world, we cannot help experiencing ; 

1 InteU. PotverSy Essay vi. ch. 6. (p. 455, of Sir W. Hamilton's 
edition.) 



; 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 171 

and there are others which, according to circum- 
stances, we may experience or not. The former 
will give rise to concepts which, without any great 
impropriety of language, may be called native or 
a priori ; being such as, though not coeval with 
the mind itself, will certainly be formed in every 
man as he grows up, and such as it was preordained 
that every man should have. The latter will give 
rise to concepts which, for a like reason, may be 
called adventitious or a posteriori; being such as may 
or may not be formed, according to the special 
experience of this or that individual. To the 
former class belong the notions of time and space, 
as implied in all our intuitions, internal or external: 
to this class belong also the notions of seeing, hear- 
ing, and such other mental operations, as, in some 
manner or other, are performed by every man not 
physically deficient in the requisite organs. Of the 
same kind are the notions of right and wrong, 
which must necessarily arise in the mind of every 
man who has ever performed an action of which 
his conscience approves or disapproves, — and all 
men must at times do both. The numerous con- 
troversies concerning the existence of a moral 
sense may be considerably simplified by this con- 
sideration \ On the other hand, to the class of 
adventitious notions belong those of this or that 
colour, sound, &c. in short, of all simple or com- 
plex objects of perception, which it is possible may 
k Sec Appendix, note G. 



172 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

have been presented to the experience of one man 
and not to that of another. 

But a necessity of which I am conscious, can, 
like truth and falsehood, exist only in judgments. 
It may be ordained by the laws of my constitution 
that I must necessarily form certain notions ; but 
those notions are not therefore thought by me as 
necessary. The simplest form in which necessity 
can be presented to my consciousness is that of a 
judgment, A must be B. This character belongs 
to all such judgments as by the laws of his con- 
stitution a man must form, supposing him to be 
possessed of the constituent concepts. 

There are certain concepts which, whether 
native or adventitious in their own origin, must, 
when once gained, necessarily be thought in con- 
junction : there are others which we are at liberty 
to connect or not, according to circumstances. 
This necessity or contingency of judgments is 
generally confounded with necessity or contin- 
gency in the corresponding concepts ; but the fact 
is, that they are not even coextensive in their 
provinces. There may be thousands of men who 
never heard of a circle or its radius : there is not 
one who, those notions being once acquired, can 
fail to see that all the radii of a circle must be 
equal to each other. 

Necessity in judgments is dependent sometimes 
on the laws of thought, sometimes on the laws of 
other parts of our constitution ; and the term may, 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. % 173 

in another sense,, be applied to that character in 
certain judgments which arises from the limitation 
of our faculties, and from the circumstances in 
which all men alike are placed. Thus by the 
laws of thought, every part of any given concept, 
be its origin what it may, must be thought as 
identical with itself; and hence arises the logical 
necessity of all analytical judgments. By the laws 
of our intuitive faculties, all objects of external 
perception have a certain relation to Space, and 
all objects of internal perception to Time; and 
hence arises the mathematical necessity of geo- 
metrical and arithmetical judgments. Again, the 
limitations imposed on our intuitive faculties re- 
strict us, in the case of certain intuitions, to one 
relation only between them ; and hence arises the 
psychological necessity of certain judgments, of 
which we can suppose, but cannot conceive, the 
contrary. The restriction in this case is not 
properly a law regulating acts which we can per- 
form, but a bar separating us from acts which we 
cannot perform. None of these classes of judg- 
ments can properly be termed empirical ; being 
dependent, not on experience alone, but on expe- 
rience in conjunction with certain laws and limit- 
ations of our mental constitution. They are thus, 
to adopt Shaftesbury's correction of Locke, if not 
innate, at least connatural; the constitution of man 
being such, that being adult or grown up, at such 
or such a time, sooner or later, (no matter when,) 



174 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

they will infallibly, inevitably, necessarily spring 
up in him. These laws and limitations of our 
constitution render necessary the adoption of 
Leibnitz's addition to the sensationalist axiom 1 , 
" Nihil est in intellectu, quod non fuerit in sensu, 
nisi ipse intellectus" And even with this addition, 
sense must be understood with extreme latitude, 
for every possible kind of external or internal 
presentation. There is another class of judg- 
ments, in regard to which our experience is 
restricted by the circumstances in which we are 
universally placed. This is the case with the 
results of existing physical laws of the universe, 
which we can perfectly conceive reversed, though 
within our actual experience they never are so* 
I am fully convinced, for example, that, under 
the existing state of things, a stone thrown into 
the water will sink to the bottom; but it is 
perfectly conceivable that it might float. Lastly, 

1 Nouveaux Essais, 1. ii. ch. 1. This axiom ha9 been 
attributed to Aristotle, who in De Anima, iii. 4. compares 
the intellect before its actual exercise to a tablet with nothing 
actually written upon it, (ypappartiop f prjQtv vndpxft cvrcXcx**? 
yeypappcW.) But Aristotle does not regard the blank as filled 
up by the senses, but by the activity of the intellect itself. 
A nearer approach to the sensational tabula rasa may be 
found in the doctrine attributed to the Stoics by (Pseudo) 
Plutarch, De Plac. Phil. iv. 11. Of 2n»Uol <fxww &ra* yewrjBjj 6 
SpQpwrros, lx €l T ^ Vy^p^vucbw H*P° S ")* V™X7*» &<rmp \aprrqs cVrpyur 
els diroypa<f>r]¥' cir tovto piav tKdcrn)¥ ra>v twoiSiv cvanoypatperai- 
irparros dc 6 rrjs avceypa<f>rjs Tporros 6 d*A tu>v ala6rf<r€»». Compare 
Zeller, Philosophic der Griechen, iii. p. 31. 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 175 

there is a class of judgments which are, in the 
strictest sense, contingent ; such as relate to the 
conduct of a voluntary agent, who is subject to 
no necessary restraint, whatever may be his moral 
obligations. 

The above remarks are not designed as an exact 
statement of the theory of any previous philo- 
sopher m , nor as an explanation of language which 
has been hitherto employed in describing a sup- 
posed origin of our ideas. They are offered only 
as expressing what I believe to be a more exact 
and accurate account than is conveyed by the 
physical analogies already mentioned, by the vague 
phraseology of source and occasion, or by the obscure 
notions of potential and actual consciousness. They 
likewise help to distinguish, what it is important 
to keep separate from each other, necessity in the 
acquisition of concepts, and necessity in their 
combination in judgments. It is hardly correct, 
for example, to call mathematical notions native, 
or a priori; since it is by no means necessary or 
universal among mankind to form the concept of 
a circle or a triangle, still less of an ellipse or a 
parabola. But the judgments affirming the pro- 
perties of these figures are necessary in the highest 
possible degree. On the other hand, the concep- 

B They approach closely to the view given by Maine de 
Biran in his 6th and 7th Answer to the objections of Stapfer ; 
but that philosopher has hardly marked with sufficient dis- 
tinctness the positive and negative elements. 



176 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

tion of a cause is necessary in its origin ; all men 
being, in some degree, conscious of the exertion of 
power in their voluntary acts. But the necessity 
of the principle of causality, as a proposition, is of 
an inferior degree to that of mathematical judg- 
ments. The general result may be summed up as 
follows. 

1. Judgments necessary in the first degree, or 
logical and mathematical necessity. These are 
dependent on the laws of our mental operations ; 
and their contradictions are neither conceivable 
nor supposable. 

2. Judgments necessary in the second degree, 
or psychological necessity. These are dependent 
on the restrictions of our mental constitution; 
and their contradictories are supposable, but not 
conceivable. To this class belong the principles 
of causality and of substance. 

3. Judgments necessary in the third degree, or 
physical necessity. These are dependent on the 
laws of the material world ; and their contradictories 
are both supposable and conceivable, but never 
actually true. 

4. Judgments purely contingent, where either 
contradictory may be the true or the false alter- 
native. Such are all judgments reducible to no 
law of causation. 

To this last class belong at the present moment 
many judgments on physical phenomena ; but here 
the contingency solely arises from our ignorance 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 177 

of the law, and may hereafter be removed. Thus 
I am certain that the sun will rise to-morrow ; 
but I am uncertain whether the wind will blow 
from the north or south. But this only means 
that we are acquainted with the laws of the one 
phenomenon and ignorant of those of the other. 
The progress of science may raise all these judg- 
ments to cases of physical necessity. But my 
whole consciousness assures me that my own 
voluntary acts are subject to no invariable law, 
and that to dream of any amount of future science 
enabling a man to predict these, as he can now 
predict an eclipse and may hereafter predict a 
change of weather, is perfectly chimerical. These 
last judgments are, therefore, in the strictest sense 
of the term, contingent ; while those of the second 
and third class, as before observed, may be called 
contingent or necessary, according to the different 
points of view in which they are regarded. 

It only remains to point out the relation of the 
present chapter to Logical Science. Accidentally, 
it may be applied to the correction of a few 
perversions of the Scholastic Logic, such as the 
theory of demonstrative syllogisms; but its essential 
connection with the Science will be found in the 
different forms of conceptions and judgments. 
Though the notions of substance and of cause are 
obscure and negative only, the processes of con* 
ception and judgment, in their primitive form, 
proceed upon the tacit acknowledgment of the 



/ 

( r 



178 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

existence of something of the kind. In the act 
of conception, for example, different attributes are 
regarded as forming one whole by relation to a 
common substance. My conception of gold, for 
example, is that of a yellow, hard, heavy body : 
but the colour is perceived by the eye, the hard- 
ness is discerned by touch, the weight is made 
known by its pressure as it lies in my hand. 
When I conceive these various attributes as form- 
ing one thing, the gold is neither the colour, nor 
the hardness, nor the weight, but the something 
to which all these qualities belong. Again, having 
conceived gold as yellow, and hard, and heavy, 
I afterwards discover it to be soluble. Here, in 
forming the judgment, gold is soluble, I regard 
the attributes forming the subject and the predi- 
cate as coexisting in a common substance; and this 
identity of substance is expressed by the copula. 
Our ordinary modifications of thought and speech 
thus contain certain negative elements, the notions 
attached to which no amount of reflection or 
analysis can render perfectly clear and distinct; 
though they have been instinctively adopted by 
all mankind, and underlie forms of speech and 
thought which are found among all nations. No 
language can in these respects be constructed 
upon principles of philosophical analysis; for 
analysis cannot take place till language has 
arrived at a certain stage of maturity; and, till 
that period, it must be suffered to grow up with 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 179 

all the imperfections consequent on a hasty gene- 
ralization from the data of personal intuition. The 
logical character of these negative notions will be 
more fully explained when we come to examine 
the distinction between the matter and the form 
of thought. 

A preliminary examination of the principles of 
substance and causality is also necessary, before 
we can inquire into the character of the logical 
laws of thought. If it were strictly accurate to 
regard the principle of causality, with M. Cousin *, 
as a Principle of the Reason ; — if it were true, that 
one term of the judgment, that of change, being 
given, the mind is competent by its own act to 
add the other, and assert " change supposes a 
cause;" and that this term thus added contains 
a positive element of thought, and not a mere 
negation of the existence of data for thinking ; — if 
this were the case, the whole Science of Logic 
would have to be remodelled accordingly. The 
Reason, as distinguished in Kant's sense from the 
Understanding, would become a source of specu- 
lative truth ; its principles would assume the cha- 
racter of Laws of Thought; and Logic would 
become, according to M. Cousin's conception, the 
passage from Psychology to Ontology : the process 
of pure thinking would conduct us to the science 
of pure Being. A Logic of the Reason would thus 
become a necessary complement of the Logic of 

n Court de Philosophic, £169011 1 9. 

n2 



180 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

the Understanding ; and « considerable portion, if 
not the whole, of the Hegelian Dialectic must be 
incorporated with the Formal Science of Kant 
To shew that such a treatment, instead of being a 
completion, would be a corruption of the Science, — 
instead of making Logic fruitful of truths, would 
make it prolific of chimeras, — instead of attaining 
knowledge, would aim at impossibilities, has been 
one of the main objects of the preceding inquiry. 



CHAPTER VI. 

ON LOGICAL NECESSITY AND THE LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

The result of the two preceding chapters has 
been to mark off two classes of Necessary Truths, 
which, though dependent, as all such truths must 
be, upon mental laws and limitations, do not, pro- 
perly speaking, exhibit the operation of Laws of 
Thought, nor come within the province of Logic. 
We have now to examine the psychological cha- 
racter of the laws of pure thinking, and the kind 
of necessity exhibited in consequence by strictly 
logical processes. The following passage from 
Mr. Mill's Logic may serve to introduce the 
subject. 

" This maxim, (the dictum de omni et nullo,) when 
considered as a principle of reasoning, appears 
united to a system of metaphysics once indeed 
generally received, but which for the last two 
centuries has been considered as finally abandoned, 
though there have not been wanting, in our own 
day, attempts at its revival. So long as what were 
termed Universals were regarded as a peculiar 
kind of substances, having an objective existence 
distinct from the individual objects classed under 



182 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

them, the dictum de omni conveyed an important 
meaning ; because it expressed the intercommunity 
of nature, which it was necessary upon that theory 
that we should suppose to exist between those 
general substances and the particular substances 
which were subordinated to them. That every 
thing predicable of the universal was predicable of 
the various individuals contained under it, was 
then no identical proposition, but a statement of 
what was conceived as a fundamental law of the 
universe. The assertion that the entire nature 
and properties of the substantia secunda formed 
part of the properties of each of the individual 
substances called by the same name; that the 
properties of Man, for example, were properties of 
all men ; was a proposition of real significance 
when Man did not mean all men, but something 
inherent in men, and vastly superior to them in 
dignity. Now, however, when it is known that a 
class, an universal, a genus or species, is not an 
entity per se, but neither more nor less than the 
individual substances themselves which are placed 
in the class, and that there is nothing real in the 
matter except those objects, a common name 
given to them, and common attributes indicated 
by the name ; what, I should be glad to know, do 
we learn by being told, that whatever can be 
affirmed of a class, may be affirmed of every object 
contained in the class ? The class is nothing but 
the objects contained in it : and the dictum dejomm 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 183 

merely amounts to the identical proposition, that 
whatever is true of certain objects, is true of each 
of those objects. If all ratiocination were no more 
than the application of this maxim to particular 
cases, the syllogism would indeed be, what it has 
so often been declared to be, solemn trifling. The 
dictum de omni is on a par with another truth, 
which in its time was also reckoned of great im- 
portance, ' Whatever is, is ;' and not to be com- 
pared in point of significance to the cognate 
aphorism, ' It is impossible for the same thing to 
be and not to be;' since this is, at the lowest, 
equivalent to the logical axiom that contradictory 
propositions cannot both be true. To give any 
real meaning to the dictum de omni, we must con- 
sider it not as an axiom but as a definition ; we 
must look upon it as intended to explain, in a 
circuitous and paraphrastic manner, the meaning 
of the word class*" 

I quote the above passage from a work of high 
and in many respects of deserved reputation, as a 
remarkable instance of the total misconception of 
the nature and purpose of Logic, arising from that 
erroneous view to which I have before alluded, 
which regards the Aristotelian and the Baconian 
Organon as forming portions of the same system, 
and as subservient to the same end, that of physical 
investigation or the discovery of "fundamental 
laws of the universe." That the deductive method 

* Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 284. 



184 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

may be advantageously applied to purposes of 
physical inquiry is unquestionable; and in this 
respect Mr. Mill has certainly not underrated its 
value. Any single proposition of any syllogism or 
chain of syllogisms may thus materially contain a 
fact or a law of nature : but that the fundamental 
principle on which all reasoning is supposed to 
depend can by any possibility exhibit a law of 
external nature and not a law of mind, is a sup- 
position which, if tenable, would make a science of 
Logic impossible. If the dictum de omni were, as 
Mr. Mill supposes, formed on the hypothesis that 
universals had a distinct existence in nature apart 
from the mind that contemplates them, Logic might 
be entitled to rank with Optics or Astronomy, as 
a science of the laws of this or that order of natural 
phenomena; or it might perhaps aspire to the 
character of a general Cosmology, including these 
and other physical sciences as subordinate branches ; 
but it could not pretend to the slightest knowledge 
of the laws which the mind obeys in thinking; and 
its principles, as mere generalizations from expe- 
rience, could never attain to more than a physical 
necessity, as the statement of certain facts in the 
existing constitution of the world. 

A science is never ultimately benefited by dis- 
sembling any conclusion to which its principles 
appear fairly to lead ; still less can it gain by 
adulterating those principles themselves with foreign 
matter, borrowed from other departments, in the 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 185 

hope of obviating the apprehended results. In the 
case of Logic especially, it may be confidently 
asserted that nine tenths of the confusion and 
misunderstanding which still prevail concerning 
its nature and capabilities, have arisen from ill 
judged attempts to invest it with an appearance of 
utility in matters alien to its province 5 . Let us 
therefore look the supposed charge fairly in the 
face, and ask what will be the consequences, if we 
admit that the fundamental principles of pure 
thinking are, as they seem to be, identical or 
analytical judgments. Is Logic thereby deter- 
mined to be false or futile? By no means. A 
system is futile only when it aims at the solution 
of questions beyond the reach of human faculties : 
and even then, the prosecution of such inquiries 
is attended with an indirect benefit ; inasmuch as 
it is only after repeated failures that men learn to 
know the true limits of their mental powers, and 
can profit by the precept ultimately enjoined by a 
critical psychology : 

" Tecum habita, et noris, quam sit tibi curta su pel lex." 

It may indeed be humiliating to learn, what such 
an admission necessarily implies, that the under- 
standing of man is not furnished with a power of 
intuition as well as of thought ; but only in the 

b Rosenkranz, in his preface to Kant's Logic, speaks severely 
but truly on this point, " So ist derm auch die Logik hundert- 
fach von philosophischen Stum pern utUiter gemisshandelt 
worden." 



186 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

same way as it is humiliating to know that he 
cannot fly like a bird, nor swim like a fish. The 
restriction is one which the Maker of mankind has 
thought fit to impose upon his creatures; and, 
regret it as they may, they cannot escape from it. 
If Logic indeed supplied us with nothing but 
identical principles, it would by no means follow 
that the study of it is altogether useless ; but, in 
point of fact, it does very much more. Viewed in 
connection with Psychology, it points to the im- 
portant fact, that these principles are laws of mind: 
and this fact alone, applied to the past history and 
future prospects of Philosophy, will give rise to a 
series of practical rules of inestimable value in the 
direction of the mental powers. 

To prove then that Logic is either futile or 
false, it must be shewn, either that it is impossible 
for a thinking being to attain to a knowledge of 
the laws by which he thinks and to test thereby 
the legitimacy of the products of thought, or that 
the laws by which the human mind is actually 
governed are different from those universally 
assumed and insisted upon by Logicians. But if 
on these two points Logic and Psychology are 
found to be at one, each becomes the strongest 
possible guarantee of the truth and scientific value 
of the other. The laws which the logician has 
all along assumed as the basis of his system are 
now shewn to be the very ones by which, from 
the actual constitution of the human mind, the 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 187 

operations of thought are regulated : the con- 
clusions arrived at by a critical examination of 
the mental powers are shewn to be the same laws 
of thinking which had before been accepted as 
principles from a critical examination of the mental 
products. Thus, by the united forces of Logic 
and Psychology, we advance a step in the most 
important of all speculative knowledge, the know- 
ledge of ourselves and of our capacities : and so 
far is either science from being thereby proved 
futile, that they become the strongest possible 
safeguard against all futile speculations, by point- 
ing out clearly the nature of the laws of the pure 
understanding, and the exact limits within which 
they are operative. 

Enough has, I trust, been said to vindicate 
Logic from the charge of frivolity, whatever may 
be the conclusion concerning its principles to 
which our inquiries finally lead us. But in the 
eyes of a philosopher, such a vindication is wholly 
unnecessary. The only question worthy of a 
liberal mind, as regards the result of any investi- 
gation, is not, Is it useful ? but, Is it true ? How- 
ever fully persuaded we may be that every specu- 
lative truth has its practical advantages, to require 
a foresight of such advantages before entering on 
the inquiry is to interpose the most effectual bar 
that can be devised to the progress of any know- 
ledge, and the attainment of any benefit . The 

e This is indeed admitted and ably maintained by some of 



188 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

only tenable position that can be occupied by the 
assailants of Logic must be acquired by shewing 



that class of writers, whose researches are most to the taste of 
the Utilitarian. I am happy to he ahle to quote the following 
admirable vindication of the pursuit of truth for its own 
sake, from a philosopher with whose general principles I am 
by no means inclined to sympathize. 

" Si la puissance preponderate de notre organisation ne 
corrigeait, meme involontairement, dans l'esprit des savans, 
ce qu'il y a sous ce rapport d'incomplet et d etroit dans la 
tendance generate de notre epoque, Intelligence humaine, 
reduite a ne s'occuper que de recherches susceptibles dune 
utilite pratique immediate, se trouverait par cela seul, comrae 
l'a tres-justement remarque Condorcet, tout- a- fait arretee dans 
ses progres, meme a 1 egard de ces applications auxquelles on 
aurait imprudemment sacrifie les travaux purement specu- 
latifs ; car, les applications les plus importantes derivent con- 
stamment de theories formees dans une simple intention 
scientifique, et qui souvent ont 6i6 cultiv^es pendant plusieurs 
siecles sans produire aucun resultat pratique. On en peut 
citer un exemple bien remarquable dans les belles specu- 
lations des geometres grccs sur les sections coniques, qui, 
apres une longue suite de generations, ont servi, en de- 
terminant la renovation de l'astronomie, a conduire finale- 
men t l'art de la navigation au degre de perfectionnement 
qu'il a attaint dans ces derniers temps, et auquel il ne serait 
jamais parvenu sans les travaux si purement theoriques 
d'Archimede et d'Apolionius ; tellement que Condorcet a pu 
dire avec raison a cet egard : * le mateiot, qu'une exacte 
observation de la longitude preserve du naufrage, doit la vie 
a une theorie concue, deux mille ans auparavant, par des 
hommes de glnie qui avaient en vue de simples speculations 
gfcometriques." Comte, Cours de Philosophic Positive, vol. i. 
p. 64. 

An English philosopher, who has treated of the same 
subjects in a very different spirit, has expressed the same 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 189 

that men do not, as a matter of fact, reason 
consciously or unconsciously according to its 
rules; that the thinking process is not governed 
by laws at all ; or that its laws are totally different 
from those which the logician lays down. 

But it is time to examine the question itself 
which has given rise to these observations. Are 
the Laws of Thought in reality identical judg- 
ments or not ? It may perhaps appear that the 
so-called frivolity of such judgments is the result 
of unsuspected causes, having their root in the 
nature of the mind itself; that the very feature 
which is selected as the especial object of contempt 
and ridicule is the strongest evidence of the truth 
and value of the principles which it characterizes. 
Supposing, then, that the act of thinking is governed 
by certain laws, what might we naturally expect 
to find as the prominent feature by which such 
laws will be distinguished ? A new truth is in its 
very nature partial : it is new only because it is 
partial ; — the discovery of the particular attributes 
of some particular thing or class of things. In a 
psychological point of view, the determination of 
the laws of thought, (be their character as judg- 
ments what it may,) is as much a new truth 
as any other ; being the discovery of a particular 
fact in the constitution of the human mind. But 

sentiment briefly and well. " It may be universally true, 
that Knowledge is Power ; but we have to do with it not as 
Power, but as Knowledge." 



190 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

when we consider the same laws logically, in their 
application to the products of thought, how is it 
possible for any new truth to be determined by 
them ? As general laws, they can have no special 
relation to this object of thought rather than that; 
and it is upon such special relations that the 
discovery of every new property must depend. 
Material knowledge arises from the observation 
of differences: the essential feature of laws of 
thought must be the abstraction from all differ- 
ences d . A necessary law of all thinking, which 
shall at the same time ascertain the definite pro- 
perties of a definite class of things, is a contra- 
diction in terms ; for it is optional, and therefore 
contingent, whether we shall apply our thoughts 
to that particular class of things or not. But if 
all men have been thinking, some on this thing, 
some on that, but all under one code of laws, what 
marvel if, when their attention is called to those 
laws, they should recognise them as what they 
have all along virtually acknowledged? Herein 
lies at once the explanation and the justification 
of the so-called frivolity of principles of this kind. 
They can determine only the general attributes 
common to all objects of thought as such ; and 
these attributes must constitute the very ana- 
lytical judgments which Logic is so much decried 
for offering. Surely, in the name of common 
sense and common honesty, never was outcry 
d Kant, Logik, Einleitung, vii. p. 219. Ed. RosenkraDz. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 191 

more absurd than that which finds fault with a 
science for accomplishing the very purpose which 
it professes to attempt, and for exhibiting the very 
features which, if its pretensions are well founded 
and its method sound, it necessarily must exhibit. 

It is a remarkable fact in the modern history of 
philosophy, as regards identical judgments, that, 
while English philosophers, taking their departure 
from the principles of Locke, have been unsparing 
in their expressions of scorn and censure of them 
as mere verbal trifling, German philosophers, 
taking their departure from the principles of Kant, 
have placed them at the head of all philosophy, 
as the only absolute principles of truth and 
certainty. Yet Kant, as well as Locke, and with 
far more accuracy of discrimination, perceived and 
pointed out the impossibility of constructing a 
system of philosophy upon these judgments only. 
That both extremes are equally in error, — that both 
arise from a crude and one-sided view of a philo- 
sophy not perhaps in all respects consistent with 
itself, — and that the truth lies between the two, is 
a natural and obvious conclusion. To enter into 
the extravagancies of Fichte and Schelling would 
be foreign to the purposes of the present work ; 
but as regards the disciple of Locke, it may be 
observed, that he has no choice but of two 
alternatives ; either to repudiate the attack of his 
master on frivolous propositions, or to retract his 
refutation of the doctrine of innate ideas. If the 



192 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

principles of thought are competent to supply any 
positive addition to what is given in intuition, it 
follows that the act of thought can in so far 
create its own materials : this brings us back of 
necessity to the theory of innate ideas. If, on 
the other hand, the understanding can only modify 
what is given out of the act of thought, it follows 
that analytical judgments are not mere verbal 
frivolities, but fundamental laws of the thinking 
faculty. 

The Laws of Thought, properly so called, may 
thus be psychologically distinguished from the 
other elements of the process, by the answers to 
the following questions : 1. What is the material 
which must be given prior to any act of pure 
thinking? 2. How is that material modified by 
the act of thought itself? 3. What are the 
conditions by which the understanding is bound 
iu such modification? The third question will 
determine the fundamental laws of the several 
operations of Conception, Judgment, and Rea- 
soning. 

The act of Conception consists in regarding 
certain attributes as coexisting in a possible object 
of intuition. It has before been remarked, that 
when the object of intuition is actual, i. e. now 
and here present, an act of thought is necessary 
to distinguish it as such from other objects simul- 
taneously presented. This, however, is not pure 
conception, but conception in conjunction with 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 193 

intuition* In pure conception, the attributes are 
not presented in themselves, but represented by 
their signs. Hence the necessity, in some form 
or other, of language; and hence the object of 
intuition, in an act of pure conception, is not pre- 
sented as actual, but represented as possible 4 . 

Two preliminary conditions are thus requisite, 
prior to any act of pure conception. Firstly, 
attributes must be given, which in some com- 
bination or other have been presented in a former 
intuition. For, as thought cannot create intuition, 
attributes which have never been experienced are 
not conceivable. They need not indeed have 
been experienced in their present relation, but 
in some relation or other. Thus, though I have 
never seen that combination of a man's head with 
a horse's body which is supposed to constitute a 
centaur, yet the notion of such a conjunction 
is perfectly conceivable, because both the horse's 
body and the man's head have been presented in 
other combinations. Secondly, as the attributes 
are now given in and through their signs, the 
import of those signs is presupposed to be known. 
A word which I cannot connect with some known 
attribute is, for all purposes of thought, like 
the terms of an unknown tongue. Pure thought 
can neither supply defects in the experience of 
things, nor ignorance of the meaning of words. 

d Cf. Krug, Logik, §. 15. 
O 



194 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

Information on both these points is therefore 
presupposed. 

These materials being given, how are they dealt 
with by the act of thought, and what are the 
laws and limits which govern or confine the 
operation ? By the act of conception, the given 
attributes are combined in an unity of repre- 
sentation. Are there then any cases in which, 
certain attributes being given, I am compelled to 
think them bs representing an object? are there 
any cases in which I am forbidden to do so ? and 
are there any in which, as far as thought is con- 
cerned, I am left at liberty to do as I please? 
Pure conception being concerned with possible 
objects of intuition only, the first and third cases 
merge into one. The actual existence of any 
object can be determined only by its actual pre-* 
sence in this or that intuition ; and even then the 
evidence extends only to its present existence now 
and here, not to its necessary existence at any 
future time when it may become an object of 
thought. As an object of a past intuition, it has 
then a possible and representative existence only*. 

* " As not now present in time, an immediate knowledge of 
the past is impossible. The past is only mediately cognisable 
in and through a present modification relative to and repre- 
sentative of it, as having been. To speak of an immediate 
knowledge of the past involves a contradiction in adjecto. 
For to know the past immediately, it must be known in itself; 
and to be known in itself, it must be known as now existing. 
But the past is just a negation of the now existent : its very 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 195 

The first law of pure thinking applicable to con- 
ception is thus indicated by the negative criterion, 
that there are certain attributes which we cannot 
think as coexisting in any possible objefet of in- 
tuition. This leads us to the well-known Principle 
of Contradiction f , the most general form of which 
is, " Nothing can be A and not-A," or, u No object 
can be thought under contradictory attributes." 
But, though every thing which is contradictory is 
thus inconceivable, it cannot be maintained, on 
the other hand, that every thing which is not 
contradictory is conceivable 8 . 

But the Principle of Contradiction, as above 
enunciated, can only be applied in thought co- 
ordinately with another and a positive principle. 
If an object cannot be thought under contra- 
dictory attributes, the impossibility arises from its 
having a definite character of its own, including 
one of the contradictories and excluding the other. 
The universe of conceivable objects embraces 
both A and not-A ; it is only when definitely 
conceived as the one that an object cannot be 
conceived as the other. Every object of thought 
as such is thus conceived by limitation and dif- 
ference ; as having definite characteristics by 

notion therefore excludes the possibility of its being imme- 
diately known." Sir W. Hamilton, ReuTs Works, p. 810. 

r This law, as Erug has remarked, (Logik, §. 18.) ought 
rather to be called the Principle of Non-Contradiction. 

• On conceivability, as a test of logical possibility, see Sir 
W. Hamilton, Reid'a Works, p. 877. 

02 



196 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

which it is marked off and distinguished from 
all others ; as being, in short, itself and nothing 
^lse. The indefinite ideas, therefore, corresponding 
to the general terms, Thing, Object, Being in 
general, are not concepts, as containing no dis- 
tinctive attributes ; and the general object denoted 
by such terms is inconceivable. This second Law 
of Thought is expressed by the Principle of 
Identity, " Every A is A," or " Every object of 
thought is conceived as itself V 

But these two Laws of Thought necessarily 
involve a third. The object which I conceive 
is by the Law of Identity discerned as being 
that which it is, and by the Law of Contradiction 
is distinguished from that which it is not. But 
these two correlatives must also be regarded as 
constituting between them the universe of all that 
is conceivable; for the distinction above made 
is not between two definite objects of thought, 
but between the object of which I think and 
all those of which I do not think. Not-A implies 
the exclusion of A only, and of nothing else, 

h Cf. Krug, Logik, §. 17. who contemplates the principle 
from the opposite side. He is wrong however in deducing 
from it the principle of Contradiction, which is an inde- 
pendent axiom. The two have been confounded or identified 
by many eminent Philosophers ; as Leibnitz, Reflex, sur Locke, 
Wolf, Ph. Rat. §. 271. Kant, Logik, Einl. vii. Herbart, Einl in 
die Philosophie, §. 80. Hoffbauer, Logik, §. 23. shews that the 
two principles are independent, and that neither can be 
deduced from the other without a petitio principiu 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 197 

and thus denotes the universe of all conceivable 
objects with that one exception. This relation, 
in its more general expression, constitutes a third 
Law of Thought, the Principle of Excluded Mid- 
dle 1 , « Every possible object is either A or not-A." 
These three Principles, of Contradiction, Identity, 
apd Excluded Middle, constitutes the Laws of 
Pure Thinking, or of Thought as Thought. 

Another limitation must be noticed, which, 
though perhaps not properly an a priori law 
arising out of the nature of thought itself, is at 
least an universally valid a posteriori restriction 
arising from the practical limits of our intuitive 
powers. Thought can only deal with such at- 
tributes as have been in some manner presented 
in intuition. Hence in all cases where intuition 
is impossible, thought is impossible likewise. Hence 
arises a class of practical limitations of thought 
based on the limitations of possible experience. 
Some of these are partial and accidental only ; as 
in the case of a blind man, who can have no 
intuitive experience of colours. But one at least 
is common to all men, and, so far, psychologically^ 
if not logically, necessary. Though, as far as the 
laws of thought are concerned, it is permitted to 
unite in an act of conception all attributes which 
are not contradictory of each other, it is impossible 

1 Principium exclusi medii inter duo contradictoria. For the 
history of this expression and of the Law denoted by it, see 
Sir W. Hamilton's Lectures on Logic, vol. i. p. 90. 



198 ' PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

in practice to go beyond a very limited number. 
The number of attributes in the universe not 
logically repugnant to each other is infinite ; and 
the mind can therefore find no absolute limits to its 
downward progress in the formation of subordinate 
notions. To arrive at a notion which shall com- 
prehend within itself all conceivable compatible 
attributes, and which shall therefore admit of no 
further possible limitation but that of the individual 
conditions of presence in space and time, is an act 
which, if not a priori self-destructive, will at least 
in practice require an infinite grasp of mind and an 
infinite length of time for its accomplishment 3 . 

Hence it follows at once, that a logical Highest 
Genus, and a logical Lowest Species, i. e. a notion 
so simple as to admit of no further subtraction, 
and a notion so complex as to admit of no further 
addition, are both inconceivable. The meaning of 
these two terms in Logic must not be confounded 
with that which is applicable to this or that branch 
of material science. The Highest Genus in any 
special science is the general class, comprehending 

J This and the preceding condition are sometimes given as 
the Laws of Homogeneity and Specification. See Kant, Kritik 
der r. V. p. 510. ed. Rosenkranz. Krug, Logik, §. 45. b. Fries, 
Syst. der Logik, §.21. I prefer to regard them as deductions 
from a higher law. It may be observed, that those logicians 
who insist on the Law of Homogeneity are not consistent in 
calling thing or object a concept (Begriff). The third law 
joined with these two, that of Logical Affinity, or Continuity, is 
questionable, both as regards truth and value. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 199 

all the objects whose properties that science in- 
vestigates: the different Lowest Species are the 
classes at which that special investigation termi- 
nates. In Geometry, for example, under the 
summum genus of magnitudes in space, we find 
three coordinate infimce species of triangles, the 
equilateral, the isosceles, and the scalene. The 
Geometrical properties of the figures are not 
affected by any further subdivision. These three 
classes are therefore lowest species in Geometry, 
but not in Logic. For of geometrical limitations, 
the logician, as such, knows nothing. In a mere 
relation of concepts, the notion of an equilateral 
triangle whose sides are three feet long, is a 
further subdivision of the notion of an equilateral 
triangle ; and out of this again we may form the 
subordinate notion, " an equilateral triangle whose 
sides are three feet long and divided into inches." 
This process may, as far as Logic is concerned, be 
continued ad infinitum. 

The extreme limits of generalization and speci- 
fication being thus inconceivable, we obtain from 
these conditions two characteristics of all logical 
concepts, namely, that they must have both com- 
prehension and extension. Every notion, that is 
to say, as a condition of its conceivability, must 
contain a plurality of attributes, in consequence 
of which it is capable of subordination to a higher 
notion : and it must contain a limited number only 
of attributes, in consequence of which lower notions 



200 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

may be subordinated to it. This canon of con- 
ceivability, as we have seen, is not invalidated by 
the supposed highest and lowest classes of the 
logicians, which are limits never arrived at in any 
process of actual thought. Neither is it invalidated 
by the so-called simple ideas, which, according to 
the doctrine of Descartes and Locke, are the limits 
beyond which analysis is impossible. For a simple 
idea, like a summum genus, is by itself incon- 
ceivable. In every intuition it is presented as 
part of a complex object ; and it can in no act 
of positive thought be contemplated out of that 
onnexion. Whiteness and redness, for example, 
are given to us in combination with extension : 
motion, with a moving body : pleasure and pain, 
with a conscious subject. We cannot represent 
to ourselves, as a possible object of intuition, a 
colour unextended k , a motion without a moving 
body, a feeling without a mind. Simple ideas are 
thus never conceived as such, but only as forming 
parts of a complex object. That they are inde- 
finable, (in Locke's view of definition,) has been 
remarked in a former chapter ; but this arises, not 
from their forming absolutely simple concepts, but 
from their being simple portions of a complex 
intuition. 

From these two characteristics of all concepts 

k The error of those philosophers who suppose that colour 
can be conceived apart from extension, has been noticed by 
Sir W. Hamilton, EM's Works, p. 860. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 201 

follows their capability of Definition and Division : 
the former being an enumeration of the higher 
notions contained in the comprehension of a given 
concept ; the latter, an enumeration of the lower 
notions contained in its extension. The manner 
however in which these two operations are com- 
monly treated in logical writings manifests an utter 
confusion between the general laws of thinking as 
applicable to any matter, such as they are laid 
down in pure Logic, and the performance of a 
special act of thought about this or that matter, 
which forms a portion of this or that branch of 
applied Logic. The so-called Logical Laws of 
Definition and Division are merely derived from an 
analysis of the notions of the operations them- 
selves ; — notions such as might be borrowed con- 
cerning any object from the art or science to 
which it materially belongs. In the given notion 
of Definition, as the enumeration of the parts 
comprehended in a concept, it is of course implied 
that it must be adequate ; otherwise the parts are 
not enumerated ; and that it is clearer ; otherwise 
they are not parts. And so of Division, substituting 
parts of extension for those of comprehension. 
Such an analysis furnishes no test even of the 
formal validity of any single act of division or 
definition ; it only takes to pieces the general 
notion of the process. But it is obvious that 
any given notion, borrowed from any source what- 
ever, may be analysed in like manner by an appli- 



202 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

cation of thought. From the notion of weighing 
a pound of cheese, it follows of course, firstly, that 
the whole quantity weighed must be exactly a 
pound ; secondly, that any part of the same must 
be less than a pound ; thirdly, that the same ounce 
must not be weighed twice over. If this criterion 
be adopted, a chapter on cheese-weighing has as 
good a right to be placed in Logic, as a. chapter on 
Division or Definition. 

The question necessary to determine the true 
logical character of these processes is not, " Given 
the general notions of the two operations, to deter- 
mine by analysis what those notions imply ;" but, 
" Given any particular concept, how much can be 
ascertained by pure thinking concerning its relation 
to higher or lower concepts?" Viewed in this 
light, Definition, as a logical operation, is a portion 
of the act of Conception, governed by the same 
laws, and subject to the same limitations. We can 
determine thereby nothing concerning the actual 
possession of certain attributes by certain objects : 
we cannot even ascertain that objects of any kind 
really exist in nature. Conception being limited 
to possible objects of intuition only, Definition is 
confined to the analysis and separate exposition of 
the attributes contained in a given concept, and 
determines not their reality but their conceivability. 
Its only logical laws are the Principles of Identity 
and Contradiction : the one compelling us to regard 
any given concept as identical with the sum of its 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 203 

constituent parts, and the other pronouncing that 
a definition which enumerates attributes directly 
or by implication incompatible with each other, 
is logically self-destructive. If the attributes are 
compatible, the definition is allowed as valid, as 
far as Logic is qualified to pronounce judgment : 
for further examination, it must be referred to the 
tribunal of experience. The purpose of logical 
definition is thus, not material accuracy, but formal 
distinctness as regards the intention or comprehen- 
sion 1 of the concept 

It is obvious that the rules of definition com- 
monly given in logical treatises have no value or 
significance except in extralogical applications. 
To say that a definition must be adequate to the 
notion which I entertain, is only to say that what 
I assign as the contents of a notion must be what 
I think to be the contents : which is of course 
implied in the fact of my assigning them. The rule 
acquires a material significance, when interpreted 
to mean that the attributes assigned in the definition 
must exactly correspond to the characteristic fea- 
tures of the object as it exists in nature. But then 
to determine whether this rule is complied with 
or not is clearly beyond the province of the 
logician. I may assign "rational animal/' as an 
analysis of my notion of man : but to ascertain, as 

1 See Drobisch, Neue Darstellung der Logik, §. 102. That 
analytical distinctness alone falls within the province of Logic 
is shewn by Kant, Logik, Einl. viii. 



204 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

a matter of fact, that all men possess reason, and 
that all other animals are without it, is manifestly 
a question not of thought, but of experience. 
There is no alternative between exempting the 
logician as such from all material knowledge 
whatever, and requiring from him a minute ac- 
quaintance with every possible branch of human 
knowledge. If he is bound to know, as a matter 
of fact, that men are rational and horses hinnible, 
he is by the same rule bound to be conversant 
with the constitution and properties of every object 
which nature can present or art produce. 

It is obvious also that Logic can admit one kind 
of definition, and one only. The so-called nominal 
definition by synonym or etymology would require 
of the logician a material knowledge of the voca- 
bulary and construction of any given language: 
thus making Logic a compendium of all dictionaries 
and all grammars" 1 . The so-called accidental 

m ** In this place," says Archbishop Whately, '• we are 
concerned with nominal definitions only, because all that is 
requisite for the purposes of reasoning (which is the proper 
province of Logic) is, that a term shall not be used in different 
tenses : a real definition of any thing belongs to the science or 
system which is employed about that thing." In the sense 
in which nominal and real definition were distinguished by 
the scholastic logicians, the exact reverse is the truth. Logic 
is concerned with real, i. e. with notional definitions only : to 
explain the meaning of particular words belongs to the 
dictionaries or grammars of particular languages. But this 
is only one out of thousands of errors committed by various 
writers, through confounding the thing or notion in the mind 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 205 

definition is a logical absurdity. If the notion 
homo, for example, is composed of the notions 
animal rationale, it cannot at the same time contain 
the distinct attributes of bipes implume. To use 
the same word for both combinations is simply to 
employ language equivocally. It may so happen 
that all the individuals possessed of reason are also 
provided with two legs and destitute of feathers ; 
but this is not implied in the notion of rationality, 
and cannot be elicited by any act of pure thinking. 
For this reason those logicians are clearly right 
who consider the enumeration of properties or 
accidents, not as a definition of notions, but as a 
description of individuals. But such a description 
has clearly no connection with Logic, but solely 
with the natural history of the object described. 

Division, on the other hand, corresponds in ono 
sense to the remaining portion of the act of Con- 
ception, the union of the attributes in a possible 
object of intuition, and is thus regulated by the 
same laws as Definition. But Division, in this sense 
of the term, is not Specification, but Individualiz- 
ation ; and moreover pays no attention to any 
coordinate members of the same class, but is solely 
occupied with the one object conceived. It thus 
belongs, not to symbolical, but to intuitive cogni- 
tion ; being not the mere enumeration of the 
constituent elements of a concept, but the veri- 

with the things or individuals out of it. Even Kant (Loyik, 
§. 1 06.) has not quite avoided this ambiguity. 



206 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

fication of their conceivability by the aid of the 
imagination. Such an imagination is in one sense 
a Division ; for it is impossible for me to imagine 
an individual triangle which shall be neither equi- 
lateral, isosceles, nor scalene : one of these attri- 
butes therefore enters into every actual intuition 
of a triangle, and thus far limits and divides the 
general notion. But then the attributes added 
are not in this case contemplated as the consti- 
tuents of a lower class, but of a possible individual. 
In like manner, I cannot imagine a man of no 
colour and no stature ; but in adding these parti- 
culars to my conception, I do not think of them 
as related to any coordinate class, as constituting 
a division of men into tall and short, or white and 
not white. I think of them only as necessary to 
test the conceivability of the generic attributes with 
which they are combined. The office of Division 
in this respect is to make our conceptions clear, as 
that of Definition is to make them distinct n . 

Beyond this, the process of Division, as con- 
tributing to distinctness in the extension of a Con- , 
cept, cannot be regarded as an act of pure thinking , 

B A conception is clear, when its object* as a whole, can be 
distinguished from any other ; it is distinct* when its several 
constituent parts can be distinguished from each other. The 
merit of first pointing out these characteristics of the logical 
perfection of thought belongs to Leibnitz. See his Medka- 
tiones de Cognitions Veritate et Ideis. 

° By pure thinking, is not meant thinking which has no 
relation to any past experience ; for without some experience, 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 207 

or as solely determined by logical laws. Even in 
the case of dichotomy by contradiction, the prin- 
ciple of division must be given, as an addition to 
the attributes comprehended in the concept, before 
the logician can take a single step. For Division 
is not, like Definition, a mental analysis of given 
materials : the specific difference must be added 
to the given attributes of the genus ; and to gain 
this additional material, it is necessary to go out 
of the act of thought, to seek for new empirical 
data. "Divide animal" is a command which no 
logician as such can obey; for the mere notion 
animal does not of itself suggest rational or irra- 
tional, any more than mortal or immortal, virtuous 
or vicious, or any other attributes not logically 
incompatible with the genus p . The principle of 
division must be given in addition to the concept 
to be divided ; and when it is given, the process 
thus raised from a material to a formal one has, 
like definition, a potential only, n6t an actual 
value in relation to experience. If the differentia 
rational is given, I can divide animal into rational 
and not-rational ; but if the differentia mortal is 
given, I can also, as far as Logic is concerned, 
divide into mortal and immortal. I must appeal 

all thought is impossible. It means only, that we can proceed 
to the act Of thought without additional data being required 
prior to and out of the act itself. The relation of experience 
to thought is too often lost sight of in the Kantian Philosophy. 
p See Fries, System der Logik, §. 02. 



208 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

to experience, and not to thought, to determine 
whether one or the other of these divisions is 
actually true, whether the Struldbrugs of Luggnagg 
or the Undying Fish of Bowscale Tarn are really 
existing animals or not. «Every concept is poten- 
tially divisible by any two given differentiae, con- 
tradictory of each other, and both compatible with 
the genus. And the laws by which the process is 
governed, are, firstly, the Principle of Contradiction, 
and, secondly, that of Excluded Middle. By the 
first, we are forbidden to think that two con- 
tradictory attributes can both be present in the 
same object : by the second, we are forbidden to 
think that both can be absent. The first tells us 
that both differentiae must be compatible with the 
genus : I cannot, for example, divide animal into 
animate and inanimate. The second tells us that 
one or the other must be found in every member 
of the genus : but in what manner this is actually 
carried out, whether by every existing member 
possessing one of the differentiae and none the 
other, or by some possessing one and some the 
other, experience alone can determine q . 

It thus appears that even dichotomy by con- 
tradiction is not, strictly speaking, a formal process, 
as Kant considers it r ; but that it is partly material, 
and so far extralogical ; and that the material 

« Trendelenburg, Logische Untermckungen, i. 4. 
* Logik, §. 113. See on the other side, Hoffbauer, Logik, 
§. 134, 138. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 209 

element predominates still more, according as any 
other principle of division is adopted. Where the 
specific differences are not contradictory, so that 
each naturally suggests the other, every one of 
them must be given, prior to any possible act of 
formal thinking. The only division of a concept 
which can be regarded as a purely logical process 
is that sometimes distinguished as Determination, 
which consists in the reunion of attributes pre- 
viously separated by definition '. In a formal point 
of view, therefore, the arrangement of those logi- 
cians who treat of Definition before Division is 
preferable to the inverse order adopted by Aldrich, 
Divisionem excipit Definition 

Throughout the preceding remarks, the presence 
of all the antecedent conditions requisite to the 
logical perfection of cognitions is presupposed. It 
is taken for granted that we are, prior to any act 
of conception, in possession of the materials neces- 
sary to complete clearness and distinctness; and 
that the act of thought consists merely in eliciting 
the concept with these qualities out of the sufficient 
data. And this supposition is the only one which 
can be admitted into a system of pure Logic, or 
into Psychology in its purely logical relation. The 
failure of materials for conception is precisely 
analogous to the failure of materials for reasoning. 
In the latter case, if a single premise only is given, 
or two premises so related that no necessary con- 
' See Drobisch, §. 17, 29, 30. 



1 



210 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

elusion follows from them, the logician is not called 
upon to remedy the deficiency ; he simply decides 
that the data are insufficient for reasoning at all. 
In like manner, if the empirical data for clear or 
distinct conception are wanting, the logician, as 
such, can only say that the materials for the thought 
are insufficient. The distinction between clear and 
obscure, distinct and indistinct conceptions, is as 
much out of the province of pure Logic, as- a dis- 
tinction between syllogisms whose premises neces- 
sitate their conclusion, and reasonings in which the 
consequence may with more or less probability be 
conjectured. In conception and in judgment, as 
well as in reasoning, there are processes necessitated 
by the laws of thought from certain data; there are 
others which are not necessitated, but which may 
be hazarded with more or less risk of error; the pre- 
sumption in their favour amounting in some cases 
to a moral certainty, and binding upon our practice, 
but never reaching the height of logical necessity 
or speculative perfection *. The first class alone 
are recognised by Pure Logic, and that in relation 
not merely to reasoning, but to all three operations 
of thought. Applied Logic, in the Kantian sense 
of the term, may treat of the several practical 
imperfections of human thought, which lower in 
this or that special instance the logical standard of 
perfection. Here we may treat of notions more 
or less obscure or confused, of judgments more or 

1 Cf. Krug, Logik, §. 85. Anm. 1. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 211 

less uncertain, of reasonings more or less incon- 
sequent. The object of the present observations 
is rather to ascertain what light may be thrown by 
psychological considerations on the purely logical 
processes, and to call attention to the fact, that the 
distinction between material and formal thinking 
may and ought to be consistently carried out in 
reference to all the operations of the understanding. 
Judgment is distinguished from Conception by 
the difference of its data. In Conception, attributes 
are givfip, to be united by thought in a possible 
object to intuition : in Judgment, concepts are 
given, to be united by thought in a common object. 
Like Conception also, Judgment may be considered 
either as pure, or as combined with, a present 
intuition. Pure judgments are those in which the 
given concepts are of such a character that their 
mutual relation of agreement or difference can be- 
determined by an act of thought alone, without 
any appeal to experience. This is the case when 
the attributes comprehended in the one concept 
form either the whole or a part of those com- 
prehended in the other : or where some attribute 
comprehended in the one is contradictory of one 
of those comprehended in the other. In the 
former case we are enabled at once by the law of 
Identity to unite the two concepts in an affirmative 
judgment, and in the latter, by the law of Contra- 
diction, to separate them by a negative judgment. 
But this class of judgments (being those commonly 

p2 



212 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

known as analytical or explicative) may with more 
propriety be included under the head of Con- 
ception. The affirmative analytical judgment is 
in fact nothing more than the Definition, complete 
or partial, of the subject-notion ; while the negative 
judgment expresses only the necessary condition 
of all conception, which by discerning any notion 
as being that which it is, necessarily excludes it 
from all that it is not 

In synthetical or ampliative judgments, the act 
of thought is not sufficient to determine the 
relation of the concepts to each other, without 
the accompaniment of an intuition, pure or em- 
pirical. For example: in order to form the 
judgment, "two straight lines cannot inclose a 
space," I must not only be able to conceive sepa- 
rately the two notions of a straight line and of an 
inclosing of space, but I must also, by the aid of 
imagination, construct a representation in my mind 
of two actual straight lines and their actual 
positions in space. I must perceive that these 
two straight lines are incapable of inclosing a 
space, before I pronounce the universal judgment 
concerning all pairs of straight lines. Here the 
relation between the two concepts is presented in 
a pure or d priori intuition, i.e. in an intuition 
containing no adventitious element external to the 
mind itself. Again, in order to form the judgment, 
" gold is heavy/' supposing that my conception of 
gold does not in itself include the attribute of 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 213 

weight, I cannot, by merely thinking of gold as a 
hard, yellow, shining body, determine what effect it 
will produce when laid on the hand. I must 
actually place an individual piece of gold on my 
hand, and ascertain by experience the fact of its 
pressure. Here the relation between the two 
concepts is presented in a mixed or empirical 
intuition, i.e. in an intuition caused by the pre- 
sence of a body external to the mind itself. 

Yet in this class of judgments, as well as in the 
former, when the necessary intuition has once 
been given, the act of thought itself is governed 
by the same laws of Identity and Contradiction. 
In pronouncing that two distinct notions are 
united in. one and the same object, that it is the 
gold which is heavy, I unite the concepts "gold" 
and "heavy" in a complex notion comprehending 
both, and denoting the union of both in a common 
object. That which was before conceived as 
"gold," is now conceived as "heavy gold," (whether 
the new attribute becomes part of the meaning of 
the term gold or not is of no consequence,) and 
this complex notion is now exhibited in the act of 
judgment, as analysed into its constituent parts, 
and identified with them". Synthetical judgments 
may thus, as far as the mere act of thought is 
concerned, be brought under the same law as 
analytical ones, namely, the Principle of Identity 

Q See Drobisch, Neue Darstellung der Loyik, §. 36. 



214 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

when the judgment is affirmative, and that of 
Contradiction when it is negative. 

Another law of thought is sometimes given as 
the foundation of Judgment, under the name of 
the Logical Principle of Sufficient Reason. This 
law, which must be carefully distinguished from the 
Metaphysical Principle of Causality, is enunciated, 
u Every judgment must have a sufficient ground 
for its assertion V* But, in truth, the relation of 
this principle to the act of judgment is merely 
negative : it forbids us in certain cases to judge at 
all, and it does no more. If the judgment is 
analytical, the law of Identity or of Contradiction 
is the sufficient reason for making it. If the judg- 
ment is synthetical, we have, previously to the given 
intuition, no reason at all; and, accordingly, we 
suspend our thought till we have referred the 
decision to the tribunal of experience. The only 
logical reason for a thought of any kind is its 
relation to some other thought : and this relation 
will in each case be determined by its own proper 
law. The Principle of Sufficient Reason is there- 
fore no law of thought, but only the statement 
that every act of thought must be governed by 
some law or other 7 . 

* See Kant, Logtk, Einleitung vii. Fries, 8y$t. der Logik, 
§. 41. Krug, Logik, §. 20. Thomson, Laws of Thought, p. 296. 

7 In excluding the Principle of Sufficient Reason from the 
laws of thought I am happy to find myself supported by the 
authority of Sir William Hamilton in the Philosophical 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 215 

Hypothetical and Disjunctive Judgments must 
be reserved for a separate examination. At present, 
we must proceed to investigate the laws of Rea- 
soning. This process differs from Judgment, as 
Judgment differs from Conception, in the nature 
of its preliminary data. In Judgment, concepts 
are given, thought being required to determine 
their possible coexistence in an object In Rea- 
soning, one or more judgments are given, thought 
being required to determine what further judg- 
ments may be elicited from them. Under this 
head will thus be included not merely the ordinary 
Syllogism, but likewise (so far as they contain 
processes of thought at all) the immediate infer- 

Appendix to his Discussions, published subsequently to the 
first edition of the present work. " The Principle of Suffi- 
cient Reason" he says, " should be excluded from Logic. For, 
in as much as this principle is not material, (material = non- 
formal,) it is only a derivation of the three formal laws ; and 
in as much as it is material, it coincides with the principle 
of Causality, and is extralogical." Kant, Logik, Einleitung, 
vii. takes a different view. He regards the Principle of 
Contradiction as the criterion of the logical possibility of a 
judgment, that of Sufficient Reason, as the criterion of its 
logical reality. But of judgments, as distinguished from the 
conclusions of syllogisms, the only logical reality is possibility. 
Directly I have ascertained two notions not to be contradictory 
to each other, I have made an actual judgment of the logical 
possibility of their coexistence : and to take any step beyond 
this, experience is required and not Logic. The difference 
between problematical and assertorial judgments is extralogical, 
and depends on the question whether a logical judgment is 
or is not determined by experience to be materially true. 



216 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

ences of Opposition and Conversion. In all these, 
the material given prior to the act of thought is 
a judgment; and the process of judging from 
concepts is thus not included, but presupposed; 
the conclusion being always a different judgment, 
either in form, as regards Quantity, Quality, or 
Relation, which is the case in immediate conse- 
quences ; or partially in matter, which is the case 
in mediate reasoning by syllogism 1 . The common 
arrangement, therefore, which places immediate 
inference in the second part of Logic, is objection- 
able*. 

Opposition may be treated in two points of 



2 See Kant, Logik, §. 44. His theory of contraposition 
affecting the modality of the judgment is untenable, and 
seems to result merely from that excessive love of system 
which must bring in four forms somehow. The supposed 
demonstrative character of the conclusion in contraposition 
is merely a necessity of consequence from the position of the 
premise ; a character which is found in all logical reasoning 
whatever. 

* This order, however, has by no means been uniformly 
adopted by Logicians. Aristotle treats of Opposition in the 
De Interpretations, and of Conversion in the Prior Analytics. 
Wolf separates Opposition and Conversion, considered as 
relations between two given propositions, from the processes 
of inference derivable from each. The former is treated in 
connection with Judgment; the latter, under the name of 
Immediate Consequence, in connection with Reason in g. 
Kant and his followers treat immediate consequences as 
reasonings, under the name of Syllogisms of the Understanding; 
an arrangement which is logically correct, whatever may be 
the psychological objections to the nomenclature. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 217 

view. Firstly, as a relation between two given 
propositions : secondly, as a process of inference, 
in which, one proposition being given, another 
may be determined. In the former character, it 
is merely an explanation of the meaning of certain 
logical terms; in the latter, it is a process of 
reasoning, a deduction of one proposition as con- 
clusion from another as premise, and governed, 
as we shall see, by the same laws as the mediate 
inference*. The primary processes, on which the 
rest may be made to depend, are those of Sub- 
altern and Contradictory Opposition ; the former 
being grounded on the Principle of Identity, and 
the latter on those of Contradiction and Excluded 
Middle. Thus in the proposition, " All A is some 



b On account of this identity of law, various attempts have 
been made by ingenious writers to reduce immediate con- 
sequences to the mediate form. Thus Wolf exhibits sub- 
altern opposition as a syllogism with the minor premise, 
" Some A is A ;" thus perversely representing the law of thought, 
which governs the reasoning process in general, as a part of 
the special matter given preliminary to a particular act. Still 
more absurd is the elaborate system which Krug, after a hint 
from Wolf, has constructed, in whiih all immediate infer- 
ences appear as hypothetical syllogisms; a major premise 
being supplied in the form, " If all A is B, some A is B." 
The author appears to have forgotten, that either this premise 
is an additional empirical truth, in which case the immediate 
reasoning is not a logical process at all; or it is a formal 
inference, presupposing the very reasoning to which it is 
prefixed, and thus begging the whole question. 



218 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

B," an identity is stated between the whole of the 
objects thought under the concept A, and a portion 
of those thought under B e . The conclusion, 
" Therefore some A is some B," proceeds on the 
principle, that every part of A must be identical 
with a part of that which has been given as 
identical with all A. This process resembles the 
inference in an affirmative syllogism ; except that 
in the latter there is given a double identity; 
firstly, of the middle term with a part of the 
major; and secondly, of the minor with a part 
of the middle. The inferences of Contradictory 
Opposition are based on the Principles of Con- 
tradiction and Excluded Middle. By the former, 
when one of two contradictory judgments is given 
as true, we infer that the other is false ; and by 
the latter, when one is given as false, we infer 

e Throughout the following pages, in order to exhibit the 
law of thought more clearly in each case, I have, in con- 
formity with the view 8 of Sir William Hamilton, stated the 
quantity of the predicate as well as of the subject in each 
proposition. Of the value of this addition to the ordinary 
logical forms, I have elsewhere expressed my opinion. (North 
British Review, No. 2&) I have not, therefore, thought it 
necessary to enter into an elaborate examination of it here ; 
especially as it is sufficient for my purpose to bring forward 
only those forms of reasoning universally admitted by 
logicians. In quantifying the predicate in these instances, 
we only express what every treatise on Logic tells us to 
understand: viz. that the predicate of an affirmative pro- 
position is not distributed; i. e. is thought as particular. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A* 219 

that the other is true. The remaining inferences 
of Opposition may be reduced to combinations of 
the above. 

The several processes of Conversion, if the 
predicate is quantified as well as the subject, may 
be reduced to Simple Conversion only ; and even 
under the old system, Conversion per accident may 
be regarded as a combination of Simple Conversion 
with one of the inferences of Opposition d . Simple 
Conversion is thus the only one which it is ne- 
cessary to examine. This cannot properly be 
regarded as a process of judgment; for either 
the converted proposition is a new judgment 
distinct from the original one, or it is merely the 
same judgment expressed in different language. 
In the former case, it is an inference from a 
premise, and consequently a process of reasoning : 
in the latter, there is no process of thinking at all, 
but merely a change in the language by which a 
given thought is expressed. The former is the 
preferable view, so long as the subject and pre- 
dicate of a proposition are viewed in the relation 
of whole and part, whether by the inclusion of 
the subject under the extension of the predicate, 

d Thus Aldrich analyses conversion per accident. " Sit 
vera E : Ergo et ejus simpliciter conversa: Ergo et converse 
subalternata : qu® est expositee conversa per accidens. Sit 
vera A: Ergo et ejus subalternata: Ergo et subalternato 
simpliciter conversa : quee est expositee per accidens." 



220 PROLEGOMENA LOGtCA. 

or of the predicate in the comprehension of the 
subject. For the inversion of the relations of 
whole and part is sufficient to constitute a new 
judgment. But in the system of Sir W. Hamilton, 
in which every proposition is reduced to an 
equation, or rather to an identification of object 
between the two terms, the latter view seems 
more accurate ; it being manifestly the same thing 
to identify the object thought under A with that 
of B, and that thought under B with that of A. 

To opposition and conversion must be added a 
third process, that of the immediate consequence 
of one equipollent proposition from another 9 . 
The equipollence in some cases can only be deter- 
mined materially ; and the consequence is then 
extralogical ; as in the instance cited by Wolf, 
Titius est pater Caii, ergo Cains est jilxus Titii: 
but there are other instances in which the con- 
sequence is formal, and determined solely by the 
laws of thought. Thus, by the principle of contra- 
diction, from the premise, All A is B, follows the 
immediate inference, No A is not-B, in which is 
produced a change of quality from affirmative to 
negative. In this way, when one predicate is 

e See Wolf, Philosophia Rationalis, §.445. Fries, System der 
Logik, §.47. The former has not accurately distinguished 
the material from the formal cases of this consequence; 
and it was, probably, this confusion that led Kant to reject 
the inference altogether. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 221 

affirmed of a subject, its contradictory may always 
be denied. The process commonly called Con- 
version by Contraposition, is properly the simple 
conversion of this equipollent proposition'. 

The whole of the preceding observations clearly 
point out the view in which Logic and Psychology 
must coincide concerning the nature and principles 
of the Syllogism. The former, as the science of 
the laws of pure thinking, has nothing to do with 
the inferences of more or less probability furnished 
by the analogies of this or that branch of physical 
science, nor even with the general constitution of 
the material world, so far as it is known to us only 
empirically as a fact. Its only province is with 
those inferences which are necessitated by the lawn 
of thought ; which, certain data being furnished, 
we cannot but draw as consequences. That the 
premises of a syllogism necessarily imply and 
contain the conclusion, is so far from being an 
imperfection in Logic, that it is a necessary 
consequence of the supposition that thought is 
governed by laws at all. And in accordance with 
this conclusion, Psychology teaches us that thought 
is representative and reflective, not presentative 
and intuitive ; that, having no positive operation 
beyond the field of possible experience, its laws 
can only be analytical, and its processes must lead 
not to the acquisition of new knowledge, but to 

1 This has been remarked by Fries, §. 49. e. and recently 
by Mr. Karslake, Aids to the Study of Logic, p. 65. 



222 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

the modification of the old. It only remains to 
exemplify this result, by applying it to the ordinary 
forms of the logical syllogism. 



Fig. I. Fig. 2 

All M is some P. 
All S is some M. 

.\ No S is any P. II .-. No S is any P. 



. All S is some P. 



No M is any P. II No P is any M. 
All S is some M. II All S is some M. 



Fig. 3. 

All M is some P. 

All M is some S. 

. Some S is some P. 



No M is any P. 
All M is some S. 
.*. Some S is not any P. 



The above examples will suffice as specimens 
of the different forms of affirmative and negative 
reasoning admitted by the three Aristotelian 
figures. The fourth figure might be easily sub- 
jected to the same treatment ; but it is preferable 
to regard its moods as inverted forms of the first 
On inspection of these specimens, it appears, that 
the Principle of Identity is immediately applicable 
to affirmative moods in any figure, and the Prin- 
ciple of Contradiction to negatives. In Barbara, 
for example, the minor term all S is identical with 
a part of M, and consequently with a part of that 
which is given as identical with all M, namely, 
some P. In Darapti, the minor term some S is 
identical with all M, and consequently with some 
P. The principle immediately applicable to both 
is the axiom, that what is given as identical with 
the whole or a part of any concept, must be 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 223 

identical with the whole or a part of that which 
is identical with the same concept. This may be 
briefly expressed by the Principle of Identity, 
Every A is A. In Celarent, Cesare, and Felapton, 
some or all S, being given as identical with all or 
some M, is distinct from every part of that which 
is distinct from all M*. This is briefly expressed 
by the Principle of Contradiction, No A is not-A. 

These two laws govern all the moods of Cate- 
gorical Syllogism, including under them, as sub- 
ordinate rules, the dictum de omni et nullo, or the 
nearly equivalent axiom, nota notes est nota ret 
ipsitis ; as well as the distinct axioms which have 
been framed by different logicians as rules of the 
second and third figures \ The process of Re- 
duction, which is properly and necessarily adopted 
by those logicians who, with Aristotle and Kant, 
acknowledge the principle of the first figure only, 
now becomes unnecessary and inconsistent ; inas- 
much as all the syllogistic figures are exhibited as 
equally direct exemplifications of the same general 
law. For the same reason, the distinction adopted 
by Kant between Syllogisms of the Understanding 
and Syllogisms of the Reason, in addition to the 

* Under the system of a quantified predicate, the second 
figure admits of affirmative syllogisms, which, like the rest, 
may be referred to the principle of Identity. 

h As by Lambert, Neues Organon, part i. §. 232. Kant, Logik, 
§.71. Sir W. Hamilton in Mr. Thomson's Laws of Thought, 
p. 248. where they are given correctly as special applications 
of a more general principle. 



224 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

psychological impropriety of distinguishing two 
faculties of thought 1 , is now shewn to be logically 
untenable also; the processes of immediate and 
mediate reasoning being exhibited as cognate acts 
of thought, governed by the same general laws, 
and differing only in their material data. 

By bearing in mind what has been above said of 
the nature of thought and its laws, we shall also 
be enabled to take a juster view of a process more 
or less misrepresented in the majority of logical 
treatises, Induction. Scarcely any logician has 
accurately distinguished between Formal Induction, 
in which the given premises necessitate the con- 
clusion in conformity with the laws of thought, 
and Material Induction, in which the conclusion 
may be inferred with more or less probability from 
additional data not furnished by the premises ; — 
between what we must know as thinkers, and what 
we may know as investigators of nature. By some 
logicians, Induction is treated as a Syllogism in 
Barbara, with the major or minor premise suppressed ; 
the advocates of this view overlooking the fact, 
that the suppression of either premise leaves a 
deficiency to be supplied independently of the act 
of thought, and thus reduces the whole process 
from formal to material ; — to say nothing of the 
inversion of the reasoning as actually performed, 

1 On this question, see Sir W. Hamilton, Discussions, 
p. 17. Cousin, Leqons sur la Philosophic de Kant, p. 168. 
Krug, Logik, §. 74. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 225 

and the destruction of all foundation for the 
syllogistic process from universals to particulars, 
by making every universal premise itself a deduction 
from a higher one. By others, Induction is repre- 
sented, according to the Baconian view, as an in- 
terrogation of nature, by the selection, in any 
physical investigation, of such phenomena as may 
indicate the existence of a general law. Here it is 
forgotten, that the fact that nature proceeds by 
uniform laws at all, is a truth altogether distinct 
from the laws of thought, and, if not of wholly 
empirical origin, at least one which cannot be 
ascertained a priori by the pure understanding. 
Others again, struck by the physical difficulty of 
an exhaustive enumeration of individual cases, 
endeavour to effect a compromise between material 
probability and formal necessity, by describing the 
instances cited as representatives or samples of their 
class ; as if the nature of samples and represent- 
atives could be made known by an innate principle 
of the mind, independently of experience. Even 
the wonderful acuteness of Kant in all questions 
between matter and form appears to have deserted 
him here; and, by describing Induction as a 
Syllogism of the judgment, furnishing a logical 
presumption of a general conclusion, he not only 
encumbers the science with an extralogical pro- 
cess, but neglects altogether the really formal 
reasoning which it is the duty of the logician to 
take into account \ 

k Two distinguished exceptions to this general error must 

Q 



226 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

The truth is, that there are two totally distinct 
processes confounded under the general name of 
Induction. The Baconian or Material Induction 
proceeds on the assumption of general laws in the 
relations of physical phenomena, and endeavours, 
by select observations and experiments, to detect 
the law in any particular case. This, whatever be 
its value as a general method of physical investi- 
gation, has no place in Formal Logic. The Aris- 
totelian or Formal Induction proceeds on the 
assumption of general laws of thought, and inquires 
into the instances in which, by such laws, we are 
necessitated to reason from an accumulation of 
particular instances to a general or partial rule. The 
process in this case may be affirmative or negative; 
and it is governed, like other formal reasonings, by 
the general laws of Identity and Contradiction. 
Specimens of its several forms may be exhibited as 
follows : 

Affirmative Induction. 



X, Y, Z, are some B. 
X, Y, Z, are all A. 
. All A is some B. 



X, Y, Z, are some B. 
X, Y, Z, are some A. 
.*. Some A is some B. 



however be noticed. Aristotle's account of Induction, in 
Anal. Pr. ii. 23. incomplete as it is in many respects, lias the 
merit of adhering accurately to the formal view of the process. 
And the admirable Article on Logic by Sir W. Hamilton, 
in No. 115. of the Edinburgh Review, (reprinted in his 
Discussions,) exhibits for the first time the logical character 
of Induction, divested of its material incumbrances and formal 
perversions. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 227 

Negative Induction. 



X, Y, Z, are not any B. 
X, Y, Z, are all A. 
.\ No A is any B. 



X, Y, Z, are not any B. 
X, Y, Z, are some A. 
. Some A is not any B. 



Other moods may be added to these, by varying 
the quantity of the predicate in the major premise. 
By assigning, in conformity with the system of Sir 
W. Hamilton, a definite quantity to the predicate 
in all affirmative propositions, we are enabled to 
avoid that ambiguity of the copula which has 
hitherto been the main defect in the logical analysis 
of inductive reasoning 1 . The relation of whole 
and part between the terms of the proposition 
being thus dispensed with, the subject is no longer 
represented as at one time contained under, at 
another constituting its predicate ; but each term, 
in every case, is equated, or identified as to its 
object, with the whole or a part of the other. 

Under this system, it is no longer necessary to 
distinguish Induction from the third figure of 
Syllogism, as this figure, with a definite predicate, 
will admit of universal as well as particular con- 
clusions. Indeed, every Syllogism in this figure, 
in which the minor premise is collective, may be 
regarded as a logical Induction. In this point of 
view, it is manifestly governed by the same laws as 
the syllogism, the affirmative moods by the Prin- 
ciple of Identity, and the negative by the Principle 
of Contradiction. The so-called imperfect Induc- 

1 See Sir W. Hamilton, Discussions, p. 163. 

q2 



228 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

tion is altogether extralogical. The constituted 
whole can in thought be identified only with the 
sum total of its parts, not with a few represent- 
atives; and without such identification no inference 
can be necessitated by the laws of thought. The 
physical difficulty of adducing all the members of a 
given class is a purely material consideration, like 
that of the truth of the premises in a syllogism, 
and is assumed, not investigated, by the logician. 
But without such a preliminary datum, we have 
no materials for drawing an universal conclusion 
by logical Induction. 

Thus far we have shewn the several forms of 
mediate categorical reasoning to depend on two 
necessary laws of thought, the Principles of 
Identity and Contradiction. A separate examin- 
ation is needed to ascertain the character of the 
Hypothetical Propositions and Syllogisms, which, 
as I am inclined to think, has not hitherto been 
accurately exhibited, even by the best logicians 
of the formal school. 

By Kant and his followers, the Hypothetical 
Proposition is described as representing a form of 
judgment essentially distinct from the Categorical ; 
the latter being thoroughly assertorial, the former 
problematical in its constituent parts, assertorial 
only as regards the relation between them. Two 
judgments, each in itself false, may thus be hypo- 
thetically combined into a single truth ; and this 
combination cannot be reduced into categorical 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 229 

form m . The Hypothetical Syllogism, in like manner, 
is a form of reasoning distinct from the Categorical 
and not reducible to it, being based on a different 
law of thought, namely, the logical Principle of 
Sufficient Reason, a ratione ad rationatum, a nega- 
tione rationati ad negationem rationis valet conse- 
quential 

Of this principle, as applied to judgments, I have 
before remarked, that it is not a law of thought, 
but only a statement of the necessity of some law 
or other. As applied to syllogisms, it has the same 
character. It states the fact, that whenever a con- 
dition, whether material cause of a fact or formal 
reason of a conclusion, exists, the conditioned fact 
or conclusion exists also. Thus viewed, it is not 
the law of any distinct reasoning process, but a 
statement of the conditions in which laws of nature 
or of thought are operative. When a material 
cause exists, its material effect follows, and the 
phenomenon indicates a law of nature: when a 
logical premise is given, its logical conclusion fol- 
lows, and the result indicates a law of thought. 
What law, must in each case be determined by the 
particular features of the phenomenon or reasoning 
in question ; but a statement of this kind is dis- 
tinguished from laws of thought, properly so called, 
by the fact, that it cannot be expressed in a sym- 

m See Kant, Logik, §. 25. Krug f Logik, §. 57. Fries, System 
der Logik, §. 32. 

n Kant, §. 76. Krug, §. 82. Fries, §. 58. 



230 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

bolical form : we require the introduction of a 
definite notion, Cause, Reason, Condition, or some- 
thing of the kind, which is a special object of 
thought, not the general representative of all. 
objects whatever. The principle in question is 
thus only a statement of the peculiar character 
of certain matters about which we may think, and 
not a law of the form of thought in general. 

It is obvious that the relation of premises and con- 
clusion in a syllogism may, like any other relation of 
condition and conditioned, be expressed in the form 
of a hypothetical proposition : " If all A is B, and 
all C is A, then all C is B :" and the actual asser- 
tion of the truth of these premises will furnish at 
once a so-called hypothetical syllogism : " But all 
A is B, and all C is A, therefore all C is B." This 
was observed by Fries, who hence rightly maintains 
that analytical hypothetical judgments are formal 
syllogisms . It is strange that, after this, he 
should not have gone a step further, and discovered 
that synthetical hypothetical judgments are asser- 
tions of material consequences. The judgment, " If 
A is B, C is D," asserts the existence of a conse- 
quence necessitated by laws other than those of 
thought, and consequently out of the province of 
Logic. The addition of a minor premise and con- 
clusion in the so-called hypothetical syllogism, is 
merely the assertion that this general material 
consequence is verified in a particular case. 

System der Logik, §. 4 4. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 231 

The distinction so much insisted on by the 
Kantians, of the problematical character of the two 
members of a hypothetical judgment, is, like the 
whole Kantian doctrine of modality, of no conse- 
quence in formal Logic. All formal thinking is, 
as regards the material character of its objects, 
problematical only. Formal Conception pronounces 
that certain objects of thought may possibly exist, 
leaving their actual existence to be determined by 
experience. Formal Judgment decides on the 
possible coexistence of certain concepts; and Formal 
Reasoning, on the truth of a conclusion, subject to 
the hypothesis of the truth of its premises. 

To state that this hypothesis is in a certain in- 
stance true, adds nothing to the logical part of the 
reasoning, but only verifies the empirical prelimi- 
naries which the logician in every case assumes as 
given. To exhibit a formal consequence hypo- 
thetically, is only a needless reassertion of the 
existence of data which the act of thought pre- 
supposes. To exhibit a material consequence 
hypothetically, is not to make it formal, but only 
to state that, in a certain given instance, a conse- 
quence not cognisable by Logic takes place. The 
sequence of " C is D/' from " A is B," is not one 
whit more logical than it was before ; it is only 
stated to take place materially in the present case. 

The omission of hypothetical syllogisms has 
frequently been blamed as a defect in Aristotle's 
Organon ; and his French translator takes some 



2.32 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

fruitless pains to strain his text, in order to make 
out that he does in fact treat of them*. If there 
is'any truth in the preceding observations, it will 
follow, that Aristotle understood the limits of Logic 
letter than his critics ; and that his translator had 
letter have allowed the omission as a merit than 
hr-Ye attempted to deny it as a fault When the 
hypothetical proposition states a formal conse- 
< I lie- nee, the reasoning grounded upon it may always 
be reduced to categorical. When it states a ma- 
terial consequence, it states what the logician, as 
such, cannot take into account. Aristotle is there- 
fore quite right in saying, that in this case the 
conclusion is not proved, but conceded" 1 . Syllogism 
may be employed as a logical proof of the ante- 
cedent : the consequent is admitted to follow on 
grounds which the logician, as such, does not 
investigate, but which may be warranted by the 
principles of this or that material science. 

The true character of hypothetical reasoning is 
lost sight of in the examples commonly selected by 
logicians, which have for their subject a proper 
name, and indicate, not a general relation of reason 
and consequent between two notions, but certain 
accidental circumstances in the history of an indi- 
vidual. The adoption of this type has led to the 
logical anomaly, that the propositions of a hypo- 

p St. Hilaire, Loyique d'Aristote Traduite en Fran^ais, Preface, 
p.l*. 

« Anal. Prior, i. 23. 11. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 233 

thetical syllogism are generally stated without any 
designate quantity; whereas it is obvious that, 
wherever concepts are compared together in any 
form of reasonings two distinct conclusions may 
follow, according to the quantity assigned. For 
example, to the premise, " If men are wise, they 
will consult their permanent interests," we may 
supply two minors and conclusions, in the con- 
structive form, according as we affirm the ante- 
cedent of all men or of some. It thus becomes 
necessary to distinguish between two different 
kinds of apparent hypothetical syllogisms, those in 
which the inference is from a general hypothesis to 
all or some of its special instances, and those in 
which a relation between two individual facts is 
assumed as a hypothesis leading to a singular 
conclusion. The former contain a general relation 
of determining and determined notion* which may 
always be expressed in three terms ; the occasional 
employment of four being only an accidental variety 
of language. Thus the general assertion, " If any 
country is justly governed, the people are happy," 
is equivalent to, " If any country is justly governed, 
it has happy people." This we may apply to 
special instances; all countries, some countries, or 
this country, being asserted to be justly governed : 
and this is properly hypothetical reasoning. The 
latter denote only a material connection between 
two single facts, either of which may, to certain 
minds possessed of certain . additional knowledge, 



234 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

be an indication of the other ; but the true ground 
of the inference is contained in this additional 
knowledge, and not in the mere hypothetical 
coupling of the facts by a conjunction. This is 
not hypothetical reasoning ; i. e. it is not reason- 
ing from the hypothesis, but from other circum- 
stances not mentioned in the hypothesis at all\ 

It thus appears, that the only hypothetical judg- 
ment which can be employed as the real major 
premise of a syllogism, may be expressed in the 
form, " If any A is B, it is C," where A, B, and C 

r This may be made clearer by an example. The following 
is cited by Fries, as an instance of a hypothetical proposition, 
not reducible to categorical form. " If Caius is free from 
business, he is writing poetry." This may be interpreted to 
mean either, generally, " whenever Caius is disengaged, he 
writes poetry ;" or, specially, " if he is now disengaged, he is 
now writing poetry." Under the former interpretation, it is 
a general hypothesis, which may be applied as a major 
premise to particular instances: but in this case the true 
form of the reasoning is, "All times when Caius is disengaged, 
are times when he writes poetry ; and the present is such a 
time." Under the latter interpretation, it is one of the cases of 
a material connection of two facts mentioned in the text. Now 
in this last case, it is obvious that the inference is really 
made, not from the hypothesis, but from some circumstance 
known to the reasoner, but not appearing in the proposition. 
Any man being asked, " Why do you infer that Caius, being 
now disengaged, is writing poetry ?" would reply, " Because 
he told me he should do so;" or something of the kind. 
Assuredly he would never dream of replying, " Because if he 
is now disengaged he is writing." In this case then he does 
not reason from the hypothesis, and the expressed propositions 
do not compose a syllogism. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 235 

represent concepts or general notions. The com- 
plete categorical equivalent to this is, u Every A 
which is B is C, because it is B," which admits of 
two interpretations, according as B stands for the 
physical cause of the fact, or for the logical reason 
of our knowing it. In the latter case, the judgment 
is analytical, and represents a disguised formal con- 
sequence with B as a middle term : e. g. " Every 
man who is learned has studied, because he is 
learned." Here the notion of study is implied in 
that of learning, and the major premise is, " All 
learned beings have studied." The hypothetical 
proposition thus becomes a complete syllogism, to 
which the subsequent consequence is related as an 
episyllogism 8 . In the former case, where B stands 
for a physical cause, the judgment is synthetical, 
and indicates a material consequence, which it 
requires some additional knowledge of facts to 
reduce to formal : e. g. " All wax exposed to the 
fire melts, because it is exposed." Here, on 
material grounds, we know that we cannot supply 



• Thus: 

Hypothetical Syllogism. 
If any man is learned, he 

has studied : 
Some men are learned ; 
. Some men have studied. 



Categorical Analysis. 
All learned beings have 

studied : 
All learned men are learned 
beings ; 
•. All learned men have 
studied : 
Some men are learned men ; 
¦\ Some men have studied. 



236 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

the premise, "All bodies exposed to the fire melt;" 
but only, " All bodies soluble by heat and exposed 
to the fire melt/' In this case the consequence is 
extralogical, and requires additional data not given 
in the thought. But here also, when the judg- 
ment in question is employed as the premise of a 
reasoning, the conclusion follows categorically; 
though the premise itself cannot, as it stands, be 
proved by a prosyllogism*. 

The Disjunctive Judgment is usually described 
as representing a whole divided into two or more 
parts mutually exclusive of each other; and the 
Disjunctive Syllogism is supposed to proceed either 
from the affirmation of one member to the denial 
of the rest, or from the denial of all but one to 
the affirmation of that one, by the Principle of 
Excluded Middle . 

This can scarcely be regarded as a correct 
analysis of the process, unless the two members 
are formally stated as contradictory. The Prin- 

1 The analysis in this case may be exhibited thus : 



Hypothetical Syllogism. 
If any wax is exposed to the 

fire it melts : 
This wax is exposed to the 

fire ; 
. This wax melts. 



Categorical Equivalent. 
All wax exposed to the fire 

melts (because exposed) : 
This wax is exposed to the 

fire; 
\ This wax melts. 



The parenthesis indicates the material ground of the major 
premise. 

• Kant, J. 27 sqq. 77, 78. Krug, §. 57, 84, 86. Fries, 
§. 38, 59. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 237 

ciple of Excluded Middle asserts that every thing 
is either A or not A, that of two contradictories, 
one must exist in every object ; as the Principle of 
Contradiction asserts that they cannot both exist. 
But if the two members are not stated as contra- 
dictories, if my disjunctive premise is, u All C is 
either A or B," I make the material assertion that 
All C which is not A is B. If then I reason, 
" This C is not A x , therefore it is B," I employ 
the Principle of Identity in addition to that of 
Excluded Middle. Again, if I maintain that No 
C can be both A and B, I make the material 
assertion that No C which is A is B; and from 
hence to reason, " This C is A, therefore it is 
not B," requires not the Principle of Excluded 
Middle, but that of Contradiction. In the first 
case, the Excluded Middle does not lead directly 
to the conclusion, but only to the contraposition 
of the minor premise. When we deny this C to 
be A, this principle enables us to assert that it is 
not-A, and hence to bring the reasoning under 
the Principle of Identity. But in the second case, 
in which one of the opposed members is affirmed, 
the ground on which we deny the other, is not 
because both cannot be false, but because both 
cannot be true. 

It may be questioned whether this second in- 
ference is warranted by the form of the disjunctive 

* The indefinite minor, " but it is not A," is as objectionable 
in this syllogism as in the conditional. 



238 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

premise. Boethius calls it a material consequence 7 ; 
and, in spite of the many eminent authorities on 
the other side, I am still disposed to think he is 
right But let us grant for a moment the opposite 
view, and allow that the proposition, "All C is 
either A or B," implies, as a condition of its truth, 
" No C can be both"." Thus viewed, it is in reality 
a complex proposition, containing two distinct 
assertions, each of which may be the ground of 
two distinct processes of reasoning, governed by 
two opposite laws. Surely it is essential to all 
clear thinking, that the two should be separated 
from each other, and not confounded under one 
form by assuming the Law of Excluded Middle 
to be, what it is not, a complex of those of 
Identity and Contradiction. Thus distinguished, 
the moods of the disjunctive syllogism are mere 
verbal variations from the categorical form, and 
may easily be brought under its laws*. 



y Ds SyU. Hyp. lib. i. Opera, p. 616 

T)in1 n 1 1 


Cf. Galen. Isagoge 


UlUif* U, 11a 

1 Aquinas, Opusc. xlviii. Ds Enunciations, c. xiv. Krug, 
Loyik, §. 86. 
• Thus: 


Modus tollendo ponens. 
Every C which is not A'ls B. 


Modus ponendo tollens. 
No C which is A is B. 


Every 
Some 
This , 


is a C which is 
not A. 


Every" 
Some 
This . 


C is a C which is A. 


.-. It is B 




.*. It is n 


otB. 



The first is governed by the Principle of Identity, and the 
second by the Principle of Contradiction. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 239 

The preceding discussion may appear to some 
readers of trifling importance ; and some apology 
for its length may be thought necessary. I believe 
nothing to be unimportant in a logical work, which 
tends to mark out more accurately the nature of 
thought and its laws, to exhibit more precisely the 
formal character of logical processes, and to clear 
the subject from the remaining excrescences and 
inconsistencies, with which, even in the writings 
of the best modern Logicians, it is still occasionally 
encumbered \ Either Logic is not worth studying 
at all, or it is worth studying in the utmost com- 
pleteness and exactitude of which it is susceptible. 
The length to which these remarks have run is 
justified, indeed demanded, by the eminence of the 
authors from whom the writer has ventured to 
dissent; — authors, whose mere assertions in matters 



b For example : Fries, after expressly distinguishing the 
Principle of Sufficient Reason from the other Formulae of 
Thought, as not being a principle of philosophical or formal 
Logic, places it in his next chapter in a coordinate position 
with them, as the distinctive law of hypothetical syllogisms. 
Krug describes it in one place as the highest principle of 
syllogism in general, and in another as the special principle 
of a single class of reasonings. It is proper to speak with 
respect even of the errors of the great philosopher of 
Konigsberg; but perhaps even Kant was in some degree 
biassed in his examination of logical processes, by an almost 
pedantic love of reproducing in every relation his four 
Functions of Judgment, and by the strange metaphysical 
theory which deduced the three Ideas of Pure Reason from 
the three kinds of dialectical syllogism. 



240 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

of logical science are not to be lightly regarded nor 
hastily departed from. Even if the views here 
advanced should be found on examination to be 
less tenable than the author believes them to be, 
they will not have been without their use, if, by 
calling the attention of others to one or two of 
the weaker defences of the received doctrines of 
Formal Logic, they should indirectly lead to a 
more satisfactory vindication of the positions as- 
sailed. 

It only remains to sum up as briefly as possible 
the results of the present chapter. Formal or 
Logical Necessity is dependent on one negative 
condition, and on three positive laws. The 
negative condition, or sine qua non of thought in 
general, is contained in the Principle of Sufficient 
Reason, which, however, in this relation, belongs 
to Psychology and not to Logic ; being only a 
general statement of the conditions under which, 
in the existing constitution of man's mind, thought 
is possible ; — its dependence, that is to say, on a 
higher thought, or on a fact of intuition. The 
three positive laws or fundamental principles 
assumed by Logic, as regulating all its actual 
processes, are those of Identity, of Contradiction, 
and of Excluded Middle ; the last, however, 
operating in most cases in subordination to the 
other two. These three are the highest and 
simplest forms of identical judgments, to one of 
which all analytical thinking may ultimately be 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 241 

referred : and all pure thinking may be shewn, on 
psychological grounds, to be of a strictly analytical 
character. The necessity arising from these laws 
is that of the harmony of thought with itself, — of 
its conformity to its own ruling principles ; as the 
forms of necessity noticed in the previous chapters 
were those arising from the relation of thought to 
the laws and conditions of intuition, — the requisite 
harmony of the several mental faculties one with 
another. These two harmonies constitute respec- 
tively Formal and Material Truth. Truth, relatively 
to man, cannot be defined as consisting in the con- 
formity of knowledge with its object ; for to man 
the object itself exists only as it is known by one 
faculty or another. Material Truth consists rather 
in the conformity of the object as represented in 
thought with the object as presented in intuition : 
and of this no general law or criterion can be 
given ; its essence consisting in its adapting itself 
in every case to the diversities of this or that 
special presentation. But Logical Truth, which 
consists in the conformity of thought to its own 
laws, can be submitted to those laws as general 
and sufficient criteria; criteria, however, not of 
the real and existent, but of the thinkable and 
possible. Of actual truth it furnishes one element 
only, which becomes truth or not in combination, 
according as, upon further examination, it is found 
to be in conformity or at variance with the co- 
ordinate decisions of experience. By the same 

R 



242 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

criteria, we shall also be able to determine the 
logical or extralogical character of any portion of 
the contents of existing treatises on the science : 
according as it is a deduction of pure thinking 
from given materials, or a mixed process, com- 
bining the act of thought with the acquisition of 
further empirical data. On the distinction esta- 
blished between material and formal thinking, 
some further observations will be made in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER VII. 

ON TRB MATTER AND FORM OF THOUGHT. 

The distinction adopted between Matter and 
Form in common language, relatively to works of 
Art, will serve to illustrate the character of the 
corresponding distinction in Thought The term 
Matter is usually applied to whatever is given to 
the artist, and consequently, as given, does not 
come within the province of the art itself to supply. 
The Form is that which is given in and through 
the proper operation of the art. In Sculpture, for 
example, the Matter is the marble in its rough 
state as given to the sculptor ; the Form is that 
which the sculptor in the exercise of his art com- 
municates to it*. The distinction between Matter 
and Form in any mental operation is analogous to 
this. The former includes all that is given to, the 
latter all that is given by, the operation. In the 
division of notions, for example, whether performed 
by an act of pure thinking or not, the generic 
notion is that given to be divided ; the addition of 

* See Fries, System der Logik, §. 10. His division cor- 
responds to the above, though based on a somewhat different; 
principle. 

r2 



244 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

the difference in the act of division constitutes the 
species. And accordingly, Genus is frequently 
designated by logicians the material, Difference, the 
formal part of the Species. So likewise in any 
operation of pure thinking, the Matter will include all 
that is given to and out of the thought ; the Form 
is what is conveyed in and by the thinking act itself. 
The same analogy may be carried on in relation 
to what are called material and formal processes 
of thinking. It may happen on certain occasions 
that the marble given to the sculptor is insufficient 
for the completion of the statue. It becomes 
necessary, therefore, to suspend the artistic pro- 
cess itself, in order to obtain additional material ; 
and this provision of new material the artist does 
not undertake purely as a sculptor. So in relation 
to any process of thinking. The empirical data 
requisite for an act of conception, judgment, or 
reasoning, may be insufficient, and require the 
addition of fresh material not furnished by the 
mere act of thinking. The operation in this case 
is one of mixed or material thinking; i.e. of thinking 
preceded by an appeal to experience for the pro- 
vision of further data ; and this appeal is no part 
of the duty of the logician, as such. Whereas, if 
the materials originally given are alone sufficient to 
necessitate, in obedience to the laws of thought, 
an act of conception, judgment, or reasoning, the 
process is properly distinguished as one of pure or 
formal thinking. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 245 

Notwithstanding this analogy, it is in many 
respects important that the matter and form of 
a thought should not be confounded with material 
and formal thinking respectively. Thinking is not 
always formal because its product has form, nor 
does the presence of a form in the antecedent of 
thought always necessitate a formal process in 
consequence. The sculptor, to continue our image, 
may ultimately complete his work with all the 
form and finish of art : it does not therefore follow, 
that all his material must have been given to him 
at once in the first instance. Or he may have 
carved with exactness one subordinate figure of 
a group : it does not therefore follow, that his 
material is sufficient to enable him to complete 
the whole. The present chapter is intended to 
point out more clearly the distinction and re- 
lation between the form of thought and formal 
thinking. 

The antithesis of matter and form, — the objective 
and the subjective, — the variable and the permanent, 
— the contingent and the necessary, runs through 
all the phenomena of consciousness. The mani- 
fold elements presented by any object of conscious- 
ness constitute the matter: the relations which 
the mind, acting by its own laws, institutes between 
the several elements as it combines them into an 
object, constitute the form b . In this point of 
view, Space and Time are called by Kant the 

b See Kant, Kritik der r. V. p. 32. (ed. Rosenkranz.) 



246 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

Forms of the Sensibility in general, external or 
internal ; the objects of the former being neces- 
sarily regarded by the mind as lying out of our- 
selves in Space, the objects of the latter, as suc- 
ceeding one another in Time. These may thus 
be regarded as the subjective conditions under 
which sensibility in general is possible. The same 
antithesis may be carried through those special 
acts of consciousness, in which the understanding 
operates, whether in conjunction with the pre- 
sentative faculties, as in an act of mixed thinking ; 
or representatively, as in pure thinking. A savage, 
to adopt an illustration of Kant's 8 , sees a house in 
the distance, not knowing what it is. It is thus 
present to him only as an intuition in space. 
But the very same complex phenomenon is pre- 
sented to a man who knows it to be a building 
designed for the habitation of men. To the same 
sensible data, the understanding now adds its own 
contribution, by which the several presentations 
of sense are combined into one whole, under the 
general notion of a house. The sensible attributes 
here constitute the matter; their union in a concept 
is the form. 

In Thought, as in Intuition, there is thus a 
variable and a permanent, an objective and a sub- 
jective element, a matter given to the thinker, 
a form communicated by the thinking act. In 
respect of the matter, concepts differ one from 
c Logik, Einleitung v. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 247 

another, as being composed of this or that variety 
of given attributes. In respect of the form, all agree, 
as being a collection of attributes constituting an 
object* The universal conditions under which 
attributes are conceived in this relation have been 
pointed out in the last chapter, as the Principles 
of Identity, Contradiction, and Excluded Middle. 
From these three laws we may deduce, with some 
amendment, the Forms which have been regarded 
by logical writers as distinctive of the Concept 
pjjpper*. The concept is necessarily conceived as 
one, as one out of many, and as constituting with the 
many, an universe of all that is conceivable. From 
the last of these three conditions it follows that 
the concept must possess a generic or universal 
feature, by which it is characterized as a concept 
in general, or a member of the conceivable 
universe. From the second it follows, that it 
must also possess a differential or peculiar feature, 
by which it is distinguished from all others. And 
from the first it follows, that these two features 
must be united in a single whole. Hence every 
concept, as such, must possess in some degree the 
attributes of distinctness, as having complex con- 
tents ; of clearness, as being, by one portion of its 
contents, distinguishable from other notions ; and 

d See Kant, Logik y §. 2. Fries, System der Loyik, §. 20. 
The former places the form of a concept in its universality ; 
the latter adopts the same view, subdividing universality into 
extension and comprehension. 



248 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

of relation to a possible object of intuition, inasmuch 
as the unity of a complex notion depends, not on 
a mere juxtaposition of terms, but upon its being 
the representative of one object 6 . These three 
forms may be otherwise denominated (for the 
difference is merely verbal) comprefiension, limit- 
ation, and extension. As having complex contents, 
every concept comprehends certain attributes; as 
distinguishable from others, it is limited by its 
specific difference; and, as representative of a 
class of possible objects, it has a certain field over 
which it is extended. The forms of the concept 
proper may thus be indifferently enumerated as 
Distinctness, Clearness, and Relation to an object ; 
or as Comprehension, Limitation, and Extension. 

The matter and form of Judgments may be dis- 
tinguished in the same manner as those of Concepts. 
Omitting those judgments which involve merely 
the enumeration of the attributes comprehended 
in a concept, (the analytical or explicative judg- 
ments of Kant,) which may be more properly 
classed as acts of Conception ; and confining our- 
selves to those in which the contents of the given 
concepts are distinct from each other, (the syn- 
thetical or ampliative judgments of Kant,) we may 

8 Arist. Metaph. vi. 12. 'Eirl piv yap rov foQpwros koL \€vk6p 
iroWa \iiv iarut, Srav p) virapxfl Bartpq Bartpov, cV 8c, Stop vnapxQ *al 
iraOy ti tA vrroKeifitvou 6 avOpcsmos' r6rc yap h yiyptrtu teal cVrtv 6 
\cvk6s fo$poMTos. Ibid* vii. 6. 'O 8' 6pia-pos \6yos c<tt\v els w 
(n/vdcVfitp KaB&iTfp rj *ikids, dWa t<£ eVor tivai* 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 249 

distinguish, as before, between the preexisting 
materials, which must be given before the act of 
judging takes place, and the additions contributed 
by the act itself. 

Thus, to take an example adduced in a former 
chapter : If I poise a piece of gold in my hand, in 
order to ascertain whether it is heavy, the presented 
phenomena belong to distinct acts of sensation. 
The evidence of sight attests the presence of a 
round, yellow, shining body; the evidence of 
touch, or rather of muscular pressure, attests its 
weight To unite these attributes as belonging to 
one and the same thing, is an act, not of sensation, 
but of thought. The mere sensation, aided by the 
concepts, presents us with three things — the body 
which is seen, the pressure which is felt, and a 
certain temporal and local juxtaposition of the 
two. To combine the presented attributes as 
belonging to one thing, — to pronounce that it is 
the gold which is heavy, is an act of thought 
constituting a judgment. Here, then, we have 
one form of the judgment, expressed in the copula, 
" gold is heavy :" this indicates the identification 
of two concepts as related to a common object ; 
an identification usually known as the Quality of 
the Judgment. 

The same is the case with the Quantity of 
Judgments. I see a number of balls lying on a 
table, and pronounce at once that they are all 
white : I see another collection, and assert in like 



250 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

manner that some are white and some black. 
Here the senses, even when aided by the concepts 
in -distinguishing the balls as such, yet present to 
us only individual objects. This, this, and this, 
are within their province ; but they know nothing 
of aU or sorte. It is by an act of thought that 
the several individuals are regarded as constituting 
a whole, and a judgment pronounced concerning 
that whole or a portion of it. 

A third Form of the Judgment, as indeed of all 
thought, is Limitation. In predicating one notion 
of another, I at the same time necessarily exclude 
every thing to which that predicate is opposed, 
and thereby limit the subject to one alone of those 
contradictory determinations which make up the 
universe of thought In asserting, for example, 
that gold is heavy, I as much exclude it from the 
class of imponderables, as I include it in that of 
bodies possessing weight. The canon that predi- 
cation is limitation is now indeed generally admitted 
as an axiom in philosophy f ; and the various 
metaphysical systems of modern Germany, since 
the days of Kant, may be briefly described as so 
many attempts to evade the consequences of this 
principle, by constructing a philosophy of the 

f See for example, among others, Fichte, Ueber den Qrund 
unseres Olaubens an eine gottliche Weltregierung, p. 16. (Werke, v. 
p. 187.) Oerichtliche Verantwortung, p. 47. (Werke, v. p. 265.) 
Bestimmung des Memchen, {Werke, ii. p. 304.) Hegel, Logik, 
P. i. b. ii. ch. 2. P. ii. ch. 2. (Werke, iv. p. 36. v. p, 70 ) 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 251 

unlimited on a basis independent of logical 
predication. 

The two Forms of Quantity and Quality are 
generally recognised by logicians of the school of 
Kant To these are added two others, Relation 
and Modality. The former of thes€ includes the 
three subdivisions of Categorical, Hypothetical, 
and Disjunctive, and is necessarily included among 
the forms of thought by those who adopt Kant's 
theory of the nature of these three kinds of pro- 
positions. But the view which has been taken of 
these in the last chapter precludes the admission 
of Relation as a distinct form from Quantity and 
Quality. Disjunctive judgments have there been 
treated as reducible to Categorical forms; and 
Hypothetical, as containing, not a judgment, 
properly speaking, but a consequence, formal or 
material. In this case, the relation is not between 
the different parts of a single judgment, but be- 
tween two judgments, one dependent on the other. 
The judgment proper being thus confined to the 
categorical form only, Relation becomes only a 
general expression for the connection of subject 
and predicate under certain conditions of quantity 
and quality, and thus is not a special form of 
judgment, but a term equivalent to Form in 
general. 

As regards Modality, judgments, according to 
Kant, are of three kinds, problematical, assertorial, 
and apodeictical. The first are accompanied by 



252 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

a consciousness of the bare possibility of the 
judgment; the second, by a consciousness of 
its reality ; the third, by a consciousness of its 
necessity. Modality is thus dependent on the 
manner in which a certain relation between two 
concepts is maintained, and may vary according to 
the state of different minds, the given concepts, 
and consequently the matter of the judgment, 
remaining unaltered 8 . These grounds are fully 
sufficient to establish modality, in the extent to 
which it is acknowledged by Kant and by Aristotle h , 
as, in a psychological point of view, belonging to 
the form, not to the matter, of judgment. It is 
conveyed in the act of judging, not given in 
the preliminary materials, and affects the copula, 
not the predicate. But the forms cognisable by 
Psychology must not be confounded with the 
forms cognisable by Logic. The latter science is 

* Kant, Logik, §. 30. 

h Aristotle, in the De Interpretations, ch. 12. enumerates 
four modes of judgment, the necessary, the impossible, the 
contingent, and the possible. The addition of the true and 
the false is, I think, founded on a misinterpretation. These 
modes he reduces, in the Prior Analytics, i. 2. to the necessary 
and the contingent (rod «£ dpdyiajs vrrdpx^v and rot) cpdexccr&u 
vnapxw)* These, with the addition of the pure judgment 
(rov imapx* iV )> correspond to the division of Kant. The 
spurious modes admitted in abundance by the scholastic 
logicians are not forms of the judgment, but modifications 
of one of its terms only. They affect, that is, the subject 
alone, or the predicate alone, not the relation between 
the two. 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 253 

not concerned, as is sometimes maintained, with 
the Forma of Thought in general, but only with 
the Forms of Thought as related to pure or formal 
thinking. The meaning of this limitation will 
appear more clearly in the sequel. In this point 
of view, Modality stands on a very different footing 
from Quantity and Quality. In cases where a 
modal conclusion is drawn from modal premises, 
it is only the form of the conclusion as a judgment 
that differs from that of the pure syllogism : its 
relation to the premises as a conclusion from them, 
consequently the entire form of the reasoning, is 
the same in both. Whereas, by the substitution 
of a negative premise for an affirmative, or of 
a particular for an universal, the conclusiveness 
of the premises as necessitating a consequence, 
and hence the whole form of the reasoning, will, 
in most cases, vanish altogether. For this reason, 
Modality, though psychologically a form of judg- 
ment, is not one of those forms that properly fall 
within the province of Logic. This will be made 
clearer when we come to treat of the matter and 
form of syllogisms 1 . 

As conception furnishes the material for an act of 
judgment, so judgment furnishes the material for 
an act of reasoning. The Matter of the inference 
consists in the several propositions of which it is 

1 On the disputed question of the relation of Modals to 
Logic, some further remarks will he found in the Appendix, 
note H. 



254 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

composed, and which vary in every different in- 
stance : its Form appears in the manner in which 
those propositions are invariably thought as con- 
nected together, as premises and conclusion. This 
connection consists in the recognition of a relation 
of identity or contradiction between the terms as 
given in the antecedent and those connected by 
the act of reasoning in the consequent. The 
Forms of the Syllogism may thus be determined 
by the following question. Given two judgments, 
(no matter what may be their material signi- 
fication,) what relations must exist between them, 
to warrant us in inferring a third judgment as 
their consequent ? 

In the first place, the premises and conclusion 
must stand to each other in the relation of con- 
dition and conditioned. As the predicate of a 
judgment limits and determines the subject, so 
the premises of a syllogism must limit and deter- 
mine the conclusion. Limitation is thus a form 
of reasoning, as of all thinking ; the act of reason- 
ing being such as to determine the mind to one 
actual conclusion out of two contradictory possi- 
bilities. 

In the second place, since the terms of the 
conclusion are not compared together directly, 
but through the medium of a third, it is neces- 
sary that this third concept should be compared 
with each of the others. This comparison, as 
we have seen in the last chapter, results in a 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 255 

relation either of identity or contradiction; the 
objects denoted by the two concepts being pro- 
nounced identical when the premise is affirmative, 
and contradictory when it is negative; and a 
similar relation being consequently inferred to 
exist between the concepts compared together 
in the conclusion. The Forms which the Syllo- 
gism exhibits in these relations are those of Mood 
and Figure, affirmative or negative, which shew 
us what relations of identity or contradiction in 
the premises of a Syllogism may legitimately 
determine a similar relation in the conclusion. 

Inferences, as well as judgments, are in some 
cases the result of an act of mixed thinking ; of 
reasoning, that is, in conjunction with an appeal 
to experience. This is sometimes distinguished 
by logicians as material consequence; the strictly 
logical operation being designated formal. In the 
earlier portion of the present chapter, it has been 
necessary to avoid this nomenclature ; the object 
having been to shew that in every act of thought, 
pure or mixed, the product exhibits the distinct 
features of a matter given to, and a form given by, 
the thinker. The matter and form of thought 
are thus by no means coextensive with material 
and formal thinking; and it becomes therefore 
necessary to examine separately the propriety of 
these last expressions, and to determine what is 
the exact sense in which Logic is defined to be a 
Formal Science. 



256 PROLEGOMENA L06ICA. 

The distinction between formal and material, or, 
as for the present it is better to term them, between 
pure and mixed thinking, has not in general been 
consistently followed out by logicians. They have 
allowed the existence of material consequences, in 
which the conclusion does not follow from the 
given premises, but requires additional data from 
experience ; and these they have rightly regarded 
as extralogical ; but they have not observed that 
the same distinction is applicable to Apprehension 
and Judgment, as well as to Reasoning ; that there 
are pure and mixed concepts and judgments, as 
well as pure and mixed reasonings; and that in 
every case the province of Logic is with the first 
only. In consequence of this, the province of 
Logic has been by some too much widened, and 
by. others too much narrowed. On the one side, 
we are told that it can remedy indistinctness of 
apprehension and falsity of judgment ; — a pretension 
which, announced without limitation, is perfectly 
absurd : and on the other side, it has been described 
as concerned with the operation of reasoning only ; 
apprehension and judgment being considered only 
in subordination to this. Neither view has been 
consistently carried out. The advocates of the 
former ought to have included within the province 
of Logic, Induction, Analogy, and the whole field 
of probable reasoning ; while the advocates of the 
latter ought to have extended the signification of 
of the term reasoning, so as to include those forms 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 257 

of pure thinking which are governed by the same 
laws as the formal syllogism. 

It would be more correct to distinguish, with 
regard to all the three operations of the under- 
standing, between those errors which arise from a 
defect in the thought itself, and those which arise 
from a defect in the corresponding experience. 
For example, my conception of a particular flower 
is obscure, when I have not noticed it so closely as 
to be able to distinguish it as a whole from certain 
others : it is indistinct, when I know it as a whole, 
but have not analysed it so minutely as to be 
able to enumerate its botanical characteristics. In 
these cases, the defect is empirical, and can only 
be remedied by closer attention to the individual 
flowers of that kind. But, on the other hand, my 
conception may be obscure, as containing attributes 
inconsistent with the existence of its object as an 
individual whole ; or it may be indistinct, as con- 
taining attributes incapable of coexisting with each 
other as parts of a whole. Thus we may be told 
to conceive a flower of no colour at all, or a flower 
which shall be both red and white on the same 
part of the same leaf. In these cases, the defect is 
in the thought itself. And accordingly, Logic is 
competent to declare the supposed object incon- 
ceivable. Again, a judgment may be empirically 
false, as asserting a combination of attributes never 
actually found in experience; as if it is asserted that 
a horse has five legs. It may be logically false, as 



258 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

coupling together attributes which contradict each 
other; as if it is asserted that a quadruped has five 
legs. In the former case, I can contradict the 
assertion only by an appeal to the experience of 
all who are acquainted with the animal: in the 
latter, I can contradict it on logical grounds, as 
false in the thought itself. An inference, in like 
manner, may be empirically inconsequent, as 
grounded on a relation of phenomena not in- 
variable in nature: it may be logically incon- 
sequent, as deduced from premises not neces- 
sitating it by the laws of thought. Thus, if I am 
asked whether this particular fall of the barometer 
is a ground for asserting that it will rain within 
twelve hours, I can only reply, as a logician, that 
it is so, if all falls of the barometer are so : but 
whether this is the case in fact, cannot be decided 
by logic, but by experience. On the other hand, 
if it be expressly stated that some falls only of the 
barometer are indications of rain within twelve 
hours, I can at once decide that it is logically 
inconsequent to reason from a merely partial rule 
to any single instance : the rain may in this case 
be expected with more or less probability, but it 
cannot be inferred as a certainty. 

It thus appears, that in all the three operations 
of the understanding, Logic is equally competent 
to detect their internal vices, as thoughts trans- 
gressing their own laws; and that in all it is equally 
incompetent to detect their external vices, as 



PROLEGOMENA LOOIOA. 259 

thoughts inconsistent with experience. It can 
detect the inconceivability of a notion, the self- 
contradiction of a judgment, the inconsequence 
of a conclusion as not necessitated by given 
premises. It cannot supply the empirical defi- 
ciencies of a notion, nor determine the real exist- 
ence of its object : it cannot ascertain the truth or 
falsehood of a judgment as a statement of a fact : 
it cannot decide as to the necessary sequence of a 
conclusion from understood premises, or the pro- 
bability of its truth where the given premises are 
insufficient to necessitate it by the laws of thought. 
It remains to ascertain the exact meaning of the 
expressions formal and material thinking, as ap- 
plied respectively to those operations which do or 
do not fall within the province of Logic. 

Law and Form, though correlative terms, must 
not, in strict accuracy, be used as synonymous. 
The former is used properly with reference to an 
operation ; the latter, with reference to its product. 
Conceiving, Judging, Reasoning, are subject to 
certain laws: Concepts, Judgments, Syllogisms, 
exhibit certain forms. But the laws of thought 
are not always competent to determine its form ; 
as has been already shewn in the case of all the 
products of mixed thinking. In a synthetical 
judgment, for example, the laws of thought can 
determine only its possible truth, which equally 
implies its possible falsehood; thus leaving it 
altogether undecided, whether the form of the 

s2 



260 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

judgment should be affirmative or negative, uni- 
versal or particular. The form in all these cases 
is determined by that universal tendency of the 
human mind, which has been noticed in a former 
chapter, the tendency to regard physical phe- 
nomena as indicating the existence of a substance 
or a cause similar to that of which we are directly 
conscious in our own mental states and operations. 
Tt is thus that, when experience presents certain 
phenomena in juxtaposition, the mind is invariably 
led to regard them as attributes of one and the 
same substance ; and this constitutes the form of 
all mixed concepts and judgments. And in like 
manner, when one phenomenon is the invariable 
consequent of another, the mind is irresistibly led 
to regard them as respectively cause and effect ; 
and this constitutes the form in all cases of mixed 
inference. The same tendencies which thus co- 
operate with the presentations of experience in 
the acts of mixed thinking, cooperate in like 
manner with the laws of thought in acts of pure 
thinking. In the former case, the attributes are 
given as empirically related as intuitions ; in the 
latter, they are given as logically related as 
thoughts; and in both they are regarded as 
mutually related to some unknown substance or 
cause. But that these tendencies, however uni- 
versal or irresistible, cannot properly be regarded 
as laws of thought or of intuition, is manifest from 
the fact, that they furnish no criterion for de- 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 261 

termining the legitimacy or illegitimacy of any 
product. Thoughts, whether empirically true or 
false, whether logically sound or unsound, in this 
respect present precisely the same features. An 
assertion, false in point of fact, or self-contradictory 
in point of thought, contains, as regards the sup- 
posed relation of attributes to a common substance, 
precisely the same form as one logically and em- 
pirically valid. The Principle? of Substance and 
Causality are thus rather negative conditions than 
positive laws of thought. They have a psycho- 
logical relation to thought as it actually exists, 
explaining and accounting for the fact of its 
invariably assuming a certain form : but they have 
no logical relation to thought as it ought to be, 
and furnish no criterion of its validity in any 
special instance. 

Logical or pure thinking is not, therefore, called 
formal, because its product exhibits a form ; for 
the coexistence of matter and form is common 
to all thought, and to all spurious imitations of 
thought. But the justification of the terms formal 
and material, as applied to pure and mixed pro- 
cesses of thinking, is to be found in the circum- 
stance, that in the former, the act of thought is 
based on the form only of the preliminary data, 
without reference to the particular matter ; while, 
on the other hand, matter is necessarily taken into 
account in every process of mixed thinking. To 
an act of logical conception, for example, it is 



262 PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 

not necessary to examine in any case the special 
character of the attributes, as having been actually 
combined in experience ; but only that they should 
be compatible with the possible existence of an 
object in space or time. In an act of logical 
judgment, one of the given concepts being always 
comprehended in the other, it is indifferent of 
what special attributes either is composed, pro- 
vided they possess sufficient clearness and dis- 
tinctness to enable the mind to discern the relation 
between them. In an act of logical reasoning, 
the validity of the conclusion depends solely on 
the quantity and quality of the given premises; 
without any reference to the particular terms of 
which they are composed. In all, so long as the 
formal relation of the data remains the same, the 
matter may be changed as we please, without 
affecting the logical value of the thought. In 
mixed thinking, on the other hand, the matter is 
of principal importance. To determine that this 
or that object of conception actually exists, that 
this or that judgment is in accordance with expe- 
rience, that this or that inference is sufficiently 
probable to furnish a reasonable motive to action, 
we require to be guided by a knowledge of the 
nature and circumstances of the particular object 
in question. And it is for this reason that all ex- 
amples of logical thinking are better expressed by 
means of arbitrary symbols than of significant 
terms ; not that it is in any case possible to think 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 263 

without some matter or other, but because it is 
wholly indifferent what matter we may at the time 
be thinking about ; and, therefore, by employing 
an unmeaning sign, indifferently representative of 
any object of thought, we are enabled to clear the 
process from any accidental admixture of material 
knowledge, and to exhibit the form alone iiKits 
proper relation to the laws of thought. 

In accordance with the view here given of Form 
and Formal Processes, it will be proper to modify 
slightly some of the definitions of Logic given by 
those philosophers, whose views have been princi- 
pally followed in the present work. Logic, to omit 
less accurate views of its nature, has been defined 
as the Science of the bare Form of Thought k , or 
as the Science of the Formal Laws of Thought 1 ; — 
definitions which, though substantially approaching 
far nearer to the truth than any antagonist view, 
still leave something to desire in point of verbal 
accuracy. The term formal strictly belongs rather 
to the process of pure thinking than to the laws by 
which it is regulated, or to the science which takes 
cognisance of them ; and Logic is not the science 
of the Forms of Thought in general, but only of 
such as are subservient to other processes of formal 
thinking. Other forms, such as modality, fall 
without the province of Logic, and within that of 
Psychology ; to which latter science, indeed, all the 

k Kant, Ijogik, Einlcitung i. Hoffbaucr, Logik, §. 17. 
1 Sir W. Hamilton, Discussions, p. 119. 



264 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

forms and laws of thought belong in their relation 
to the constitution of the thinking subject To 
Logic, on the other hand, belong the same forms 
and laws in relation to those acts and products 
of pure thinking which are suggested by the one 
and governed by the other. If, therefore, slightly 
altering the language of the above definitions, we 
define Logic as the Science of the Laws and Pro- 
ducts of Pure or Formal Thinking" 1 , we shall 
express with tolerable accuracy its character and 
province, according to the views advocated in the 
preceding pages. 

¦ This coincides nearly with the definition given- by Sir W. 
Hamilton, Reid's Works, p. 698, the science of the lam of thought 
as thought. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

ON POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE THOUGHT. 

Logic has been described by Kant as the science 
of the necessary laws of the understanding and of 
the reason. Psychologically, the propriety of this 
division of the mental faculties has been called in 
question by eminent critics*. And in a logical 
point of view it is untenable, if, as I have endea- 
voured to shew*judgment and reasoning, in so far 
as they are logical processes, are both governed by 
the same laws, and must be referred to the same 
faculty. In the present chapter, however, it is 
proposed to examine another expression of the 
same definition, and to enquire in what sense the 
Laws of Thought can properly be called necessary. 
Kant employed this term to distinguish the laws 
of thought in general from those of thought as 
employed upon any definite class of objects; it 
being optional with every man, and therefore con- 
tingent, whether he shall exercise his understand- 

* Among others by Sir William Hamilton, Discussions, p. 17. 
and by M. Cousin, Legons sur la philosophic de Kant, L. vi. 



266 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

ing on one class of objects rather than another b . 
This distinction I have preferred to express in 
other words, by separating pure ot formal from 
mixed or material thinking ; but the Kantian 
phraseology may serve to introduce a subject, the 
right understanding of which is of considerable 
importance in Logic : the difference, namely, be- 
tween positive and negative thinking. The phrase 
necessary laws of thought, if such language is allow- 
able, ought to imply that we cannot think at all 
except under their conditions; and yet it is notorious 
that such laws are daily transgressed, that nothing 
is more common than illogical reasoning. To 
reconcile the language with the fact is the object 
of the following observations. 

Illogical reasoning may be of two very different 
kinds. It may violate the laws ofthought in cases 
where they are applicable, or it may endeavour to 
extend them to cases where they are not applicable. 
The offence in the former case consists in attempt- 
ing to draw a conclusion opposed to that which 
the laws require; in the latter, in attempting to 
draw a conclusion where none can be legitimately 
inferred. Thus we may, verbally at least, reason, 
« All A is B ; all C is A ; therefore no C is B. w Or 
we may reason, " All A is B ; some C is not A ; 
therefore some C is not B." If the laws of thought 
are in the strict sense necessary, i. e. obligatory 
upon every act of thinking, it will follow that these 

b Kant, Tjoffik, Einleitung, J. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 267 

supposed reasonings are neither of them acts of 
thought at all. 

It is, of course, always possible to compose a 
verbal representation of a thought in which the 
rules of Logic shall be violated, and to understand 
fully the* meaning of each word of which it is 
composed. The test, however, of the reality of a 
thought does not lie in the possibility of assertion, 
but in the possibility of conception* ; in the power, 
that is to say, of combining the given attributes in 
a single image representative of an individual object 
of intuition d . I may make use of the words a 
round square, or a bilinear figure ; but the terms 
imply no conception, because the attributes cannot 
be united in an image. These words therefore are 
not the signs of thought, but only express the 
negation of any object on which thought can be 
exercised*. 

And such, in ultimate analysis, will be seen to 
be the case with all verbal combinations in which 
the laws of formal thinking are violated ; whether 
directly, by denying their authority in cases to 

' Ov yap wp6s t6v ?£«» \6yov q oirtfdc i{ir, aKka vp6t top eV rjj ^foxO' 
£rci ov&c cn/XXoyur/ufc. 'Acl yap turuf fvorijvai vp6g t6v ?£o» Acfyov, 
dkka rrpbs rhv to-» \6yov ovk art. Arist. Anal. Post. I. 10. 6. 

d It will be necessary here to bear in mind what has been 
observed before, that all conception implies imagination, 
though all imagination does not imply conception : see above, 
p. 24. 

e See on this subject an excellent note in Sir W. Hamilton's 
edition of Reid, p. 377. 



268 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

which they are applicable, or indirectly, by attempt- 
ing to apply them to cases where they are not 
applicable. The only difference between these two 
offences is, that in the former case the product is 
no thought whatever ; in the latter, it is not that 
kind of thought which it professes to be. 

Let us suppose, for example, a syllogistic con- 
clusion verbally asserted, the reverse of that which 
the laws of thought require ; such as, u All A is B, 
all C is A, therefore some C is not B. w This rear- 
soiling supposes the possibility of conceiving a C, 
which shall at the same time be B and not B. 
Tried by this test, the form of words is ascertained 
to be representative of no thought at all. 

On the other hand, in a case where the law of 
reasoning is not applicable, as in the apparent 
syllogism ; t€ All Y is [some] Z, no X is [any] Y, 
therefore no X is [any] Z," the thought is anni- 
hilated as a syllogism only : as a mere judgment, 
the concluding proposition may or may not be true ; 
and there is no impossibility in conceiving an X 
which is neither Y nor Z. But as a syllogism, it 
maintains that X is not Z, became it is not Y; in 
other words, that nothing which is not Y can be Z, 
or that all Z is Y ; — an assertion which again in- 
volves a contradiction of the major premise, which, 
in asserting that all Y is some Z only, implies at 
the same time that some Z is not Y. This contra- 
diction is not so apparent in the ordinary form of 
the affirmative proposition, in which the predicate 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 269 

is expressed as indefinite, though thought as parti- 
cular : and thus theelliptical and imperfect language 
of common Logic has caused to be overlooked the 
important truth, that illogical thinking is in reality 
no thinking at all. 

The language of this chapter may recall to the 
mind of the reader a distinction made in an earlier 
portion of the present work, between positive and 
negative ideas. A comparison of the two cases will 
serve to shew, that the expression negative thinking, 
or negation of thought, is properly applicable to 
both ; though in different relations and on different 
grounds. Positive thinking implies two conditions : 
firstly, the material condition, that certain attri- 
butes be given as united in a concept : secondly, 
the formal condition, that the concept be capable 
of individualization; i. e. that the attributes be such 
as can coexist in an object perceived or imagined. 
If either of these conditions be wanting, we are 
deficient in the sine qua non of actual thought. 
A given form of words may thus in two different 
ways be void of a thought corresponding. We 
may be unable to conceive separately one or more 
of the attributes given, or we may be unable to 
conceive them in combination. The former is the 
case, when we have never been personally conscious 
of the said attribute as presented; the latter is the 
case, when the several presentations are incom- 
patible with each other. 

From defect in the first of these conditions, 



270 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

a man born blind may be said to have a negative 
idea of light, which he knows only as "something 
different from darkness, and, consequently, of the 
various colours, which are different modifications 
of light : and any man, in like manner, has but a 
negative idea of a colour which he has not actually 
seen f . The blind man may be able to distinguish 
a sphere from a cube by touch ; but if he is told 
that the ball which he has in his hand is white, he 
cannot connect the word with any sensation of which 
he has been at any time conscious. And in like 
manner, a man who has seen white objects only 
has no idea of red; he knows it only as some 
colour which he has not seen. In this manner 
it is that we have negative ideas only of many of 
the objects on which men most boldly speculate. 
Such is the case with all our speculations on 
causality, as existing apart from the conscious 
exertion of power; on substance, other than as 
a conscious self; on consciousness in general, apart 
from the conditions of space and time. Of these 

' In the first of these instances, the negative idea is so 
obscure as to be tantamount in its actual result to no idea 
at nil. Still the corresponding state of mind is not one of 
pure quiescence, or mere absence of thought. A blind man 
who had lived all his life among a nation of blind men, and 
who had thus never been led to infer the existence^ visible 
objects at all, would be in a different state from one who 
is continually told of things which he is unable to see, and 
whose mind is consequently roused to an effort, though an 
ineffectual one. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 271 

we can only speak as a causality which is not our 
causality ; as a substance different from our 
substance ; as a consciousness unlike our con- 
sciousness 8 . The same is the case with all the 
speculations of our reason concerning infinity 
and infinite attributes as such. By removing, 
the condition of limitation, we remove the only 
condition under which such attributes have ever 
been presented to our consciousness. Further 
speculation is not thought, but its negation. 

The second condition fails in cases of illogical 
thinking, all of which may be shewn ultimately to 
annihilate themselves by involving a contradiction. 
And in these cases, the attempt to individualize . 
the thought furnishes at once a decisive criterion 
of its negative character. In the former instances, 
the thought is only ultimately discovered to be 
unattainable, from the failure of every attempt to 
realize it : in the present case, the attributes can 
be immediately determined to be unthinkable, as 
mutually destroying one another. The former 
may be distinguished as materially or relatively 
negative, from the absence of the requisite data 
for thinking : the latter are formally or absolutely 
negative, as containing data which offend against 
the universal laws of human thought. The former 
might become positive, if man were furnished with 
a new sense or any additional faculty of intuition : 
the latter could only become so by a complete 

¦ Cf. Damiron, Psychologic, vol. ii. p. 221. 



272 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

inversion of the existing constitution of his mind. 
The negative character of the first is shewn by 
Psychology, which ascertains empirically the limit- 
ations to which the mind is subject in the accu- 
mulation of materials for thinking: the negative 
character of the second is shewn by Logic, which 
lays down d priori the conditions to which all 
materials, whencesoever derived, must be subjected 
in the formation of thought 

It is of the utmost importance to distinguish 
these two kinds of negative thinking, the material 
or psychological and the formal or logical, from 
each other. No error in philosophy is more 
frequent in its occurrence, or more pernicious in 
its results, than a confusion on this point. Men 
are apt to mistake the absence of the materials for 
one thought for the presence of materials for its 
opposite ; — to imagine that it is all one to be unable 
to think of an object as existing, and to be able 
to think of it as not existing; — to fancy that 
certain positions are condemned by the laws of 
the understanding, when the fact is only that their 
materials have not been given in an intuition; — 
to suppose that to be rejected by reason, which 
in truth has never come in contact with reason 
at all. 

To examine in detail the prominent instances of 
the above confusion, which are plentifully exhibited 
by some of the so-called philosophers of the present 
time, would require a work of a higher and more 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 273 

controversial character than the present. I shall 
content myself with selecting two examples, one 
ancient and one modern, as specimens of the 
confident manner in which men of all ages, and 
under all religious systems, have been prone to 
dogmatize upon the highest matters of speculation, 
upon no better basis than the absence of all 
materials for speculating at all. 

Aristotle's well-known argument, to prove that 
the happiness of the Gods consists in contem- 
plation, is based* on the ground that we cannot 
attribute to them moral attributes in the only way 
in which such attributes come within the sphere 
of human consciousness ; viz. under the limitations 
and imperfections consequent upon human passion 
and human error. What scope, he asks, can there 
be for fortitude, where there is no pain to undergo; 
or for temperance, where there are no evil desires 
to keep in check h ? But the reasoning is incom- 
plete. Cotta, in Cicero, pursuing the same prin- 
ciple to its ultimate consequences, shews clearly, 
that we must equally deny of the Deity the 
possession of any intellectual as well as of any 
moral quality. What is the object of reason 
and intelligence, but to gain a knowledge of 
that which is obscure? What is the purpose of 
contemplation, but to gain a closer insight into 
the nature of the things contemplated? Intel- 
lectual attainments have the same relation to 

h Eth. Nic. x. 8. 



271 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

human ignorance that moral virtues have to 
human frailty 1 . 

The error of both these reasonings is the same : 
it consists in mistaking a psychological deficiency 
for a logical impossibility. To determine in thought 
that certain attributes cannot exist in any being 
except under given conditions of manifestation, it 
would be necessary that we should have had per- 
sonal experience of the abrogation of those con- 
ditions, and of the absolute destruction of the 
attributes in consequence. But such an experience 
in the present case is, ex hypothesis impossible ; the 
conditions being those to which the universal 
human consciousness is subject. To pronounce 
how consciousness exists in beings of a different 
nature from ourselves, it would be necessary that 
we should be capable of possessing their nature 
and faculties, as well as our own, and of comparing 
the two together, by the aid of a third power in- 
dependent of either. To pronounce that certain 
modes of consciousness cannot exist save as they 
exist to us, it is necessary that we should have 
personally tried every other possible relation of 
modes of consciousness to a conscious subject 
Until human experience has extended thus far, to 
limit the province of faith by that of reason, — to 
say that what we cannot compass in thought we may 
not believe as existing, is to pass from criticism 
to dogmatism, a dogmatism resting its claims to 

1 Cicero, De Natura Deorum, iii. 16. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 275 

dictation on a complete ignorance of the matter 
in which it dictates. 

The modern Atheism of the German philo- 
sopher Feuerbach is based on a similar confusion. 
It assumes that the measure of what man is 
to believe is to be determined by what he can 
grasp in an act of positive thought: in other 
words, that the mere absence of the necessary 
data for thinking at all is tantamount to a logical 
determination of the non-existence of a corre- 
sponding object. God, according to this system, 
is but humanity deified in its intellectual, or 
moral, or physical attributes, according to the 
varying condition, characters, and wants of this or 
that people ; but in all, according to one form or 
another of Anthropomorphism. 

Falsehood is only dangerous from its possessing 
a certain portion of a mutilated truth. The one 
element of truth which underlies the Atheism of 
the Essence of Religion*, is the fact, that finite 
thought can only be positively exercised on finite 
objects. Thought, on its positive side, is ulti- 
mately tested by the individualization of concepts. 
To effect this, they must be referred to the 
representative image of some actual state of 
consciousness, — sensation, volition, affection, &c. 

k With this work, and others of the same author, I am 
acquainted through the French translation by M. Ewerbeck, 
entitled, Qu'est-ce que la Religion d'apres la nouvelle phUosophie 
Allemande. 

t2 



27() PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

In attempting to grasp the Deity as an object of 
positive thought, — to speculate beyond what is 
revealed to us of the divine attributes as mani- 
fested in relation and accommodation to human 
faculties, man can only bring God down to his 
own level, and exercise his reason on those 
analogous attributes of which he has had expe- 
rience in his personal consciousness. The error 
consists in overlooking the religious feelings and 
affections, as a distinct class of psychological 
facts, coordinate with, not subordinate to, the 
t: inking faculty. The history of mankind in 
general, as well as the consciousness of each 
individual, alike testify that religion is not a 
function of thought; and that the attempt to 
make it so, if consistently carried out, necessarily 
leads, firstly to Anthropomorphism, and ultimately 
to Atheism. 

The incompetency of such reasoning to prove 
its conclusion is manifest from the fact, that the 
mental phenomena on which alone it rests, 
must, from the nature of the case, be precisely 
the same, whether that conclusion be true or false. 
If human thought is subject to laws and limit- 
ations, formal and material, the mode and the 
sphere of positive thinking must be such as those 
laws and limitations require, whether there exist 
objects beyond it or not. But the hypothesis, 
indispensable to the rationalist, that the sphere of 
thought and that of being are coextensive, fails 



PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 277 

altogether to account for the phenomenon of 
negative thinking ; to explain, that is, how it can 
be that man, in the exercise of thought, ever 
finds himself encompassed with conditions and 
restrictions, which he is ever striving to pass and 
ever failing in the effort ; that he ever feels him- 
self in the presence of yearnings unsatisfied and 
doubts unsolved ; — yearnings which countless ac- 
cessions to the domain of thought have left as 
vague and restless as before ; — doubts which cen- 
turies of speculation have made no progress 
towards answering. These and such like humi- 
liating truths, altogether inexplicable on the 
arrogant assumption of a human God contem- 
plating the products of his creative intelfect 1 , are 
the natural and necessary features of our position, 
if we believe that man, as individual or as species, 
is but a lower intelligence in the midst of the 
works of a higher, a being of finite intuitions, 
surrounded by partial indications of the Unlimited, 
of finite thought, contemplating partial revelations 
of the Incomprehensible. 

1 " Ueber die Natur philosophiren," says Schelling, " heisst 
die Natur schaffen." 

" Die Logik," says Hegel, " zeigt die Erhebung der Idee zu 
der Stufe von daraus sie die Schtipferin der Natur wird." In 
the same spirit, Logic is declared to be, " Die Darstellung 
Gottes, wie er in seinem ewigen Wesen vor der Erschaffung 
der Natur und eines endlichen Geistes ist." 

The mock thunder of Salmoneus was modesty itself to 
this. 



CHAPTER IX. 

OF LOGIC AS BELATED TO OTHEB MENTAL SCIENCES. 

A division was early established in philosophy 
between the Logica docens, and the Logica uteris ; 
the one concerned with the pure laws and forms 
of thought, the other with the application of 
thought to this or that object matter. The 
relations of the latter it is not my present purpose 
to examine. Every art or science, in so far as it 
contains reasonings on its own special objects, 
may be regarded as furnishing an instance of the 
Logica utens ; and in this point of view, Logic has 
no special affinity with one branch of knowledge 
rather than another. But in relation to the Logica 
docens, there are three branches of science, real or 
apparent, which, from community of object and 
method, as well as from historical connection, 
demand a more special consideration. 

The three sciences in question are Grammar, 
Psychology, and Metaphysics. Rhetoric, from 
an association with Logic and Grammar in the 
mediaeval Trivium, might also be thought to have 
a special claim on our attention. But, in truth, 
Rhetoric is connected by community of object- 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 2/9 

matter rather with the art of Dialectic, as exhi- 
bited in the Topics of Aristotle and the Probable 
Syllogisms of the Scholastic Logic, than with the 
formal science as treated of in the present work. 
Its relation to the latter is only by way of appli- 
cation, inasmuch as logical forms may be applied 
in rhetorical exercises ; — a relation which reduces 
it to a level with any other employment of the 
Logica uteris. With Psychology, indeed, its con- 
nection is far more intimate, but on the opposite 
side from that by which the same science is 
related to Logic. Logic, as the science of the 
laws and products of the understanding, is related 
to Psychology through the medium of the spe- 
culative and discursive faculties. Rhetoric, as 
concerned with the movement of the will, is 
related on the side of the emotional and prac- 
tical faculties, and is thus correctly described by 
Aristotle as an offshoot of Dialectic and Moral 
Philosophy. 

On the other hand, Psychology, Metaphysics, 
and Grammar, are intimately connected with the 
faculties, the laws, and the instruments of the 
universal process of thought, — a connection which 
has been recognised with more or less clearness 
from the origin of Logic to the present time. 
The Categories, from the days of Aristotle down- 
wards, have been disputed ground between Logic 
and Metaphysics, and are treated of by the 
Stagirite himself in connection with both sciences. 



280 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

The treatise irepl epfirjvtla?, whose title, sorely 
misnomered by various translators, might be 
adequately expressed in English by, "of Lan- 
guage as the interpretation of Thought*," is, in 
the early portion, devoted to grammatical defini- 
tions and distinctions. Psychology also, though 
less prominently introduced, claims her share in 
the multifarious matter of the Organon; in the 
account of the processes of sensation, memory, 
and experience, as subsidiary to induction. 

Were we indeed to start from the whole Organon 
of Aristotle, as an uniform treatise on a single 
subject, it would be difficult to accommodate its 
contents to any modern classification of the mental 
sciences. But it may fairly be questioned, whether 
even the authority of the philosopher himself can 
be adduced in support of such a proceeding. While 
we cannot help admitting, with Sir William Hamil- 
ton b , that the incorrect notions which have pre- 
vailed, and still prevail, in regard to the nature and 
province of Logic, are mainly to be attributed to 
the authority of the father of the science, it may 
be doubted how far that authority has been put 
to a legitimate use by his followers. The same 

* For various interpretations of Interpretation, see M. St 
Hilaire, De la Logique d'Aristote, p. i. ch. 10. The version 
given in the text corresponds to that by Isidore of Seville : 
" Omnis elocutio conceptee rei interpres est : inde periher- 
meniam nominant quam interpretationem nos appellamus." 

* Discussions, p. 141. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 281 

eminent critic to whom we have just referred has 
observed in another place, that there is required 
for the metaphysician not less imagination than 
for the poet; that it may, in fact, be doubted 
whether Homer or Aristotle possessed this faculty 
in greater vigour 6 . The two authors here placed 
in juxtaposition may be compared in more respects 
than that of their mental powers. The influence 
of Homer in Poetry has been similar to that of 
Aristotle in Philosophy ; yet, while, from the 
Father of Criticism to the present day, there has 
never been wanting a champion to maintain against 
all impugners the unity of design of the Iliad, 
and its exact relation to a beginning, a middle, and 
an end, the primary argument of this " one entire 
and perfect chrysolite" has been almost as much 
disputed among critics as the question of the 
definition of Logic. Different portions of the poem 
have been pronounced genuine or spurious, accord- 
ing to this or that conception of the poet's design ; 
and, finally, it has even been maintained that the 
model of all succeeding Epics is little more than a 
fortuitous concourse of atoms, the fragments of 
distinct rhapsodists. The Organon of Aristotle 
has had a similar fate. Various have been the 
conjectures concerning its design and method. 
Portions have been at different times regarded as 
logical, as grammatical, as metaphysical ; nor have 
there been wanting critics to deny the genuineness 
c Heid'3 Works, p. 99. 



282 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

of this or that part. The parallel might be carried 
further. The different portions of the Iliad are 
said to have been collected and arranged in the 
time of Pisistratus, about 340 years after the date 
assigned by Herodotus, (rightly or wrongly,) to 
the birth of the poet ; and the writings of Aristotle 
are generally supposed to have received their present 
form and arrangement at the hands of Andronicus 
of Rhodes, a philosopher who flourished about 
three centuries later than the Stagirite. I am not 
indeed aware that any critic has been bold enough 
to maintain a thoroughly Wolfian hypothesis of 
the origin of the Organon ; and yet there are not 
wanting grounds on which a not very different 
theory might be supported ; not indeed as regards 
the authorship, but certainly as regards the unity 
of design of the work. The title by which the 
collected treatises are known is undoubtedly of 
recent origin ; it is not found in Aristotle himself, 
nor in any of his earlier commentators ; and, as far 
as existing evidence can determine, -it appears not 
to have been in common use before the fifteenth 
century d . The several treatises themselves are 
invariably mentioned by their author as distinct 
works under distinct titles ; and even after the time of 
Andronicus, commentaries were generally written, 
not on the Organon as a whole, but separately on 
its constituent parts. If from the books we turn to 
the matters of which they treat, the result is the 

d St. Hilaire, De la Logique d y Ari$tote, vol. i. p. 19. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 283 

same. Logic, as -the name of an Art or Science, 
does not once occur in the writings of Aristotle ; 
and the cognate adjective and adverb are used in a 
peculiar and much more restricted sense than that 
which has subsequently been given to them. The 
names sanctioned by the Philosopher himself, such 
as Analytic and Dialectic, are commensurate with 
portions only of the Organon ; the division of 
Philosophy into Logic, Physics, and Ethics, adopted 
by the Stoics, and sometimes attributed (on ques- 
tionable grounds) to Plato, receives no sanction 
from the Stagirite : indeed, he adopts a classifi- 
cation in many respects at variance with it, dis- 
tinguishing theoretical philosophy from practical 
and productive, and dividing the first into three 
branches, Physics, Mathematics, and Theology e . 

Leaving then altogether the question of autho- 
rity, and adopting the formal view of Logic taken 
in the preceding pages, as the only one which 
promises to secure for the science what it has so 
long needed, an exact definition and a determined 

c Afetaph. v. 1. Mr. Karslake (Aids, p. 10.) speaks of the 
Organon as presenting so coherent a system, that the assertion 
that it contains a few only of Aristotle's logical works is 
doubtful. To me there appears little more of coherence 
than may naturally be expected in distinct writings of the 
same author on any question of Grammar, Analytic, Dialectic, 
or Rhetoric. And, as far as we can conjecture from existing 
evidence, it is most probable that the several books were 
written in the reverse order of that in which they are now 
arranged. See Burgersdyck, Inst. Log. Praef. Fries, System 
der Logik, p. 15. 



284 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

field of inquiry, I shall proceed to examine the 
relation in which Logic, as thus exhibited, stands 
towards the cognate sciences of Psychology, 
Grammar, and Metaphysics. 

Of Psychology something has already been said 
in the earlier portion of the present Essay. Logic 
deals with the products of the several thinking 
acts, with concepts, with judgments, with reason- 
ings, as, according to certain assumed laws of 
thinking, they ought to be or not to be f . It is 
competent to test the validity of all such products, 
in so far as they comply or not with the conditions 
of pure thought ; leaving to this or that branch of 
material science to determine how far the same 
products of thought are guaranteed by the testi- 
mony of this or that special experience. Thus it 
accepts, as logically valid, all such concepts, judg- 
ments, and reasonings, as do not, directly or in- 
directly, imply contradictions ; pronouncing them 
thus far to be legitimate as thoughts, that they do 
not in ultimate analysis destroy themselves. That 
rhey will be also accepted upon an appeal to expe- 
rience, it does not decide; it only recommends 
them as qualified for further examination. It is 



f •* Die ganze reine Logik hat es mit Verk&ltnissen des 
Gedachten, des Inhalts unserer Vorstellungen (obgleich nicht 
speciell mit diesem Inhalte selbst) zu thun ; aber uberall 
nirgends mit der Thatigheit des Denkens, nirgends mit der 
psychologischen, also metaphysischen, Moglichkeit desselben." 
Herbart, Psychologic ah Wissenschaft. Th. II. §. lifl. 



PROLEGOxMENA LOGICA. 285 

thus competent to determine the possible existence 
of a class of objects corresponding to a given 
concept, the necessary truth of an analytical, and 
the possible truth of a synthetical judgment, the 
formal validity of a conclusion as necessarily fol- 
lowing from certain assumed premises. Questions 
concerning the real existence of this or that class 
of objects, the actual truth of a synthetical judg- 
ment, or of a conclusion out of relation to its given 
premises, it sends up for judgment to the tribunal 
of Experience. 

As Experience decides on the relations of any 
given product of thought to the actual phenomena 
presented by this or that object of intuition, so 
Psychology decides on its relations to the actual 
constitution of the human mind. Why it is that 
the laws of pure thinking extend thus far and no 
further; — what are the mental processes preliminary 
and subsidiary to thought, and the nature of the 
thinking act itself as giving rise to the logical 
products ; — whence arises the phenomenon of ille- 
gitimate thinking; — the nature and origin of various 
impediments and errors to which thinking and 
other mental acts are subjected in mankind; — the 
relation of the several mental acts to one or more 
faculties of mind, and the value of such distinction 
as absolute or relative, implying a notional only, 
or an actual separability; — in short, all inquiries 
into the actual phenomena of man's mental con- 



286 PROLEGOMENA LOG1CA. 

stitution and their explanation form the object- 
matter of Psychology g . 

From this it appears, that Psychology, as well 
as Physical Science, is, in the widest sense of the 
term, empirical. It inquires, that is to say, what 
are the actual phenomena of the several acts and 
states of the human mind, and the actual laws or 
conditions on which they depend; and in this 
sense the laws of thought themselves are empirical 
and within the province of Psychology ; inasmuch 
a° it is a matter of fact and experience that men 
'lo reason according to them. Logic, on the other 
hand, can in no sense be called empirical, inasmuch 
as the actual constitution, whether of the world 
within, or of the world without, is assumed indeed 
and implied in its researches, but in no respect 
described or investigated. We are not to ascertain, 
as a matter of fact, that men do reason in this or 
that form, as governed by this or that law ; but, on 
the assumption of certain laws, we are to determine 
a priori the forms which legitimate thinking ought 
to exhibit, whether mankind in general do comply 
with them or not\ Logic is indeed ultimately to 
be referred to the test of experience ; but only in 

* Much of this is distinguished by Kant as Applied Logic, 
which however he allows to be more properly referred to 
Psychology. 

h Kant, Logik Einleitung II. 4. Drobisch, Neus Darstellung 
der Logik, §. 9. 



PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 287 

respect of its conformity with facts without its 
province, not in respect of the coherence of its 
parts within. So far as it implies that, as a matter 
of fact, men do reason in syllogisms, so far its 
pretensions may be tested by reference to the 
empirical truths of Psychology. So far as it asserts 
that the legitimate forms of the syllogism are such 
and such, it is simply deductive a priori, and 
necessarily valid for any class of thinking beings 
whose laws are such as it presupposes. An empi- 
rical science may contain much partial truth, though 
omitting many important phenomena and erro- 
neously accounting for many which it recognises. 
It offers much, therefore, for enlarged experience 
gradually to supply and correct. An a priori 
Science, like Logic, is tested by experience only 
with reference to its fundamental hypotheses. If 
these are accepted, they carry with them the whole 
superstructure of details. If these are rejected, 
every portion of the science falls to the ground 
along with them. 

But though Logic and Psychology have thus 
each their respective provinces and methods, it 
cannot be too often repeated, that neither can be 
taught as a science efficiently and satisfactorily, 
unless in connection with the other. We may 
learn by rote a multitude of logical rules, and 
fondly imagine that we are acquiring an art 
which will enable us to think ; — a course of Logic 
being in fact about as necessary for making men 



288 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

thinkers, as a course of Ethical Philosophy for 
making them honest, or a course of Optics for 
enabling them to see. Or we may analyse in. 
dictione and extra dictionem all sorts of imaginary 
fallacies propounded by imaginary sophists, and 
dream that we are forging an impenetrable pano- 
ply against all the deceits of the world;— as if we 
could bind men down in heavy securities to lie 
and cheat by rule/in order that they may be 
detected in due course of art. Or we may draw 
up syllogisms in orthodox mood and figure, and 
babble about Laws of Thought, and never dream 
of asking what is the nature of Thought as a 
process, and with what elements does it combine 
in the actual formation of this or that compound. 
Or, on the other hand, starting from confused or 
erroneous notions of the nature and powers of the 
human mind, we may blame Logic for not accom- 
plishing what no science can accomplish, and 
deem its whole contents a tissue of jargon and 
imposture, because it is neither able to open a 
Royal Road to the Encyclopaedia, nor to convert 
natural folly into supernatural wisdom. It may 
safely be asserted, that nine tenths of the mistaken 
judgments to which Logic has been subjected on 
the part of friends and adversaries, unreasonable 
eulogy on the one hand, equally unreasonable 
abuse or contempt on the other, have been owing 
to its treatment out of relation to Psychology, — to 
its having been expounded and studied without 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIGA. 289 

any preliminary attempt to ascertain what are the 
nature and limits of the thinking faculty and what 
character its laws and products ought to exhibit 
in conformity with the constitution of the human 
mind. 

With Grammar, Logic is connected through the 
medium of the universal instrument of thought, 
Language. The practical necessity of this instru- 
ment for the formation as well as for the com- 
munication of thought, has been noticed already : 
it remains to inquire in what different ways this 
their common object is dealt with by Logic and 
Grammar respectively. Universal Grammar, with 
which alone we are concerned, (the history and 
idiomatic peculiarities of special languages being 
obviously unconnected with general Logic,) has 
been happily defined as " the science of the rela- 
tions which the constituent parts of speech bear 
to each other in significant combination V It is 
thus concerned with Language primarily and essen- 
tially; Logic, secondarily and accidentally. The 
former has given certain articulate sounds, to find 
their relation to certain supposed counterparts in 
thought. The latter has given to determine the 
necessary relations of concepts to each other ; but 
in so doing it is compelled secondarily to exhibit 

1 Sir John Stoddart, Philosophy of Language, pt. i. p. 21. 
Universal Grammar is properly a science, particular Gram* 
mar an art, as is observed by Du Marsais, Encyclopedia, Art. 
Grammaire, p. 842. 

U 



290 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

the corresponding relations of the sounds by which 
concepts are represented. 

The two sciences differ also in the extent of 
their provinces. Logic considers language simply 
as the instrument and representative of thought. 
Grammar will include its relation to intuitions and » 
emotions and every state of consciousness which 
finds its expression in speech k . Logic considers 
language only in so far as it is indispensable to 
thought, and accordingly analyses speech only to 
that point at which it is representative of the 
simplest element of thought, the concept. Any 
parts into which a concept may be divided, which 
are not themselves concepts, are beyond its pro- 
vince, as not being representative of a complete 
thought, nor competent instruments alone for the - 
performance of an act of thinking. Hence all 
syncategorematic words, as not being per se signi- 
ficant, are not recognised by Logic. 

In Grammar, the unit of thought is a judgment, 
both terms being necessarily represented by words. 
Hence the unit of speech in Grammar is a pro- 
position ; the office of the subordinate parts of 
speech being to limit or connect the primary parts 
as subjects or predicates of a given assertion 1 . 



k See Harris, Hermes, ch. iii. 

1 For a further illustration of this doctrine, not universally 
held by Grammarians, the reader is referred to an article by 
the present author, on the Philosophy of Language, in the 
North British Review, No. 27. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 291 

Such connections and limitations may be more 
conveniently effected by the invention of words 
expressive of relations between concepts, than 
by the use of distinct signs for every new con- 
cept resulting from such relations: this however 
is one of the luxuries only, not one of the 
necessaries of language, and, as such, is not 
noticed by Logic. Viewed simply as an element 
of thought, it is indifferent whether the same 
concept be expressed by a combination of sub- 
stantive and adjective, as in the English "four- 
footed beast," or the German " vierfiissiges Thier," 
by the interposition of a preposition, as in the 
French "b&te a quatre pieds," or by a single 
substantive, such as the classical equivalent, 
" quadruped." 

In Logic, the unit of thought is also a judg- 
ment, but not one which requires a verbal repre- 
sentative of both its constituent parts. Conception, 
the simplest act of thought, consists in the referring 
a given concept to possible objects as imagined. 
Here there is, in the psychological sense of the 
term, a judgment ; i. e. a consciousness of the pre- 
sence of the objects in thought; but that con- 
sciousness does not form an additional concept, 
nor require as its necessary exponent a second 
verbal sign. Hence the unit of speech in Logic 
is a term ; such being a sufficient verbal instrument 
for the performance of the first and simplest act of 
thought. 

u2 



292 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

With reference to the second operation of 
thought, judgment, wherein the two sciences 
come most nearly into contact, the following 
distinction is important. Grammar considers 
words objectively, as signs of things. Hence the 
distinction of tenses, according as the remote or 
represented object is considered as contempora- 
neous with, or distant in time from, the speaker. 
Logic considers words subjectively, as signs of 
thoughts. Hence the only logical tense is the 
present, the immediate or presented objects being 
necessarily contemporaneous with the act of con- 
sciousness by which they are now thought in 
conjunction 01 . 

It is sometimes said that Logic recognises two 
only of the grammatical parts of speech, the noun 
and the verb, forming the two terms of the pro- 
position, with and without time". It would be 

m See above, p. 72. 

n " Grammatici enim, considerantes vocum figuras, octo 
orationis partes annumerant. Philosophi vero, quorum omnis 
de nomine verboque tractatus in significatione est constitute 
duas tan turn orationis partes esse docuerunt: quicquid plenam 
sigaificadonem tenet, siquidem sine tempore significat, nomen 
yocantes ; verbum vero, si cum tempore." Boethius, Int. ad 
Syll. (p. 501.) " Et sciendum est quod Dialecticus solum 
ponit duas partes orationis, scilicet nomen et verbum. Alias 
autem omnes appellat syncategorematicas, id est consigni- 
ficativas." Petr. Hisp. Sum. Log. Tr. i. Here, as in the D$ 
Interpretations of Aristotle, the type of the logical proposition 
is the form distinguished as secundi adjacmti*, the verb being 
neither the copula alone, nor the predicate alone, but the 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 293 

more correct to say that Logic, viewing language 
in a different light from Grammar, and analysing 
on a different principle, does not recognise the 
grammatical parts of speech at all. The simplest 
elements of a complete assertion in Grammar are 
the noun and the verb ; the latter being a com- 
bination of attribute and assertion. Hence the 
grammatical type of a proposition is that distin- 
guished in scholastic language as secundi adfacentisf 
and to this form, all varieties produced by the 
accidents of particular languages must, in Universal 
Grammar, be virtually reduced p . In Logic, on 
the other hand, for the purposes of opposition 
and conversion, as well as from the necessity of 
assigning a quantity to both terms of the pro- 
position, the type is required to be of the form 



combination of the two, however expressed. A neglect of 
this has misled many commentators and critics on Aristotle, 
from Ammonius to the present day. 

" In all languages there are only two sorts of words 
which are necessary for the communication of our thoughts, 
the noun and the verb." Tooke, Div. of Parley, ch. 8. 

p Hence it follows that the copula is, grammatically speak- 
ing, no verb at all. It fulfils none of the functions of that 
part of speech, for it implies no attribute, and cannot, when 
united to a subject, form a complete assertion. In such a 
sentence as M the meadows are white with frost," the true 
verb is not the copula, but the copula with the adjective, are 
white, as may be seen by substituting the Latin, " prata can is 
albicant pruinis." Whether this can be expressed in one word 
or not, is an accidenfcof this or that language, and is beyond 
the province of Universal Grammar. 



294 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

tertii adjacentis ; the subject and predicate being 
regarded as two given concepts, the objects of 
which are identified or distinguished by means of 
the copula. Hence, in every case in which the 
proposition is exhibited in its logical form, the 
grammatical verb will correspond, not to any 
single word in the proposition, but to a com- 
bination formed of the copula and the quantified 
predicate, — to all, in short, that is asserted of the 
subject. The predicate concept may thus, in 
different points of view, answer to two distinct 
grammatical relations. Taken by itself, it is a 
noun, identified in certain respects with another 
noun as the subject. Taken in its predicate 
character, it forms a portion of the verb, the 
remainder being supplied by the copula. Those 
logicians who maintain the copula to be the 
logical verb, confound the accidents of particular 
languages with the essentials of language in general 
as a sign of thought. With them the verb is 
determined solely by the subordinate feature of 
its personal inflection, not by the primary charac- 
teristic of its signification. 

With regard to the relation of Logic to Meta- 
physics, some preliminary verbal explanation is 
necessary, owing to the various senses in which 
the latter term has been used. Among modern 
philosophers, empirical psychology, which the 
ancients regarded as a branch of physics' 1 , is 

i See Hamilton on Reid, p. 216. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 295 

frequently classified as metaphysical. Thus the 
contributions of Reid and Stewart to the inductive 
science of the human mind are not unfrequently 
spoken of as Scotch Metaphysics ; a nomenclature 
which the latter of these philosophers has in some 
degree sanctioned by his own writings'. Such a 
classification is, however, inconsistent with the 
fundamental doctrines of the Scottish School, 
It has been before observed that one of their 
leading principles is, that in the investigation of 
mind as well as of matter, phenomena alone are 
the legitimate objects of science; the substance and 
essential nature of both being beyond the reach 
of human faculties. Whereas Metaphysics has 
from the earliest days been distinguished as the 
Science of Being as Being, in opposition to all 
inquiries into the phenomena exhibited by this or 
that class of objects". How. far such a problem 
is capable of solution is another question ; but the 
mere propounding of it implies an object totally 

r For instance : " Nothing contributes so much to form 
this talent, as the study of Metaphysics ; not the absurd 
Metaphysics of the Schools, but that study which has the 
operations of the mind for its object." Elements, vol. i. ch. 2. 
In other places, Stewart has noticed this phraseology as a 
loose use of language, and has attempted to account for it. 
But the term ought never to have been used at all. 

• Arist. Metaph. iii. 1. *Eoru' eniaTqtu) ns rj Bcvpti t6 hv § hv koi 
rh rovry virdpxovra naff avrd. The name Metaphysics is of much 
later date, but its object has always been regarded as identical 
with that distinguished by Aristotle as First Philosophy, or 
Theology. Cf. Wolf, Ontologia, §. 1. 



296 PROLEGOMENA LOGIC A. 

distinct from that of an inquiry into the faculties 
and laws of the human mind. 

The object of the older Metaphysics has been 
distinguished in all ages as the one and the real, 
in opposition to the many and the apparent*. 
Matter, for example, as perceived by the senses, 
is a combination of distinct and heterogeneous 
qualities, discernible, some by sight, some by smell, 
some by touch, some by hearing. What is the 
thing itself, the subject and owner of these several 
qualities, and yet not identical with any one of 
them ? What is it by virtue of which these several 
attributes constitute or belong to one and the 
same thing? Mind, in like manner, presents to 
consciousness so many distinct states and ope- 
rations and feelings. What is the nature of that 
one mind, of which all these are so many modifi- 
cations ? The inquiry may be carried higher still. 
Can we attain to any single conception of Being 
in general, to which both Mind and Matter are 
subordinate, and from which the essence of each 
may be deduced u ? 

Ontology, or Metaphysics proper, as thus ex- 
plained, may be treated in two different methods, 
according as its exponent is a believer in to ov 
or in to ovra, in one or in many fundamental 
principles of things. In the former, all objects 

1 Arist. Metaph. iii. 2. 

u Wolf, Phil. Rat. Disc. Pral §.73. Herbart, AUgemeins 
Metaphytik, § 27. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 297 

whatever are regarded as phenomenal modifi- 
cations of one and the same Substance, or as 
self-determined effects of one and the same Cause. 
The necessary result of this method is to reduce 
all metaphysical philosophy to a Rational Theology, 
the one Substance or Cause being identified with 
the Absolute or the Deity. According to the 
latter method, which professes to treat of different 
classes of Beings independently, Metaphysics will 
contain three coordinate branches of inquiry, 
Rational Cosmology, Rational Psychology, and 
Rational Theology \ The first aims at a know- 
ledge of the real essence, as distinguished from 
the phenomena, of the material world ; the second 
discusses the nature and origin, as distinguished 
from the faculties and affections, of the human soul 
and of other finite spirits * ; the third aspires to 
comprehend God Himself, as cognisable d priori 
in his essential nature, apart from the indirect and 
relative indications furnished by his works, as in 
Natural Theology, or by his word, as in Revealed 

v Herbart, Lehrbuch zur PhUosophie, §.7. Allgemeine Meta- 
phyrik, §.31. Anm. 

* " Man findet bier die Trennung der empirischen von der 
rationalen Psychologie ; die erste durchlauft die einzelnen 
sogenannten Seelenvormdgen ; die andre spricht iiber Natur 
und Ursprung der Seele, iiber Unsterblichkeit, Zustand nach 
dem Tode, Unterschied zwiscben den Seelen der Menschen, 
der Tbiere, und den boberen Geistern." Herbart, Allgemeine 
Metaphysik, §. 29. For a curious account of theories and 
theorists in rational psychology, see Burton, Anatomy of 
Melancholy, P. i. sect. i. Mem. 2. Subs. 9. 



298 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

Religion. These three objects of metaphysical 
inquiry, God, the World, the Mind, correspond 
to Kant's three Ideas of the Pure Reason ; and 
the object of his Critique is to shew that, in 
relation to all three, the attainment of a system 
of speculative philosophy is impossible. 

The former of these methods is the bolder and 
the more consequent; and, moreover, the only 
one which can be consistently followed by those 
who believe in the possibility of a Philosophy 
of the Absolute. For, a plurality of real objects 
being once admitted as the highest reach attain- 
able by human faculties, these must necessarily be 
regarded as related to, and limited by, each other. 
Accordingly, this method has been followed by 
the hardiest and most consistent reasoners on 
Metaphysical questions, by Spinoza under the 
older form of speculation, and by Hegel after the 
Kantian revolution. But thus treated, Metaphysical 
speculation necessarily leads to Pantheism ; and 
Pantheism, at this elevation, is for all religious 
purposes equivalent to Atheism 7 . The method is 

y It has of late been a favourite criticism of Spinoza to say, 
with Hegel, that his system is not Atheism but Acosmism : 
and this is true in a speculative point of view. But if I allow 
of no God distinct from the aggregate of the Universe, myself 
included, what object have I of worship ? Or if, according to 
the later manifestation of Pantheism, the Divine Mind is but 
the sum total of every finite consciousness, my own included, 
what religious relation between God and man is compatible 
with the theory? And, accordingly, the Pantheism of Hegel 




PROLEGOMENA LOOICA. 



thus condemned by its results ; and the condemn- 
ation will not be retracted upon a psychological 
examination of its principles. Its fundamental 
conception is not thought, but its negation. The 
Thought which is identified with Being in general, 
is not my thought, nor any form of consciousness 
which I can personally realize \ My whole con- 
sciousness is subject to the conditions of limitation 
and relation of subject and object. A system which 
commences by denying this relation, starts with an 
assumption concerning the possible character of 
an intelligence other than human, and conse- 
quently incapable of verification by any human 
being. Yet the system is the product of a human 
thinker, and addressed to human disciples. 

The second method of Metaphysical inquiry is 
less presumptuous, though perhaps also less con- 
sistent. It starts with the assumption of a plurality 
of Beings ; thus virtually abandoning the Philo- 
sophy of the Absolute. This plurality is primarily 
manifested in the contrast between the Subject 
and the Object of Consciousness, between self and 

ha3 found its natural development in the Atheism of Feuer 
bach. 

* This is expressly stated by an eminent disciple of Hegel, 
who professes to discover in Aristotle's Metaphysics an anti- 
cipation of Hegel ianism. " La pensee que nous venons de 
decrire est la pensee absolue. II ne s'agit pas ici de la pensee 
subjective, qui est une fonction psychologique restreinte a 
Tame humaine." Michelet, Examen de In Mctaphysique 
d'Artitote, p. 276. 



300 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

not-self, as related to and limiting each other. 
But the consciousness of the relative and limited 
suggests by contrast the idea of the absolute and 
unlimited; and thus gives rise to three distinct 
branches of metaphysical speculation; the ego 
being identified with the substance of the human 
soul, as distinguished from its phenomenal modes ; 
the non-ego being identified with the reality which 
underlies the phenomena of the sensible world; 
and the absolute or unconditioned with the Deity*. 
Of the last of these three branches, that commonly 
known as Rational Theology, which endeavours 
from the conception of God as an absolutely 
perfect Being to deduce the necessary attributes of 
the Divine Nature, I shall say nothing in this place. 
The question of the relation of the human mind to 
religious intuitions is one of the most delicate and 
the most difficult in Psychology, and to treat it 
adequately would require a separate volume. On 
the two latter branches of Metaphysics, which 
Kant regarded as equally unattainable with the 
first, something has been said in a former chapter. 
It was the opinion of Kant, as well as of Reid and 
Stewart, that the subject of mental as well as of 
bodily attributes is not an immediate object of 
consciousness; — in other words, that in mind as 

» These three branches of Metaphysics have been consi- 
dered somewhat more in detail, by the present Author, in the 
Article Metaphysics in the eighth edition of the Encyclopedia 
Bxitannica, vol. xiv. pp. 604 sqq. 615 sqq. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 301 

well as in body, Substance and Unity are not 
presented, but represented. Those who accept this 
doctrine are only consistent in regarding meta- 
physical inquiry in all its branches as a delusion. 
But a philosophical examination is incomplete, 
unless it not only points out the truth, but like- 
wise explains the cause of error. The weak point 
of the above doctrine is, that it fails in explaining, 
on psychological grounds, how the supposed 
delusion originated. Experience furnishes, if not 
the cause, at least the occasion of every object of 
our cognition ; and, unless upon the supposition 
that a knowledge of Unity and Substance is 
immediately given in one phase at least of con- 
sciousness, it is impossible to account for its in- 
vention in any. The multifarious phenomena of 
interna] as well m of external sense present, on 
the opposite hypothesis, nothing in any respect 
analogous to the substance to which they are 
attributed, — nothing that can operate in any way 
even as the occasional cause from which the 
existence of such a substance could be suggested. 
Metaphysical philosophy may contain much that 
is groundless, much that is deceptive; but the 
whole analogy of deception and hypothesis in 
other branches of speculation leads to the con- 
viction, that it can only arise from rashly 
transferring to new relations ideas which are 
given in some relation or other. 

Instead, therefore, of considering the whole of 



302 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

Metaphysics to be based on a delusion, and its 
ultimate destiny to be utter extinction, we shall 
probably come nearer to the truth, if we regard 
its unsound portions as based on a perverted 
intuition, and anticipate that it will be finally 
absorbed in that science to which the intuition 
in its original relation properly belongs. If, for 
example, it should ultimately be made manifest, 
that to the material world we have no relation, 
except through the various phenomena of sense ; 
but that in the mental world, Self, as well as the 
phenomena of self, is an immediate presentation of 
consciousness, it will follow, that in the former we 
have no ground for maintaining the existence of 
things other than the phenomena presented ; and 
that consequently, in this department, Ontology, 
as distinct from Phenomenology^ occupied solely 
with chimeras of our own invention : whereas 
Psychology, being called upon to extend its in- 
quiries from the phenomena of self to that of 
which they are phenomena, will legitimately in- 
clude the remaining portion of those problems 
which have hitherto been appropriated to Meta- 
physics. 

But this question cannot be discussed here. 
My present concern is only with the relation 
supposed to exist between Metaphysics, as above 
described, and Logic. In the earlier form of 
Metaphysics, which prevailed from Aristotle ^ to 
Kant, an intimate connection was supposed^to 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 303 

exist between the two sciences. The Principles 
of Contradiction and Excluded Middle, which 
have been exhibited in a former chapter as Laws 
of Thought, are found in the metaphysical as 
well as in the logical writings of Aristotle b ; and 
the former, together with that of Sufficient 
Reason, is placed by Wolf, the immediate pre- 
decessor of Kant, at the head of Ontology . But 
after the Kantian Critique, this association was 
no longer possible. Kant shewed clearly that, 
without synthetical judgments a priori, Meta- 
physical science is impossible : and this at once 
put an end to all attempts which had hitherto 
been made to elicit a science of Being from the 
laws of formal thinking which are the foundation 
of Logic. The two sciences, thus divorced, be- 
come apparently united again in the system of 
Hegel; but the union is apparent only. For 
the Hegelian Logic is based, not on an acknow- 
ledgment, but on a defiance of the Laws of 
Thought. It is a Logic of the Reason, of which 
the fundamental position is, that the laws of the 
Understanding are applicable to finite objects 

b For the principle of Contradiction, see Arist. Metaph. iii. 
8. x. 5. Anal. Pr. ii. 2. Anal. Post. i. J J. For that of Ex- 
cluded Middle, see Metaph. iii. 7. ix. 4. Anal Pr. i. 1. Anal. 
Post. i. 2. ii. 18. They may also be traced to Plato See 
Phado, p. 103. Republic, iv. p. 436. Sophist, p. 350, 252. 
They are given more explicitly in the Second Alcibiades, 
p. 139; but this dialogue is generally considered spurious. 

e Cf. Wolf, Ontologia, §. 27, 29, 56, 71, 498. 



304 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

only, and that Thought in relation to the infinite 
is free from their dominion. Logic thus returns, 
as regards its object, not to the Aristotelian 
Analytic, but to the Platonic Dialectic, as a 
science of the Real and the Absolute; though 
the method pursued is opposed to Plato as much 
as to Aristotle*. On the other hand, in pro- 
portion as we adhere more closely to the formal 
view of Logic, the separation of that science from 
Metaphysics becomes more complete. An eminent 
advocate of that view, who is far from adopting 
Kant's opinion of the impossibility of Metaphysics, 
expresses his conviction of the very different objects 
and methods of the two sciences, by likening the 
union of Metaphysics and Logic to a lecture on 
the Integral Calculus and the Rule of Three*. 
And there is much truth implied in this some- 
what overstrained comparison. With formal Logic, 
Metaphysics stands rather in opposition than in 
connection. The former is the science of the 
ultimate laws of the thinking subject ; the latter, 
of the ultimate realities of the objects about which 
we think. 

Metaphysical inquiry, if capable of a successful 
prosecution, may furnish a criticism or explanation 
of certain forms of thought assumed by Logic ; for 

d On the contrast between the methods of Plato and Hegel, 
see Trendelenburg, Loguche Untemichungen, i. p. 89. 

• Herbart, Lehrbuch zur Philosopkie, Vorrede zur zweUm 
Ausgabe. 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 305 

a form of thought implies a certain relation between 
given objects, — a relation which might be further 
elucidated if the nature of objects in general could 
be satisfactorily determined. Thus we have seen 
that the form of logical judgments and reasonings 
contains by implication those negative notions of 
substance and cause, the investigation of which is 
the special object of metaphysical inquiries. The 
science of Metaphysics, therefore, if it could be 
constructed on a solid basis, would furnish a 
criticism of those principles which are tacitly 
acknowledged in every mental process. But for 
the purposes of formal Logic, such a criticism is 
not needed. It is sufficient for that science to 
accept the principles in the obscure form in which 
they are acknowledged by common thought and 
common language ; especially as, being indifferently 
implied in sound and unsound thinking, they furnish 
no criterion by which we can distinguish the one 
from the other. 

This view is confirmed by the history of "philo- 
sophy down to the present time. While Logic, from 
the days of Aristotle, has been in possession of a 
scientific method and a definite contents, whose 
truth, whatever opinion may be entertained of their 
utility, no critic has succeeded in impugning, 
Metaphysics has from the same period been equally 
conspicuous as the changing Proteus of philosophy, 
whose concealed wisdom, sought after by ceaseless 
efforts of strength and countless varieties of artifice, 



306 PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 

has invariably eluded the inquiries of his wor- 
shippers. The union of the two, so far from con- 
tributing to the scientific completeness of the 
former, has only served to mar its beauty and 
simplicity by extralogical details, and to misrepre- 
sent its true purpose and value by obscure intima- 
tions of deeper mysteries lying hid beneath its 
apparent surface. On the other hand, in propor- 
tion as the true character of Logic as a science 
has become better known and appreciated, it has 
gradually been separated from Metaphysics, and 
been associated with Psychology. As the science 
of the laws of thought, it is absurd to expect that 
its object and character can be rightly estimated by 
those who are unacquainted with the nature and 
powers of the understanding itself, — with its re- 
lation to the cognate faculties and operations of 
the human mind, — with its legitimate province and 
duties. It is only in this connection that we can 
hope to see Logic finally freed from the unsightly 
excrescences with which it has hitherto been de- 
formed, yet still retaining a clearly defined portion 
of valuable scientific truth, and cultivated in a spirit 
of enlightened appreciation and criticism, equally 
removed from the blind veneration of the idolater 
and the blind hostility of the iconoclast It is 
only in this connection that the boundaries of the 
two sciences can be clearly marked out, and those 
portions of psychological matter and phraseology 
whose random introduction has contributed so 



PROLEGOMENA LOGICA. 307 

much to deface and obscure the pages of logical 
treatises, can become of inestimable value as part 
and parcel of a cognate and complementary, but 
by no means identical study. And if, in this asso- 
ciation, it becomes necessary to abase considerably 
the once towering ambition of the Art of Arts and 
Science of Sciences, the loss is more than compen- 
sated by the substitution of a humbler indeed, but 
more attainable and more serviceable aim, — the 
knowledge of the distinct provinces to be assigned 
to Thought and Experience respectively, of the 
true value of each within its province, and its 
worse than uselessness beyond; — the knowledge 
of ourselves and our faculties, of our true intel- 
lectual wealth, the nature of its tenure, and the 
conditions of its lawful increase. By such cultiva- 
tion alone can we hope to see Logic finally ex- 
hibited in its true character and estimated at its 
true value; neither encumbered with fictitious 
wealth by a spurious utilitarianism, nor unprofit- 
ably buried in the earth of an isolated and barren 
formalism. 



x 2 



APPENDIX. 



Note A, p. 88. 

It is much to be regretted that Dr. Whewell, who has 
made good use of Kantian principles in many parts of his 
" Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences," has not more 
accurately observed Kant's distinction between the neces- 
sary laws under which all men think, and the contingent 
laws under which certain men think of certain things. 
His neglect of this distinction has given a seeming ad- 
vantage to the empirical arguments of his antagonist, 
Mr. Mill, who is thus enabled apparently to decide the 
question at issue by what is in reality no more than an 
argumentum ad hominem. Thus Dr. Whewell says of 
certain discoveries of physical laws ; " So complete has 
been the victory of truth in most of these instances, that 
at present we can hardly imagine the struggle to have 
been necessary. The very essence of these triumphs is 
that they lead us to regard the views we reject as not only 
false, but inconceivable." In this relation, it is obvious 
that the inconceivability is, with reference to the human 
mind, merely contingent, and relative to the particular 
studies of particular men. Before the days of Copernicus, 
men could not conceive the apparent motion of the sun 
on the heliocentric hypothesis: the progress of science 
has reversed the difficulty; but the progress of science 



310 * APPENDIX. 

itself is contingent on the will of certain men to apply 
themselves to it. By thus endeavouring to exalt inductive 
laws of matter into b priori laws of mind, Dr. Whewell 
has unintentionally contributed to give an undue plausi- 
bility to the opposite theory, which reduces all laws of 
mind into the mere associations of this or that material 
experience. 

But on psychological grounds it would seem as if the 
point of separation between & priori principlesand empirical 
generalizations ought not to be very difficult of deter- 
mination. The difference is not one of degree but of 
kind ; and the separation between the two classes of truths 
is such that no conceivable progress of science can ever 
convert the one into the other. That which is incon- 
ceivable, not accidentally from the peculiar circumstances 
of certain men, but universally to all, must be so in con- 
sequence of an original law of the human mind: that which 
is universally true within the field of experience indicates 
an original law of the material world. No transformation 
of one into the other is possible, unless the progress of 
science can change mind to matter or matter to mind. 
It is therefore incumbent on the philosopher who would 
extend mathematical certainty to the domain of physical 
science, to confirm in every instance his theory by a 
psychological deduction of his principles, as Kant has 
done in the instances of Space and Time. 

Dr. Whewell lays much stress on clearness and distinct- 
ness of conceptions as the basis of the axiomatic truths of 
physical science. But the clearness or distinctness of any 
conception can only enable us more accurately to unfold 
the virtual contents of the concept itself: it cannot 
enable us to add & priori any new attribute. In other 
words, the increased clearness and distinctness of a con- 
ception may enable us to multiply to any extent our 



APPENDIX. S\l 

analytical judgments, but cannot add a single synthetical 
one. Without something more than this, the philosopher 
has failed to meet the touchstone of the Kantian question: 
How are synthetical judgments a priori possible f 

The spirit of Dr. Whewell's Philosophy of the In- 
ductive Sciences is beyond all praise. In these days of 
Positivism and Empiricism, it is refreshing to find a writer 
of such vast attainments in the details of physical science, 
comprising them under such truly philosophical principles. 
But it is to be regretted that the accuracy of his theory 
has been in some instances vitiated by a stumble on 
the threshold of the Critical Philosophy. The distinction 
laid down by Kant between the synthetical or properly 
geometrical, and the analytical or general axioms, seems 
to have been altogether overlooked. Thus, almost at the 
outset of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, the 
analytical judgment, " if equals are added to equals, the 
wholes are equal," is given as a condition of the intuition 
of magnitudes*: and the same oversight runs through the 
Essay on Mathematical Reasoning, in which he speaks of 
" self-evident principles, not derived in any immediate 
manner from experiment, but involved in the very nature 
of the conceptions which we must possess, in order to reason 
upon such subjects at all." The very nature of the con- 
ceptions, however clearly apprehended, can give rise only 
to analytical judgments. 

And such, I think, may be shewn to be the character 
of all the mechanical axioms derived from the idea of 
Force. Of force, apart from the conscious exertion of will, 
we have no positive conception per se: we know it only by 
its effects. Of equal forces we have no positive conception 
beyond that of the production of equal effects. To assert, 
therefore, that equal forces will balance each other at the 

* Book ii. ch. ix. 



312 APPENDIX. 

two extremities of a lever, is to assert no more than that 
effects universally equal will be equal in any particular 
case b . 

But to establish Mechanics as an d priori science upon 
the idea of force, it will be necessary to commence with 
some axioms at least of a synthetical character, analogous 
to the geometrical principles, " two straight lines cannot 
enclose a space," or, " if a straight line meets two straight 
lines, so as to make the two interior angles on the same 
side together less than two right angles, the two straight 
lines will meet if produced." 

As a matter of fact, I do not think that Dr. Whewell 
has hitherto succeeded in establishing in the science of 

b We most distinguish between the general theoretical statement of this 
axiom, and 'its practical application to any given object. In Geometry, 
the axiom, *' if equals are added to equals the wholes are equal,** is a mere 
analytical judgment derived from the principle oi Identity ; but to ascertain 
whether two given magnitudes are equal, is a question of experiment or 
observation. So in Mechanics, the axiom, that bodies acting with equal 
forces to turn a lever in opposite directions will retain it in equilibrium, is 
analytical ; and as thus stated, it is unnecessary to add, either that the 
directions of both forces must be perpendicular, or the arms of the lever 
equal. But in any special application of the axiom there arises at once 
the question, how can we ascertain that any two given forces are equal as 
forces acting upon the lever t If the force, for example, be gravity, and two 
equal weights be suspended, one perpendicularly, the other obliquely, the 
whole weight of the latter does not act to turn the lever in opposition to 
the former ; and the hypothesis of the axiom is violated ; the forces not 
being in that relation equal. Or if both are suspended perpendicularly, 
but at unequal distances from the fulcrum ; the moments, or forces in 
relation to the lever, are not equal. The axiom as stated by Dr. Whewell, 
" If two equal forces act perpendicularly at the extremities of equal arms of 
a straight line," has the appearance of a synthetical judgment, by compre- 
hending under one formula the mere analysis of the notion of equal forces 
and the empirical determination of equality in any particular instance. If 
by equal forces is meant forces equal in effect on the lever, the axiom, as 
stated by Dr. Whewell, is tautological: if the meaning is, forces equal in 
their effects in some other situation, the axiom is empirical only, and not 
even universally true. But, except by its effect in some situation or other, 
what test have we of the magnitude of a force ? 



APPENDIX. 313 

Mechanics a system of ct priori synthetical truths derived 
from the idea of force, as distinct from those which are 
mere applications of the mathematical intuitions of time 
or space. But as regards mere hypothetical mechanics, 
such a system is not inconceivable. A more exact psycho- 
logical analysis of the intuitive faculties may possibly 
establish the existence of other subjective conditions of 
intuition besides those of space and time, and conse- 
quently of other synthetical judgments a priori besides 
those of Geometry and Arithmetic*. But when the same 
theory comes to be applied, not to hypothetical rigid bodies 
without weight, but to the actual phenomena of natural 
agents, as in the " Demonstration that all matter is heavy/' 
and, verbally at least, in speaking of the inconceivability of 
the pre-Copernican astronomy, we see at once that the 
boundary is overleaped, which separates the necessary laws 
of thought from the generalized phenomena of matter. 
This absolute boundary is sufficiently marked. No matter 
of fact can, in any possible state of human knowledge, be 
a matter of demonstration*. Nay, even supposing such 
a demonstration possible, it would not add one tittle to 
the evidence of the fact, as such, in the eyes of any one 
but an Egoist. By him, it would be accepted as an 
additional proof that what are commonly considered as 
phenomena of the non-ego, are really only modifications of 
the percipient mind, and governed solely by mental laws. 
But to the Realist it would at most only suggest the pos- 
sibility of a pre-established harmony between the laws of 
mind and matter, — a suggestion which would require, in 
every special case, to be verified by the empirical ex- 

* Personality may perhaps be specified as another condition of this* kind, 
and the a priori principles of morals as consequent upon it. On this I 
have remarked at greater length in the Bampton Lectures, Lect. III. 
and VII. 

d Compare Hume, Essay on the Academical Philosophy, Part ii. 



314 APPENDIX. 

amination of the latter. Mental laws, which alone deter- 
mine conceivability, are primarily operative only on 
mental objects, and are applicable to external things only 
on the hypothesis of their conformity. This hypothesis 
can only be verified empirically. That every triangle, 
for example, has its angles equal to two right angles, is 
strictly true only of the perfect triangle as contemplated 
by the mind. That this bit of paper lying before me has 
its angles equal to two right angles, is only true on the 
supposition of its being a perfect triangle ; and the truth 
of this supposition, in any possible state of perfection of 
human senses and instruments, can only be determined 
empirically. It remains always conceivable that there 
may be an error in the measurement, and that the paper 
may not have exactly two right angles. The probability 
of such an error may be diminished to any degree, accord- 
ing to the perfection of our means of measurement ; but 
no approximation of this kind can ever become absolute 
certainty. 

It is not without some hesitation that I have ventured 
thus far to criticise a work, which I believe to be, in 
its whole spirit and conception, by far the most valuable 
contribution of modern times to the philosophy of the 
physical sciences. To those who would survey this 
branch of knowledge in a sound philosophical spirit, alike 
removed from the idealism of Schelling, and from the 
positivism of Comte, the writings of Dr. Whewell are 
especially valuable. To those who believe, with the 
present writer, that the future hopes of speculative 
philosophy rest on the possibility of a union of the 
critical principles of Kant with the sober practical spirit 
, which is characteristic of English thinkers, the writings 
of the same author afford one of the most cheering 
assurances that the spirit of philosophy, under all its 



APPENDIX. 315 

discouragements, is not yet extinct in this country. 
With this declaration, the spirit. that has dictated the 
preceding criticism will not, I trust, be misunderstood 6 . 



Note B,p. 146. 

That Berkeley was fully aware of the inconsequence of 
the conclusions which Hume afterwards attempted to 
draw from his principles, is manifest from the third 
Dialogue between Hylas and Philonous, in which he meets 
by anticipation the argument of the sceptic', by maintain- 
ing that we are directly conscious of our own being. He 
is wrong, indeed, in calling this consciousness Reflection ; 
this term being properly applicable only to attention 
directed to our internal phenomena ; — an attention which 
does not make known, but presupposes, the attending 
self. But when he asserts, " 1 know or am conscious of 
my own being ; and that I myself am not my ideas, but 
somewhat else, a thinking, active principle, that perceives, 
knows, wills, and operates about ideas;" he states the 
true ground on which we may refute the sceptical con- 



* The preceding note remains nearly as it appeared in the first edition 
of this work, published in 1851. Since that time, some additional 
remarks on the matter in question have appeared in Sir William 
Hamilton's Discussions, p. 828, (second edition, p. 885,) in Dr. Whewell's 
Letter to the Author of Prolegomena Loyica, and in the Author's pamphlet 
in reply, entitled, The Limits of Demonstrative Science considered. Sir W. 
Hamilton's view is substantially the same as my own ; and I cannot help 
regarding this independent coincidence as a confirmation of my original 
criticism. At the same time, I feel bound to express my acknowledg- 
ments to Dr. Whewell for the instruction which his Letter has afforded 
me, and for the liberal and courteous tone in which his objections 
are urged. 

f This part of Berkeley's Dialogue is meant as an answer to Locke, 
Essay, B. II. ch. 28. $. 5. but the same reasoning is also valid against 
Hume. 



316 APPENDIX. 

elusions of Hume. Indeed, this part of the Dialogue 
wants little more than a more complete exposition of the 
nature of the will, to anticipate in principle the position 
afterwards taken against the great sceptic by Maine de 
Biran. 

The weak side of Berkeley's Idealism is not to be found 
in its relation to Hume, but in its relation to Fichte. 
The object proposed by Berkeley was to get rid of the 
contradictions and difficulties contained in the notion of 
matter as existing distinct from mind, and thus to leave 
the existence of minds, divine and human, beyond question. 
For this purpose he availed himself of two arguments, 
one of which was borrowed from the Cartesian philosophy, 
the other was added by himself. 

The Cartesians, denying the possibility of any direct 
influence of matter upon mind or of mind upon matter, 
explained the phenomena of perception, by the hypo- 
thesis of Divine Assistance and Occasional Causes. 
According to this theory, the mental phenomena of 
sensation are not produced by any direct action of body 
upon mind, but by the immediate agency of God, who 
produces certain sensations in the conscious mind, upon 
the occasion of certain corresponding movements in the 
bodily organism*. Berkeley, while denying the existence 
of matter, and therefore rejecting the supposition of a 
bodily occasional cause, retained the Cartesian theory so 
far as to maintain that the presence of ideas in the mind 
is caused by the direct agency of the Deity. Thus he 
says, " When in broad daylight I open my eyes, it is 
not in my power to choose whether I shall see or no, 

r This theory is hinted at by Descartes, Principia, 1. ii. §. 36. and more 
fully elaborated by De la Forge, TraitS de P esprit de rhamme, ch. xvi. Male- 
brancbe, Recherche de la Periti, 1. yi. p. ii. ch. S. Entretiens eur la Mtta- 
physique, Ent. vii. Compare Laromiguiere, Lecone de Philosophic, p. ii. 
1. 9. and Hamilton, lectures on Metaphysics, i. p. 800. 



APPENDIX. 317 

or to determine what particular objects shall present 
themselves to my view ; and so likewise as to the 
hearing and other senses ; the ideas imprinted on them 
are not creatures of my will. There is therefore some 
other will or spirit that produces them*." 

With this argument, which represents God as the 
efficient cause of our ideas, Berkeley combined another, 
in which the Deity is regarded as a constantly perceiving 
mind. Accepting, as allowed on all hands, the opinion 
that sensible qualities cannot subsist by themselves, and 
rejecting the ordinary hypothesis of their existence in 
an insensible substratum, he concluded that they must 
therefore exist in a mind which perceives them, and that 
they have no existence apart from being perceived. 
If, therefore, they continue to exist when we do not 
perceive them, (and that they do so is the irresistible 
conviction of all men,) they must be perceived by some 
other mind. Hence the continuous duration of things 
implies the existence of a constantly percipient mind; 
that is, of Ood '. 

The relation between the divine and the human mind, 
as thus conceived, may be adapted either to a presentative 
or to a representative theory of idealism. We may hold 
that the ideas perceived at any particular time by a given 
man are numerically one with those constantly perceived 
by the Divine Mind; or we may regard them as having 
only a specific identity ; the former being the copy, and 
the latter the archetype. Under the first hypothesis, 
the divine ideas are presented to us as the direct objects 
of our perception : under the second, they are represented 

h Principle* of Human Knowledge, §. xxix. Compare §§. lvii. brii. In 
$. tin. he expressly refers to some modern philosophers, i. e. the Cartesians, 
as agreeing with him in making God the immediate cause of all things. 

1 Principles of Human Knowledge, |f . xc, xci ; Second Dialogue between 
Hylas and Philonous, tub init. 



318 APPENDIX. 

by similar ideas excited in ourselves. The former theory, 
though susceptible of various developments in detail, is 
in principle that of Vision in God, and is accordingly 
distinctly maintained by Malebranche, who asserts that 
a thousand men can see the same individual object, 
namely, the intelligible extension which is perceived in 
God k . Berkeley, by rejecting the theory of Malebranche, 
was logically driven to the representative hypothesis, 
though his language occasionally wavers between the 
two 1 . 

But to make this hypothesis the foundation of a 
theistic argument, it is necessary to retain, as Berkeley 
in fact did retain, the supposition of a real distinction 
between the idea or object perceived and the mind 
perceiving. The idea, though existing only as perceived 
and in the act of perception, must yet not be identified 
with that act, nor regarded as a mere modification or 
mode of being of the percipient mind. If this simpler 
form of representationism be once adopted, the legitimate 
inference is not Theism, but Pantheism. The ideas of 
which I am conscious being admitted to exist only as 
modes of my own being, it is concluded, by parity of 
reasoning, that the archetypal world exists only in the 
form of various modes of the being of God. 

And such is in fact the form which Idealism assumes 
in the hands of Fichte and Schelling. The theory of 

* See his Rkponae au IAvre des vraies et desfausset I diet, ch. xiii. 

1 I mast acknowledge my obligations to Professor Webb, the author of 
" the lntellectualism of Locke," both for the instruction derived from bis 
able and interesting work, and also for some unpublished communications 
on Berkeley's philosophy, of winch I have availed myself in revising this 
note for the present edition. At the same time, I am unable to agree with 
him in regarding Locke's and Berkeley's theory of ideas as identical with 
that of Amauld, in which the representative idea is regarded as a modi- 
fication of the mind. Indeed in Berkeley's system the relation of substance 
and mode has properly no place. 



APPENDIX. 319 

perceptions essentially representative, which virtually 
regards the act and its immediate object as produced 
by the inherent power of the mind itself, was not, in 
Arnauld's hands, carried into any consequences beyond 
those required by his controversy with Malebranche. 
But a similar theory in the hands of the German philo- 
sophers became the basis, first, of an absolute Egoism, 
and finally, of an absolute Pantheism. Consciousness 
being only possible in the form of this or that special 
modification, it is but one step further to regard the true 
substance as an unmodified substratum existing out of 
consciousness, though manifested only in the conscious- 
ness of its several modes. We have thus the Absolute 
Ego of Fichte, and, by a still further generalization, the 
Absolute Being of Schelling, which, as the one substance 
from which personal and impersonal phenomena alike 
proceed, may indifferently be called Ego or God; the 
conscious self and the objects of its consciousness being 
but opposite modes of the Divine One and All. 

Nor will the Idealism of Berkeley, however opposed 
to these conclusions, offer any effectual barrier against 
them. The distinction between ideas existing as objects 
in the mind and ideas existing as modes of the mind 
. is too slight to stand against that tendency to simpli- 
fication which forms at once the chief virtue and the 
chief vice of philosophical speculation. The natural 
judgment of mankind, which affirms the knowledge of 
an external world existing independently of perception, 
being once abandoned, the only question which remains 
is, how to account for the phenomena on the simplest 
hypothesis. And the simplest hypothesis is that which 
postulates only one real existence underlying the multi- 
plicity of phenomena, the hypothesis whose various 
subordinate theories all finally converge in Pantheism. 



820 APPENDIX. 

These consequences can only be avoided by abandoning 
the Idealistic theory, and substituting a Natural Realism, 
Dualism though it be. Admit, with Berkeley, that the 
real things are those very things which I see and feel and 
perceive by my senses ; but deny his other main position, 
that the mind perceives only its own ideas. We may 
thus open the way for the direct recognition in conscious- 
ness, first of our own organism as extended ; and secondly 
of an external world in relation to that organism". On 
this theory , we may get rid of the metaphysical distinction 
between phenomena and noumena, or between repre- 
sentation* and things in themselves. The immediate object 
of perception is the thing ; and the representation is not 
opposed to the unperceived thing in itself, but to the 
presentation, or thing as given in immediate relation to 
the conscious subject. 

Another weak point of Berkeley's philosophy is his 
theory of the nature of Belief. He considers that real 
things differ from chimeras, in being more vivid and clear, 
and not dependent on the will. This accords with Hume's 
definition of Belief, " A lively idea, related to or associated 
with a present impression." But the will is completely 
inactive in a dream ; and phantasms may be as lively and 
vivid when excited by a fiction as by a true relation. The 
truth is, that Belief cannot be defined, being presupposed 
in all consciousness. Every act of consciousness is a judg- 
ment, and therefore a belief in the presence of its object : 
the question of reality or unreality depends upon where 
and how we judge it to be present. If an object present 
to the imagination is declared to be present to the sense, 
the judgment is false : but the object is unreal, only if by 
real we mean sensible. All presentations as such may be 
called real relatively to their proper intuition, and unreal 
•» See Sir W. Hamilton's edition of Reid's Works, Notes D and D*. 



APPENDIX. 321 

relatively to any other. The further question, which of 
our intuitions indicate the presence of external objects, 
and which are merely affections of the mind or the 
sensitive organism, is one which, however important 
on the realist hypothesis, is out of place in a system of 
idealism 11 . 



Note C, p. 149. 

The following is Sir William Hamilton's analysis of 
the causal judgment, as the result of the mental law of 
the conditioned. "The phenomenon is this: — When 
aware of a new appearance, we are unable to conceive that 
therein has originated any new existence, and are, there- 
fore, constrained to think, that what now appears to us 
under a new form; had previously an existence under 
others, — others conceivable by us or not. These others 
(for they are always plural) are called its cause ; and a 
cause (or more properly causes) we cannot but suppose ; 
for a cause is simply every thing without which the effect 
would not result, and all such concurring, the effect 
cannot but result. We are utterly unable to construe it 
in thought as possible, that the complement of existence 
has been either increased or diminished. We cannot 
conceive, either, on the one hand, nothing becoming 
something, or, on the other, something becoming nothing. 
When God is said to create the universe out of nothing, 
we think this, by supposing, that he evolves the universe 
out of nothing but himself; and, in like manner, we 
conceive annihilation, only by conceiving the creator 
to withdraw his creation, by withdrawing his creative 
energy from actuality into power." 

D For some remarks on this question, see the Author's article Meta- 
phytics, in the eighth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, p. 613. 

Y 



322 APPENDIX. 

" Our judgment of causality/' he continues, '< simply 
i 8 :— We necessarily deny, or, rather, are unable to affirm 
in thought, that the object which we apprehend as 
beginning to be, really so begins ; but, on the contrary, 
affirm, as we must, the identity of its present sum of 
being, with the sum of its past existence. — And here, it 
is not requisite for us to know, or even to be able to 
conceive, under what form or under what combination 
this quantum previously existed; in other words, it is 
unnecessary for us to recognise the particular causes of 
this particular effect. A discovery of the determinate 
antecedents into which a determinate consequent may be 
refunded, is merely contingent,— merely the result of 
experience; but the judgment, that every event should 
have its causes, is necessary, and imposed on us, as a 
condition of our human intelligence itself. This necessity 
of so thinking, is the only phenomenon to be explained. 
The question of philosophy is not concerning the cause, 
but concerning a cause ." 

Such is Sir W. Hamilton's statement of the phe- 
nomenon* The following is his explanation of it. 

" The phenomenon of Causality seems nothing more 
than a corollary of the law of the Conditioned, in its 
application to a thing thought under the form or mental 
category of Existence Relative in Time. We cannot 
know, we cannot think a thing, except under the attri- 
bute of Existence ; we cannot know or think a thing to 
exist, except as in Time ; and we cannot know or think 
a thing to exist in Time, and think it absolutely to com- 
mence or terminate. Now this at once imposes on us the 
judgment of causality. Unable positively to think an 
absolute commencement, our impotence to this drives us 
backwards on the notion of Cause; unable positively to 

o Discussions, p. 609, 610. (2d edition.) 



APPENDIX. 828 

think an absolute termination, our impotence to this 
drives us forwards on the notion of Effect" " We are 
compelled/* he continues, "to believe, that the object, 
(that is the certain quale and quantum of being, whose 
phenomenal rise into existence we have witnessed) did 
realty exist, prior to this rise, under other forms ; (and 
by for™* be it observed, I mean any mode of existence, 
conceivable by us or not.) But to say, that a thing 
previously existed under different forms, is only to say, 
in other words, that a thing had causes. (It would be 
here out of place, to refute the error of philosophers, in 
supposing that any thing can have a single cause;— 
meaning always by a cause that without which the effect 
would not have been. I speak of course only of second 
causes, for of the Divine causation we can pretend to no 
conception *.)" 

To these extracts from Sir W. Hamilton's Discussions, 
may be added a short passage from the Appendix to his 
Lectures on Metaphysics, containing his latest explanation 
of his theory \ " Causation is, therefore, necessarily within 
existence ; for we cannot think of a change either from 
non-existence to existence, or from existence to non- 
existence. The thought of power, therefore, always 
precedes that of creation, and follows that of anni- 
hilation; and as the thought of power always involves 
the thought of existence, therefore, in so far as the 
thoughts of creation and annihilation go, the necessity 
of thinking a cause for these changes exemplifies the 
facts, — that change is only from one form of existence 
to another, and that causation is simply our inability to 
think an absolute commencement or an absolute termi- 
nation of being. The sum of being (actual and potential) 
now extant in the mental and material worlds, together 

P Discussion*, pp. 618, 621. i Vol. ii. p. 539. 

y2 



324 APPENDIX. 

with that in their Creator, and the sum of being (actual 
and potential) in the Creator alone, before and after those 
worlds existed, is necessarily thought as precisely the 
same. Take the instance of a neutral salt. This is an 
effect, the product of various causes, — and all are neces- 
sarily powers. We have here, 1. an acid involving its 
power (active or passive) of combining with the alkali ; 
2. an alkali, involving its power (active or passive) of 
combining with the acid; 3. (since, as the chemical 
brocard has it, ' corpora non agunt nisi soluta/) a fluid, 
say water, with its power of dissolving and holding in 
solution the acid and alkali ; 4. a translative power, say 
the human hand, capable of bringing the acid, the alkali, 
and the water, into correlation, or within the sphere of 
mutual affinity. These, (and they might be subdivided,) 
are all causes of the effect; for, abstract any one, and the 
salt is not produced. It wants a coefficient cause, and 
the concurrence of every cause is requisite for an effect." 
In describing the above four conditions as all in 
different ways causes of the effect, Sir W. Hamilton 
will probably meet with the concurrence of most of his 
readers; but the further statement, that these causes are 
all forms under which the effect previously existed, will 
probably strike them as being at least verbally different 
from the common view. Most men would readily admit 
that the acid, and the alkali, and the portion of water 
necessary for combining them, are but previous forms 
of the salt itself; but they would hesitate to admit the 
hand or its action into the same list. In other words, 
they would allow that the earlier and the later sub- 
stances are identical in the material particles of which 
they are composed; but they would insist on distin- 
guishing these particles from the efficient cause by which 
the composition is effected. But when the identity is 



APPENDIX. 325 

stated in this way, the judgment assumes a totally new 
character. Whether it be true or not that we cannot 
conceive the quantity of existence to be increased or 
diminished, there is at any rate no such inability as 
regards the quantity of matter. It may be true as a 
fact, that no material atom has been added to the world 
since the first creation ; but the assertion, however true, 
is certainly not necessary. The power which created 
once must be conceived as able to create again, whether 
that ability is actually exercised or not. 

The same conclusion is still more evident when we pro- 
ceed from the consideration of matter to that of mind. 
Of matter we maintain that the creation of new portions 
is perfectly conceivable, as a result at least, if not as 
a process ; of mind we believe that such creation actually 
takes place. Every man who comes into the world comes 
into it as a distinct individual, having a personality 
and consciousness of his own ; and that personality is a 
distinct accession to the number of persons previously 
existing. Whatever may be thought concerning the 
material particles of which my body is composed, it 
cannot be maintained that I, as a person, had a previous 
existence in the personality of my parents; however I 
may regard them as the causes of my being. 

If then we are to identify the effect with the sum of 
its causes, we must rise above the conceptions of matter 
as matter and of mind as mind, and rise to the highest 
abstraction of existence in general, which is not any 
particular existence. " The sum of being (actual and 
potential) now extant in the mental and material worlds, 
together with that in their Creator, and the sum of being 
(actual and potential) in the Creator alone, before and 
after those worlds existed, is necessarily thought as 
precisely the same." This assertion involves a previous 



.126 APPENDIX. 

question: Is Being in this abstract form necessarily 
thought as a sum at all, or indeed necessarily thought 
in any way ? 

It is admitted that we not only can conceive, but 
actually know by experience, the origination of new 
forms of existence : it is questioned whether these forms 
are regarded as new existences. But strip off the form, 
and what is left to constitute the existence ? The world 
as a world is not identical with its Creator ; the Creator 
as a Creator is not identical with the world. The identity, 
if it is admitted at all, can only be admitted as regards 
an unmodified substratum of existence in general, which 
is no existence in particular. But existence, as an 
abstract substratum of this kind, is to human thought 
absolute zero: thus far the Hegelian paradox is true; 
pure being is pure nothing. When we have abstracted 
from the world all that distinguishes it as a world, and 
from the Creator all that distinguishes him as a Creator, 
we have nothing left to constitute the identity of ex- 
istence. From the mere general statement that cause 
and effect both exist, we have no more right to say 
that they are the same existence, than, from the general 
statement that they both appear, we have a right to 
say that they are the same phenomenon. 

Our conception of existence, as of appearance, is not 
singular but plural : we are not conscious of existence 
in general, but of existing things; as we are not con- 
scious of appearance in general, but of apparent objects. 
The two may not indeed be always regarded as coex- 
tensive; diversity of phenomena does not always imply 
diversity of existence; but neither on the other hand 
does it always imply identity of existence. The primary 
fact of consciousness, the distinction between the ego 
and the non-ego, is a distinction, not of phenomena, but 



APPENDIX. 327 

of realities. I know myself as a distinctly existing 
being ; — indeed it is probably from that knowledge that 
my conception of being, as distinguished from appearance, 
is derived ; — and I know the external world as something 
different from myself. Arguing by analogy from this 
primary conviction, I believe every man to be a distinct 
being from every other man and from all the other 
objects around him ; and I believe that every new person 
that comes into the world is, as a person, a new existence. 
How far the same distinction may be extended to im- 
personal objects is another question ; for in these we have 
no immediate knowledge of any principium individuation's, 
constituting a single reality out of this or that aggregate 
of phenomena. But if we are unable to affirm the 
existence of such a principle, we are also unable to 
deny it; and hence we are not justified in asserting that 
all phenomena are but different modes of one and the 
same reality. 

From this point of view, the conception of potential 
existence, on which Sir W. Hamilton's theory mainly 
depends, vanishes altogether. If our conception of ex- 
istence, like all other conceptions, is subject to the 
conditions of plurality and difference,— if we have no 
conception of being at all, except in the form of this 
being as distinguished from that, — it follows that, where 
the definite characteristics of this or that being are 
absent, the being itself has no existence in any form. 
The mere possibility of the existence of a man is not 
the existence of the man under another form ; for the 
man as such has no existence except in the particular 
form by which he is actually constituted. To say that 
every thing which begins had a previous existence in 
another form, is to say that the form is no part of the 
existence ; — a position which necessarily leads us back 



328 APPENDIX. 

to the Eleatic theory of the unity of all things, and 
identifies Existence with Indifference. 

If these objections are tenable, the common statement 
of the causal judgment, in which the cause is regarded 
as something different from the effect, is more accurate, 
and more in accordance with the philosophy of the 
Conditioned, than that of Sir W. Hamilton, in which 
the cause is regarded as identical with the effect. Both 
statements equally repudiate the absurdity of supposing 
existence to have originated from absolute zero; for 
both alike suppose that nothing can begin to exist 
unless something had previously existed. The question 
between them is merely this, Is this something a dif- 
ferent existence, or only the same existence in another 
form? 

Neither on the one supposition nor on the other do 
we obtain any positive conception of the nature of 
Causation, beyond that which is furnished by, and limited 
to, our own volitions. Mere temporal antecedence of 
one thing to another is not the whole of causation, any 
more than the mere antecedence of the same thing under 
other forms. We are compelled still to ask, what is that 
peculiar relation between antecedent and consequent, 
by which the one gives birth to the other, or is changed 
into the other. The origination of the consequent by 
the antecedent, and the evolution of the actual from the 
potential, alike require a further cause to account for 
them ; and this causative energy, call it by what name 
you will, power, effort, tendency, still remains absolutely 
unknown, but is still supposed as absolutely indis- 
pensable. 



APPENDIX. 829 

NoteD 9 p. 165. 

The following is Mr. Mill's argument for the subjection 
of the human will to the law of physical causation. " To 
the universality which mankind are agreed in ascribing to 
the Law of Causation, there is one claim of exception, 
one disputed case, that of the Human Will ; the deter- 
minations of which a large class of metaphysicians are not 
willing to regard as following the causes called motives, 
according to as strict laws as those which they suppose 
to exist in the world of mere matter. This controverted 
point will undergo a special examination when we come 
to treat particularly of the Logic of the Moral Sciences. 
In the mean time I may remark that these metaphy- 
sicians, who, it must be observed, ground the main part 
of their objection upon the supposed repugnance of the 
doctrine in question to our consciousness, seem to me to 
mistake the fact which consciousness testifies against. 
What is really in contradiction to consciousness, they 
would, I think, on strict self-examination, find to be, the 
application to human actions and volitions of the ideas 
involved in the common use of the term Necessity ; which 
I agree with them in thinking highly objectionable. But 
if they would consider that by saying that a man's actions 
necessarily follow from his character, all that is really 
meant (for no more is meant in any case whatever of 
causation) is that he invariably does act in conformity to 
his character, and that any one who thoroughly knew his 
character could certainly predict how he would act in any 
supposable case ; they probably would not find this doc- 
trine either contrary to their experience or revolting to 
their feelings. And no more than this is contended for 
by any one but an Asiatic fatalist 7 ." 

r Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 419. 



330 APPENDIX. 

And no more than this, we might add, is needed to 
construct a system of fatalism as rigid as any Asiatic can 
desire. But we must proceed to Mr. Mill's further 
remarks in the Logic of the Moral Sciences. In this 
latter portion of his work, the author has done little 
more than repeat his belief, that the law of causality 
applies in the same strict sense to human actions as to 
other phenomena, involving in both cases, not constraint, 
but " invariable, certain, and unconditional sequence ;" 
so that, " given the motives which are present to an 
individual's mind, and given likewise the character and 
disposition of the individual, the manner in which he will 
act may be unerringly inferred: that if we knew the 
person thoroughly, and knew all the inducements which 
are acting upon him, we could foretell his conduct with 
as much certainty as we can predict any physical event." 
He adds a distinction intended to rescue his theory from 
the charge of fatalism, as usually implied in the term 
Necessity. " That word, in its other acceptations, involves 
much more than mere uniformity of sequence ; it implies 
irresistibleness. Applied to the will, it only means that 
the given cause will be followed by the effect, subject to 
all possibilities of counteraction by other causes : but in 
common use it stands for the operation of those causes 
exclusively, which are supposed too powerful to be coun- 
teracted at all." " The causes therefore," he continues, 
" on which action depends, are never uncontrollable ; 
and any given effect is only necessary provided that the 
causes tending to produce it are not controlled. That 
whatever happens could not have happened otherwise, 
unless something had taken place which was capable of 
preventing it, no one surely needs hesitate to admit 1 ." 

That there is some fundamental weakness in the above 
* Mill's Logic, book vi. chap. 2. 



APPENDIX. 331 

theory, appears almost on the surface, from the fact that 
so acute a thinker as Mr. Mill can imagine that he has 
saved the principle of causality from the charge of 
fatalism by this concluding sentence. That whatever 
happens could not have happened otherwise, unless some- 
thing had taken place capable of preventing it, is indeed 
in one sense a perfectly harmless position, but also a 
perfectly unproductive one. It is the mere truism of the 
Nursery Rhyme : 

" There was an old woman lived under a hill, 
u And jf she' 8 not gone, she lives there still." 

Examine it closer, and the question at once arises, whence 
is this counteracting something to come ? If from myself, 
from a self-determined act of free will, this concedes the 
whole question at issue. If from an act of will deter- 
mined by preexisting causes, or altogether from without, 
I am still in the iron grasp of Necessity. If the pre- 
venting circumstance, come whence it may, comes as the 
certain sequence of antecedent phenomena, I am still the 
slave of circumstances: if otherwise, the whole resemblance 
between moral and physical causation vanishes. 

But let us go up to the fundamental principle of the 
theory itself. The conduct of a man, we are told, is the 
invariable consequent of motives present to his mind ; so 
that, given the motives and the man's character, we could 
certainly predict the action. Character, it must be ob- 
served, is not here to be understood in Aristotle's sense, 
as a disposition caused by a series of voluntary acts : it 
must be something coeval with the first act of so-called 
volition. At the earliest period at which I am capable of 
acting, I possess a character of some sort ; and that cha- 
racter, together with the motives presented, determines 
certainly how I shall act. 

The plausibility of the theory arises from an ambiguity 



332 APPENDIX. 

in the term motive. In knowing the phenomena present 
to a man's mind at the moment of any act of volition, is 
it included that we are to know their relation to his will? 
If so, the supposed prediction is a mere begging of the 
question: when I know how he will be inclined to act, 
I know how he will act. If not, the advocate of the 
doctrine must succumb to the sophism of the Asinus 
Buridani, and concede that the unfortunate animal, be- 
tween two bundles of hay exactly alike, must starve. 
The solution of this sophism, supposing, of course, that 
the ass in that instance represents a voluntary, and not 
merely a spontaneous agent, is likewise the solution of 
Mr. Mill's argument. What is meant by two bundles of 
hay exactly alike? They must be indistinguishable by 
sight, smell, touch, and so forth. But are objects exactly 
similar as regards the senses, therefore exactly similar as 
regards the will ? A lump of salt and a lump of sugar 
may be similar to the eye : are they therefore similar to 
the palate ? If taste is not dependent upon another sense, 
why may not will be independent of all the senses ? If, 
on the other hand, the two bundles of hay are to be 
exactly similar, as motives in relation to the will, the 
argument amounts to the mere truism, that if the ass 
does not choose one he will choose neither. 

Exactly the same fallacy runs through Mr. Mill's theory 
of the causality of actions. The so-called motives are 
either a set of phenomena viewed in their relation to the 
will, or viewed out of that relation. If the former, the 
argument has long ago been refuted by Reid 1 . The 
strongest motive prevails ; but I only know the strength 
of motives in relation to the will by the test of ultimate 
prevalence ; so that this means no more than that the 
prevailing motive prevails. I have no measure of strength 
1 Active Powers, Essay ir. ph. 4. p. 610. ed. Hamilton. 



APPENDIX. 333 

but its effects. I only know certain things to be motives 
at all, by the fact of their ultimate prevalence. If, on the 
other hand, the phenomena are considered out of their 
relation to the will, my consciousness testifies at once 
that my actions are not subject to the same invariable 
sequence as physical changes. I know, that is, whenever 
I lift my arm to my head, that it is at that moment in my 
power not to lift it; and that, the antecedent circum- 
stances being precisely the same, I may decide not to do 
so at any future time. But, says Mr. Mill, this decision 
of the will is itself a new antecedent \ Certainly, a new 
antecedent to the act ; but with what propriety can it be 
called a new antecedent to itself t The question is not 
whether the act of motion follows certainly upon that of 
volition, but whether the act of volition follows certainly 
upon antecedent circumstances. The former sequence 
depends on purely physical laws; and the preventing 
causes, such as a stroke of paralysis, are purely physical 
also. But if the latter sequence is invariable also, wc 
admit, not one new phenomenon, but millions ; since an 
opposite determination of the will can only come in with 
its determinant, and the determinant of that determinant, 
and so on ad infinitum. For to suppose that two opposite 
volitions can follow from the same determinant is incom- 
patible with the whole hypothesis of causality. If, on the 
other hand, the sequence of volition from given ante- 
cedents is variable, what becomes of the power of pre- 
dicting a man's actions? The contingency of a single 
link affects all the subsequent portion of the chain. 
In reply then to the question, Are our volitions, like 

¦ Mr. Mill says, " the wish is a new antecedent/' If this term is meant 
to be synonymous with vrill, it would be an improvement in language to 
change it : if it is meant to be synonymous with desire, the confusion of 
desire with will vitiates his whole argument. 



834 APPENDIX. 

other events, the result of causes ? Certainly not, in the 
only intelligible senses of the term. I have only two 
positive notions of causation : one, the exertion of power 
by an intelligent being ; the other, the uniform sequence 
of phenomenon B from A. (A may here stand for a single 
phenomenon or a group ; for that antecedent or sum of 
antecedents which constitutes the Sufficient Reason.) 
The former hypothesis is Fatalism. If my'will results 
from the coercion of some other intelligence, I am the 
slave of Destiny. The latter hypothesis is Determinism, 
a necessity no less rigid than fatalism, besides being at 
variance with the whole testimony of consciousness and 
with the experience of every day. Besides these two, 
there is no alternative, but to admit in the fullest sense 
the freedom of the will, by denying the applicability of 
the principle of causality to human actions. 

"This objection, if not removed," says Mr. Mill, "would 
be fatal to the attempt to treat human conduct as a subject 
of science." Be it so. It is better to accept the conse- 
quence than to admit the alternative. But it is fatal only 
according to Mr. Mill's view of science. Ethology, as he 
conceives it, in relation to individuals, as the science of 
characters as they must be according to laws of physical 
and mental causation, I do believe to be, in its idea and 
pretensions, chimerical : but Ethics, as the science of such 
characters as they ought to be according to the laws of 
moral obligation, remains undisturbed, or rather, more 
securely established. It seems to be forgotten by writers 
of this school, that these two systems are absolutely 
exclusive of each other ; that physical causation and moral 
obligation cannot in perfection exist side by side ; and 
that where they do coexist, each must be in the inverse 
ratio of the other. In proportion as we extend the 
domain of Necessity, we must diminish that of Duty; 



APPENDIX. S35 

and Necessity, notwithstanding all that Mr. Mill has 
advanced, I still believe to be the inevitable result of 
subjecting moral acts to the laws of physical causation. 
But Ethology, in relation to classes of men, as affected by 
national, professional, educational, physiological, or even 
moral circumstances, may notwithstanding attain to a vast 
amount of important practical principles and rules; though 
still subject to the influence of individual contingency. 
The actuary of an insurance company, if he were to 
predict the duration of life of any one individual on the 
books of his office, would in all probability guess wrong; — 
as a matter of fact, it is true, mainly from his ignorance of 
physical circumstances ; but as a matter of theory also, if 
we allow that the individual in question may falsify the 
prediction by a voluntary act of suicide. But if the same 
experiment is tried on a sufficiently large scale, opposite 
errors will counteract each other, and the general ap- 
proximate result attains almost to a moral certainty. 
The general results of Ethology, as applied to classes, are 
dependent in a great degree on similar circumstances, and 
may attain to the same or a higher amount of practical 
utility. 

In the course of the above remarks, I have purposely 
avoided touching on a subject alluded to by Mr. Mill, the 
compatibility of man's free-will with God's foreknowledge. 
This question is insoluble, because we have nothing but 
negative notions to apply to it. To enable us to determine 
the exact manner in which an Infinite Intelligence con- 
templates succession in time, it would be necessary that 
our intelligence should be infinite also. In this, as in 
all other revelations of God's relation to man, we must 
be content to believe without aspiring to comprehend. 
The fact of God's foreknowledge is all that is revealed to 
us : the manner He has left in darkness, and we cannot 



336 APPENDIX. 

enlighten it* But we are not justified in rejecting what 
we can comprehend because we do not understand its 
possible relation to what we cannot 1 . That no conceivable 
amount of information could enable a being of human 
constitution to predict with certainty the acts of another, 
is established by the same evidence of consciousness by 
which we know that there is a human constitution at all. 
How far the same conclusion can be transferred to other 
orders of finite beings, still less to an Infinite Intelligence, 
we have no data for determining. 

The Necessitarian theory has recently been stated anew, 
in two works, both of high ability and reputation, but 
written in very different spirits and with very different 
purposes. The author of the first of these works, while 
professedly writing in the name and in support of the 
principles of Necessitarianism, strenuously asserts at the 
same time the apparently opposite doctrine of the freedom 
of the will and the responsibility of man, and writes with 
the avowed purpose of reconciling these seemingly con- 
flicting beliefs. The author of the second work pushes 

« " Sed quia jam Deum agnoscentes, tarn immensam in eo potestatem 
esse percipimus, nt nefas esse putemus exastimare, aliquid unquam a 
nobis fieri posse, quod ante non ab ipso fuerit preordination ; facile 
possnmus nos ipsos magnis difficultatibos intricare, si hano Dei pre- 
ordinationem, cum arbitrii nostri libertate conciliare, atque utramque 
simul comprehendere conemur. 

" Wis vero nos expediemus, si recordemur mentem nostram esee 
finitam; Dei autem potentiam, per quam non tantum omnia, qua? sunt 
aut esse possunt, ab seterno prsescivit, sed etiam voluit ac praeordinavit, 
esse infinitam : ideoque hanc quidem a nobis satis attingi, ut clare et 
distincte peroipiamus ipsam in Deo esse ; non autem satis comprehendi, 
ut videamus quo pacto liberas hominum actiones indetenninatasrelinquat; 
libertatis autem et indifferent!® quae in nobis est, nos ita conscios esse, ut 
nihil sit, quod evidentius et perfeotius comprehendamus. Absurdum enim 
esset, propterea quod non comprehend imus unam rem, quam scimus ex 
natura su& nobis esse debere incomprehensibilem, de alia dubitare, quam 
intime comprehendimus, atque apud nosmet ipsos experimur." Descartes, 
Principia, P. i. 40, 41. 



APPENDIX. 887 

his principles to a conclusion which cannot be otherwise 
understood than as exonerating human actions from all 
voluntariness and their agents from all responsibility* 
The former of these works, Dr. M c Cosh's " Method of 
the Divine Government/' is one from which I cannot 
dissent without extreme reluctance, regarding it, as I do, 
as one of the most valuable contributions to Christian 
philosophy which the present age has produced. With 
many of the author's remarks on the present question 
I fully concur, and in others I am inclined to hope that 
the difference between us is more verbal than real. 
But there are some of his statements, which, even if not 
substantially erroneous in themselves, may lead to error 
from their language and its associations. 

Dr. M e Co8h takes his position, as a Necessitarian, on 
the ground " that the principle of cause and effect reigns 
in the domains of mind as in the territories of matter*." 
Thus he considers the doctrine of Necessity to be founded 
" on one of the very intellectual intuitions of man's mind, 
which leads us, in mental as in material phenomena, to 
anticipate the same effects to follow (he same causes." 
Of this intellectual intuition he says in another part of 
his work, " In regard to any one thought or feeling, we 
affirm that it must have had a cause in some property 
of the mind, or in some antecedent state of the mind, 
or in the two combined. It is by an intuition of our 
nature that we* believe that this thought or feeling could 
not have been produced without a cause, and that this 
same cause will again and for ever produce the same 
effects. And this intuitive principle leads us to expect 
the reign of causation, not only among the thoughts 
and feelings generally, but among the wishes and volitions 
of the soul 1 ." 

y Appendix, p. 541. « p. 27ft. 



338 APPENDIX. 

I cannot help thinking that what Dr. M'Cosh here 
describes as an intuitive principle of the mind, is in 
fact a combination of two principles, differing both in 
their nature and in their origin. That a given pheno- 
menon, whether material or mental, " could not have 
been produced without a cause/' is one assertion : that 
" this same cause will again and for ever produce the same 
effects/' is another. Setting aside for the moment what 
we know empirically of the uniformity of nature, it is 
perfectly conceivable that the world might have been 
so constituted that there should be no regularity in the 
succession of events, but that the same cause which at 
one time is followed by a particular effect, should at 
another have no such consequence. The latter portion, 
therefore, of Dr. M c Cosh's principle is not entitled to 
rank among the original intuitions of the mind, because, 
even if experience assures us that, as a matter of fact, 
it never is violated, we have no difficulty in conceiving 
that it may be. 

But when the knowledge of the uniformity of nature 
is discarded, what remains to constitute the intuitive 
principle? Row much or how little is implied in the 
mere conviction that every phenomenon must have a 
cause on the particular occasion of its occurrence, if we 
know nothing about similarity of recurrence? In the 
first place, with regard to voluntary and involuntary 
phenomena alike, it is implied that som« other pheno- 
menon has immediately preceded. This is a necessary 
consequence of the subjection of our consciousness to 
the law of time. In the next place, with regard to 
voluntary actions alone, of which I am the cause, it is 
implied that, at the moment of doing them, I am con- 
scious of being able to abstain from them ; and this is 
an immediate consciousness of power, in the proper 



APPENDIX. 839 

sense of the term. In the third place, with regard to 
involuntary occurrences, there is the assumption of an 
unknown something in the antecedent phenomenon, ana- 
logous to the productive power in voluntary agents*. 
This unknown something, however, is not power in the 
only form in which we are conscious of it; nay, it is 
the direct negation of it; for power is positively con- 
ceived only in the form of ability to choose between two 
alternatives b . 

It seems then that the apparent universality of the 
axiom, " every event must have a cause," is partly 
due to the ambiguity of its terms. Define clearly what 
is meant by a cause, and the general axiom is at once 
divided into two special ones. I am the cause of my 
actions, inasmuch as I do them voluntarily, with a power 
at the same time to abstain from them. In this sense 
we cannot speak of a cause in relation to the pheno- 
mena of matter. It is not in this sense that the heat 
of the fire is the cause of the melting of the wax. On 
the other hand, in the sense in which Hume and Brown 
define a cause, it is applicable to material phenomena, 
but not to voluntary actions. A cause, in the sense 
of these philosophers, means some one invariable ante- 



¦ See above, p. 153. 

b Dr. M c Cosh, p. 626, maintains that " power is implied in oar very 
idea of substance/' and that " this power, these properties of substances, 
are permanently in them, and ready to be exercised at all times." But 
power in this sense is not an idea distinct from the actual sequence 
of the effect; it is merely that sequence viewed hypothetical^. When 
I speak of the power of fire to melt wax, that power not being in 
actual exercise, I mean no more than that the melting would follow 
if the wax were exposed to it. In this sense we know nothing of power 
or property except as the manifestation of an effect, hypothetical or 
actual. Moreover, power in this sense, as a permanent property, involves 
the empirical idea of the uniformity of nature as well as the move 
conception of a substance as existing. 

z2 



340 APPENDIX. 

cedent or group of antecedents, the presence of which 
is always followed by the phenomenon in question. In 
this sense, if cannot be asserted that the determinations 
of the will have a cause, meaning that the will is always 
determined in a similar manner by the presence of 
similar antecedent circumstances. Or thirdly, if we 
discard the conception of invariability, the axiom indeed 
becomes universal, but does not amount to an assertion 
of a cause. It then asserts positively no more than 
that every phenomenon has some other preceding it ; i. e. 
that no given phenomenon can be conceived as standing 
at the beginning of all time. The unknown something, 
which we term power in the cause to produce its effect, 
can neither be included in this universal assertion nor 
referred to an original intuition of the mind ; for there 
can be no intuition of that which is unknown, and no 
universality in that which is denied of one class of actions 
in the only sense in which it is affirmed of another. 

But it is urged on the other side that human actions 
can be calculated beforehand, and therefore are clearly 
subject to the operation of law. " We anticipate/' says 
Dr. M c Cosh, " the voluntary actions of mankind as we 
anticipate their judgments. No doubt we are at times 
mistaken in the one case as in the other in our anti- 
cipations, but we do not in these cases conclude that the 
voluntary actions of mankind have had no cause, any 
more than we infer that their judgments have had no 
cause — we conclude merely, that we did not know the 
cause, and that if we had known the full cause, we could 
have certainly anticipated the result. There are statistics 
of the voluntary actions of mankind — as of crimes, for 
instance — which are as accurate as the laws of mortality'." 
This statement would be a sufficient answer to a theory 

c p. 276. 



APPENDIX. 841 

of complete indifference, which regards the will as entirely 
uninfluenced by motives up to the time when its choice 
is made; but it does not meet the objections of those 
who, while fully allowing the influence of motives, yet 
maintain that that influence is different in its nature from 
any relation of material phenomena, and therefore should 
not be called by the same name. Doubtless there are 
general anticipations to be drawn from mental inclinations 
no less than from physical successions. If I throw a 
piece of wax into the fire, I expect that it will melt : 
If I offer money to an avaricious man, I expect that he 
will take it. The question is : is the expectation in both 
cases equally certain ? or is the difference only such a3 
can be accounted for by our greater or less knowledge of 
circumstances? To assume this, is to beg the entire 
question; and, on the strength of this assumption, to 
call both relations by the common name of causation, is 
only to confound together two different things under an 
ambiguity of language d . 

Dr. M'Cosh himself admits the existence of a self- 
activity of the will ; which, if it means any thing, means 
a power of resisting or yielding to the motives presented 
to it, and of resisting at one time and yielding at another, 
the concurrent circumstances being identical on both 

d " If in moral reasoning it be mere mockery to use the language of 
demonstration, and to build up systems by trains of d priori reasoning 
upon a single principle ; it is assuredly not less absurd to affect the forms 
of inductive proof in political speculation. Every political as well as 
every moral principle practically involves the determination of the will, 
and thereby becomes at once separated from that class of investigations in 
which we consider the immutable relations of physical phenomena* That 
the will is influenced by motives, no one pretends to deny—- but to compare 
that influence to a physical cause, followed by an unvaried physical effect, 
is only to confound things essentially different, and must ever end in 
metaphysical paradox or practical folly." Sedgwick, Discourse on the Studies 
of the University of Cambridge, p. 81. (fifth edition.) 



342 APPENDIX. 

occasions. Is there any thing similar to this in the 
relation of a physical cause to its effect ? If not, why 
call two dissimilar things hy the same name 9 ? 

In the other work to which I have above alluded, 
Mr. Buckle's " History of Civilization in England," the 
" statistics of the voluntary actions of mankind" are 
adduced to prove a further conclusion, which not merely 
subjects every moral agent to the law of causation, but 
apparently exempts him from all personal responsibility. 
Rejecting " the metaphysical dogma of free will," as 
resting on the fallible testimony of consciousness, Mr. 
Buckle maintains that the actions of men " vary in obe- 
dience to the changes in the surrounding society ;" and 
" that such variations are the result of large and general 
causes, which, working upon the aggregate of society, 
must produce certain consequences, without regard to 
the volition of those particular men of whom the society 
is composed'." And in applying this doctrine to particular 
cases, he carries it out so consistently as to maintain, 
" that suicide is merely the product of the general con- 
dition of society, and that the individual felon only 

e The above remarks were written before the publication of Dr. M c Cosh*s 
recent work on the " Intuitions of the Mind." I do not find any substantial 
difference between the author's view, as stated in this later work, and that 
previously given in the " Method ;" though there are some expressions 
which tend to confirm my suspicion that the difference between us is more 
verbal than real. Thus he asserts, (p. 472.) that " causation in the will is 
entirely different from causation in other action ;" a statement m which 
I fully concur, only doubting the propriety of calling the former by this 
name of causation at all. If there is a causation, though of a different 
kind, in moral as well as in physical action, the generic notion of cause 
should be the same in both, the specific features alone being different, 
as distinguishing this kind of cause from that. But can any univocal 
generic notion be pointed out, amounting to an adequate conception of 
causation as such ? If not, the definition of causation, as a common 
genus, is not the same in both, and we have not the subdivisions of a 
generic notion, but only the different senses of an equivocal term. 

' p. 21. 



APPENDIX. 343 

carries into effect what is a necessary consequence of 
preceding circumstances." " In a given state of society/' 
he continues, " a certain number of persons must put an 
end to their own life. This is the general law ; and the 
special question as to who shall commit the crime depends 
of course upon special laws; which, however, in their 
total action, must obey the large social law to which they 
are all subordinate. And the power of the larger law is 
so irresistible, that neither the love of life nor the fear of 
another world can avail any thing towards even checking 
its operation g ." This conclusion he endeavours to support 
by the evidence of statistics, "a branch of knowledge 
which, though still in its infancy, has already thrown 
more light on the study of human nature than all the 
sciences put together 11 ." 

It is surprising that this acute writer should not have 
seen, that in opposing the evidence of statistics to that of 
consciousness, he is comparing together two witnesses 
who are not speaking of the same thing. The fact to 
which consciousness bears witness is the freedom of our 
own personal actions. The fact which the statistical 
evidence is adduced to prove is the recurrence, within 
certain limits of greatest and least frequency, of actions 
distributed over an entire community. The former evi- 
dence tells us nothing directly concerning the actions of 
societies ; the latter tells us nothing directly concerning 
the actions of individuals. Nay, it is precisely because 
the individual actions are not reducible to any fixed law 
or capable of representation by any numerical calculation, 
that the statistical averages acquire their value as sub- 
stitutes. No one dreams of applying statistical averages 
to calculate the period of the earth's rotation, by shewing 
that four and twenty hours is the exact medium of time, 
* pp. 25,26. h p. 31. 



344 APPENDIX. 

comparing one month's or one year's revolutions with 
another's. It is only where the individual movements are 
irregular, that it is necessary to aim at a proximate 
regularity by calculating in masses. • To what cause the 
individual irregularity is due, whether to the complexity 
and minuteness of the physical conditions of the problem, 
or to the presence of moral conditions and free agency, — 
whether it indicates contingency in the facts themselves, 
or only a defect in our means of calculating,— this is a 
question which can only be answered by an acquaintance 
with the individual objects under examination, and which 
gains no elucidation from the statistics of large classes 1 . 

Note E, p. 167. 

Sir W. Hamilton, in connection with his theory of the 
nature of the causal judgment, maintains, that the schemes 
of liberty and necessity are both equally inconceivable ; 
though for the fact of liberty we have, immediately or 
mediately, the testimony of consciousness. A free voli- 
tion, he tells us, is inconceivable, because we cannot con- 
ceive an absolute commencement : a scheme of necessary 
determination is equally inconceivable, because we cannot 
conceive an infinite non-commencement. " As equally 
unthinkable," he says, " the two counter, the two one- 
sided, schemes are thus theoretically balanced. But 
practically, our consciousness of the moral law, which, 
without a moral liberty in man, would be a mendacious 
imperative, gives a decisive preponderance to the doctrine 
of freedom over the doctrine of fate. We are free in act, 
if we are accountable for our actions*." 

1 Some good remarks on the fallacy of this kind of reasoning will be 
found in the Rev. W. B.Jones's Assize Sermon, The Responsibility of Man 
to the Law of God, Oxford, 1859, p. 1ft. 

J Discussions, pp. 624, 62ft. Compare Raid's Works, pp. 599, 602. 



APPENDIX. 346 

This theory, though differing somewhat in the mode of 
reasoning, is in its conclusion similar to that previously 
arrived at by Kant. That philosopher, in his third 
Contradiction of Transcendental Ideas, arranges in parallel 
columns the opposite arguments in behalf of Liberty and 
Necessity, with the view of shewing that each is irre- 
sistible in its attack upon the other* Kant too, like Sir 
W. Hamilton, maintains that the fact of liberty is 
guaranteed by the testimony of the moral law, whose 
Categorical Imperative thou shalt, necessarily implies a 
corresponding thou canst*. Kant however denies that the 
liberty as a fact can claim the direct testimony of con- 
sciousness ; for consciousness in his philosophy is limited 
to the phenomena existing in space and time; whereas 
the freedom guaranteed by the moral law is a purely 
transcendental idea, subject to no conditions of time, and 
incapable of being presented in experience 1 . And this 
conclusion, so far as its negative result, the denial of 
a consciousness of freedom, is concerned, cannot be 
avoided, so long as we maintain, along with the universal 
authority of the principle of causality, the position that 
we are not directly conscious of self as a reality, but only 
of its several modes and affections. If my first conscious- 
ness relative to volition is not that of myself as willing, 
but only of will as a phenomenon, — if in the judgment 
"I will," there is no consciousness of/, but only of will, — 
to this phenomenon of volition I am compelled by the 
principle of causality to suppose an antecedent deter- 
mining phenomenon ; and to that again another, and so 
on ad infinitum. 

k See KrUik der reinen Vemv^Jly pp. 853, 420, 6122. Meiaph. der Bitten, 
p. 97. Kr. derpr. V. p. 189. Religion innerhalb u. *. w. p. 06. ed. Rosenkranz. 

l Kritik der r. T. p. 424. Metaph. der 8itten, p. 92. Kr. der pr. V, 
p. 224. 



346 APPENDIX. 

But this conclusion is no longer forced upon us, if we 
admit the existence of an immediate consciousness, not 
merely of the phenomena of mind, but of the personal 
self as actively and passively related to them. We thus 
obtain for the fact of liberty, not merely the indirect 
testimony of consciousness through the medium of the 
moral law, but the direct testimony by the presence of 
the fact itself. I am conscious, not merely of the phe- 
nomenon of volition, but of myself as producing it, and as 
producing it by choice with a power to choose the 
opposite alternative. In this case I am not compelled to 
go back to any prior cause whatever. I need not suppose 
a prior intelligent cause ; for my only positive notion of 
such a cause is myself determining, which does not imply 
myself determined. I need not suppose a prior phenomenal 
cause ; for I am conscious of the influence of motives as 
inclining only, not as necessitating. The whole point at 
issue thus turns on the following question, Can the fact 
of consciousness expressed in the judgment I will, be 
analysed into a relation of phenomena subject to the law 
of causality ? Is the principle which we invariably apply 
to the sequence of one phenomenon on another also 
applicable to the relation of any phenomenon to the one 
given cause, myself? 

Sir William Hamilton lays much stress on the impos- 
sibility of conceiving an absolute commencement. If by 
this is meant that I cannot conceive myself standing at 
the beginning of all time, out of all relation to any ante- 
cedent series of phenomena, it is undeniably true. But 
is such a conception needed to render the scheme of 
Liberty comprehensible ? Is it not sufficient for me to 
know that none of the chronological antecedents stand to 
my volition in the particular relation of a determining 
cause ? And this is the case, if it is neither given as an 



APPENDIX. 347 

active power coercing nor as a passive phenomenon in- 
variably preceding. To say that some antecedent or other 
must go before my will, is only to say that I do not stand 
at the beginning of all time : but does this imply some 
one antecedent which is invariably followed by volition 
or some active power, necessitating in each particular 
case ? If, on the presence of the antecedent or group of 
antecedents, A, my volition sometimes takes place one 
way, and sometimes another, it is not determined in the 
same manner as physical phenomena. If there is not 
always present some conscious being, exerting- his power 
over my will, it is not determined in the same manner as 
it determines its own volitions. But excepting these two 
senses, what is meant by determining cause f 

Is there then extant any definition of will which does 
not imply another will preceding ? Perhaps not ; but the 
fault lies only in the authors of the definitions. To refute 
a given definition does not prove the non-existence of 
the thing defined. If liberty itself is a simple fact of con- 
sciousness, the error lies in the attempt to define it at all. 
The definition will necessarily involve a circle, and upon 
that circle, and not on the fact, the antagonist reasons. 
But then if the definition and the fact of consciousness are 
at issue, the former must give way, not the latter. . Now 
consciousness tells me, not that my will mils, but that 
J will. Is it necessary to the conceivability of this fact, 
that I should be able to analyse it into two constituent 
elements, — to place an abstract 1 on one side, and an abstract 
will on the other; thus literally fulfilling the satirical 
direction for the turbulent puritan's burial, by laying John 
apart from Lilburn and Lilburn from John ? Will any 
other state or act of mind bear a similar analysis ? Can 
I in any case separate the state from the mind and the 
mind from the state ; or give any definition which does 



848 APPENDIX. 

not virtually repeat itself? Bat is it correct, on that 
account, to call states which I experience every day in 
consciousness inconceivable ? 

If indeed the freedom of the will be supposed to 
mean an absolute indifference to and independence of 
motives, such a liberty would be not only inconceivable 
as a fact, but worthless as a principle of moral action. 
But such is not the liberty to which consciousness bears 
witness; nor is such a liberty required as the only 
alternative against fatalism. The influence of motives 
on the will is not denied: only it is maintained that 
influence is not necessary determination ; and that motives 
are not causes, in any proper sense of the latter term. 
Thus interpreted, 1 believe the scheme of liberty is 
inconceivable only if the determinist argument is un- 
answerable ; and its answer is what I have attempted in 
this and the preceding note. If the attempt to establish 
a contradictory conclusion fails, liberty, though not 
definable, is surely as conceivable as any other simple 
datum of consciousness. 



Note F, p. 169. 

That our earliest notion of Causality arises from the 
fact given in the determination of our own volitions, is 
suggested by Locke and established beyond all question 
by Maine de Biran. But then arises the question : by 
what process do we transcend our personal consciousness, 
and acknowledge, in relation to the changes of the sensible 
world, the operation of causes other than ourselves? 
This process is called by De Biran and by Royer-Collard 
a Natural Induction, a term severely criticised by 
M. Cousin. Were the process really inductive, he argues, 
we must believe every cause in nature to be like our- 



APPENDIX. 34© 

selves, voluntary, conscious, and free; and even then, 
the belief in question might perhaps be regarded as 
universally true within the limits of experience, but 
could never rise to the character of a necessary truth. 
For a more satisfactory explanation, M. Cousin has 
recourse to the principle of causality, which he regards 
as a necessary law of the reason, by virtue of which it 
disengages, in the fact of consciousness, the necessary 
element of causal relation from the contingent element 
of my personal production of this or that particular 
movement. This necessity, which compels the reason 
to suppose a cause whenever the senses or the con- 
sciousness present a phenomenon, is the Principle of 
Causality" 1 . 

It is obvious to ask, what do we gain by the principle 
of causality thus supposed? Does it explain in any 
degree the nature of that power which we are supposed 
to attribute to inanimate objects? Does it explain 
how we divest our original notion of the attribute of 
personality, and whdt is left when we have done so? 
Does it furnish the slightest hint or help for investigating 
the true character of efficient causes? By no means. 
The principle itself is a mere statement of the fact, that 
we do invariably suppose a cause of physical changes, and 
that we cannot but do so. It offers no psychological 
explanation of the fact : it merely gives it the name of a 
principle of reason. It does not give us any positive 
notion of the cause in question : this remains, we know 
not what, — a something different from our own causality, 
and, as such, supposable perhaps, but inconceivable. It 
does not tell us how we can attain to a more positive 
knowledge. Not by the senses ; for these present to us 
only successive phenomena. Not by the internal con* 

m Court de Philosophic, Le^on 19. 



350 APPENDIX. 

seiousness ; for this informs us only of personal causation. 
Not by the reason ; for this only tells us in general terms 
that there is a cause, but furnishes no means of observing 
and distinguishing its character and varieties. The cause 
of physical changes still remains, like the subject of 
physical attributes, a negative idea, a.je ne sais quoi. 

Nor does M. Cousin's theory, any more than that of 
De Biran, explain how we get rid of the personal element 
with which all intuitive causality is involved. It only 
says that we do so, and that we must do so. The term 
Induction, employed by De Biran and Royer-Collard, is 
indeed objectionable, whether it be taken in the Aristo- 
telian or in the Baconian sense* The former is objection- 
able ; inasmuch as our personal acts are not supposed to 
constitute, or even adequately to represent, the whole body 
of causal relations. The latter is objectionable ; for the 
same acts cannot be selected instances shewing diverse 
operations of a law, but must, from the nature of the case, 
be all of one kind. But this objection affects only the 
language, and not the basis of the theory: indeed, the two 
philosophers in question have expressly stated that their 
natural induction must be carefully distinguished from 
that of physics n . But in point of language, the phrase 
principle of reason is equally objectionable ; partly as 
tending to check all further psychological investigation 
into a point by no means as yet satisfactorily explained, 
and partly as opening the way to the thousand extrava- 
gances of ontological speculation, by concealing the purely 
negative character of the notion of physical power. On 
M. de Biran's theory, says M. Cousin, anthropomorphism 
becomes the universal and necessary law of thought . It 

n CEuvree de Maine de Biran, vol. iv. p. 398. Jouffroy's Reid % vol. iv. 
p. 883, 439. 
• (Euvre* de Maine de Biran, vol. iv. Preface de 1'Editour, p. zxzvi. 



APPENDIX. 351 

might be replied, that in all cases where the presentation 
is given by internal consciousness only, anthropomorphism 
is in fact the condition and the limit of all positive 
thinking* 

I conceive, therefore, that there is nothing in M. 
Cousin's theory which dispenses with the obligation of 
a further psychological examination of the origin and 
character of the supposed principle of causality, such as I 
have attempted in the text of the present work. Whether 
that explanation itself be right or wrong, must be judged 
by others ; but, whatever may be its fate in this respect, 
I shall deem its purpose sufficiently answered, if it serves 
to call the attention of philosophers to a point hitherto too 
much neglected in speculation, the important distinction 
between positive and negative intuitions and thoughts. 



Note G, p. 171. 

In the controversy concerning the existence of a Moral 
Sense, the question at issue has suffered considerable mis- 
representation, from the want of an accurate distinction 
between intuitive or presentative consciousness, whose 
object is an individual thing, act, or state of mind, and 
reflective or representative consciousness, whose immediate 
object is a general notion or principle. Stewart, for 
example, in his Life of Adam Smith, observes, " It was 
the opinion of Dr. Cudworth, and also of Dr. Clarke, that 
moral distinctions are perceived by that power of the 
mind which distinguishes truth from falsehood. This 
system it was one great object of Dr. Hutcheson's philo- 
sophy to refute, and in opposition to it, to shew that the 
words right and wrong express certain agreeable and dis- 
agreeable qualities in actions, which it is not the province 
of reason but of feeling to perceive ; and to that power of 



35£ APPENDIX. 

perception which render us susceptible of pleasure or of 
pain from the view of virtue or of vice, he gave the name 
of the Moral Sense." The same philosopher, in his 
Philosophical Essays, endeavours to obviate Hume's de- 
ductions from Hutcheson's theory, by falling back, in 
some degree, upon the views of Cudworth and Clarke, 
and referring the origin of our notions of right and wrong 
to reason instead of sense. " Tastes and colours," said 
Hume, " and all other sensible qualities, lie, not in the 
bodies, but merely in the senses. The case is the same 
with beauty and deformity, virtue and vice/' To this 
Stewart replies, " The decisions of the understanding, it 
must be owned, with respect to moral truth, differ from 
those which relate to a mathematical theorem, or to the 
result of a chemical experiment, inasmuch as they are 
always accompanied with some feeling or emotion of the 
heart; but on an accurate analysis of this compounded 
sentiment, it will be found, that it is the intellectual 
judgment which is the groundwork of the feeling, and 
not the feeling of the judgment." 

In a Lecture on Moral Relations, by the late Professor 
Mills, the different opinions concerning our perception of 
' Morality are summed up as follows. 

" 1. Some ascribe our apprehension of it, with Hutche- 
son, to a peculiar internal sense, similar in its operations 
to the external senses, and confound moral perception 
with taste: this is, strictly speaking, the theory of a 
moral sense. 

"2. Others attribute moral perception, not to any 
peculiar sense, but yet to a peculiar faculty of the 
understanding distinct from its general powers, and they 
appear to identify conscience with the moral faculty. 

"8. Many deny the existence of a peculiar moral 
faculty, and maintain that moral principles are appre- 



APPENDIX. 353 

headed* by the same powers of the intellect which 
perceive other kinds of truth. 

" 4. The Utilitarian theory implies that moral relations 
are ascertained and embraced by the operations of the 
discursive faculty only *." 

The whole controversy may be considerably cleared by 
distinguishing Moral Facts from Moral Principles. Facts 
of all kinds are presented to, and perceived by, different 
faculties of intuition, similar in the manner of their 
operation to the perceptions of sense: and hence, with 
some allowance for metaphor, we may speak of internal 
or external senses*. Is it then asked whether we discern 
morality in individual acts, by the same faculties by which 
we discern other qualities of individual objects presented 
to us? But of these qualities, some are visible, some 
audible, and so on. Is it meant that an act can literally 
be seen, heard, smelt, felt, or tasted, to be virtuous or 
vicious ? If not, the perception of the moral character of 
acts is a distinct presentation, and, as such, to be referred 
to a distinct faculty ; though, being, as will appear, an 
object of internal, not of external perception, it is not, 
like the external senses, connected with a distinct bodily 
organ. 

The question, whether right and wrong are apprehended 

P Bstays and Lectwrts 6y the late Rev. W. Milk, p. 304. 

i This has been observed by Aristotle, whose account of the Practical 
Sense or Intelligence is in this respect more accurate than that of modern 
philosophers. Kol yap w trp&rtov Zptov ko\ rwv iirxdrw rods itrrl «al ob 
Kayos, ml 6 fihf Kara rat awoUi^tu rw OKtyfrrw Ipwr «ol vp<fr*p, 6 V iv 
rats vpatrruccus rov tax&rov kclI 4v9txofi4ifov «a) rqt hrtpas wpo- 
rd<T€<us' apxal yap rov oZ Utica air or 4k r*v naff harra yap rh ko96Kov. 
Tovrw obv *x«v 8*7 at<rBi\ <r i v, avrt) V Arrl vovs. Eth. Nic. vi. 1 J . Com- 
pare Pol i. 2. Tovro yap *pbs r&Wa (pet rots Mpdtwois Xhiov, rh (Uvov 
ayatiov koI kokov ko) BikoIov ko1 bZUov koX rmv tUAwp aUSi\Civ %x*w. 
These passages may serve as a qualiBcation of Smith's assertion, that the 
word moral sense is of very late formation. 

A a 



854 APPENDIX* 

by the same powers of the intellect which perceive other 
kinds of truth, is only applicable to the general concept* 
or principle*, through which morality is repreeented as an 
object of thought. Truth and Falsehood can be dis- 
tinguished in representative knowledge only ; and all such 
knowledge is most conveniently classified by reference to 
the single faculty of the Understanding* The same power 
of thought may inquire into the ground of various pre- 
sentations: it may investigate, for example, why one 
object is white, why another is harmonious, why a third 
is sweet, why a fourth is beautiful, why a fifth is 
virtuous; but in all such investigations, the fact of a 
given object possessing a given quality must be pre- 
supposed as the groundwork of the investigation. The 
distinction between a true and a false theory of morals 
will be determined by the same test as that between 
truth and falsehood in any other inquiry ; — its agreement 
or not with the facts as given in intuition. 

It thus appears, that a power of discerning right and 
wrong in individual acts must be allowed as the present- 
ative basis, without which no system of Moral Philosophy 
is possible. Such a power, thus limited, it is impossible 
for the Utilitarian to explain away by any theory of 
association or education. Education may corrupt and 
pervert our presented ideas, but it cannot originate them : 
it may teach me to regard an act as right which is really 
wrong, or vice versa, but it cannot create the original 
impression of either. To deny, with Locke and Paley, 
the existence of a moral sense, because one man holds to 
be wrong what another holds to be right, is like denying 
the existence of a faculty of sight, because a man with the 
jaundice sees all objects yellow. The existence of the 
faculty is shewn by our approving or disapproving at all: 
it cannot therefore be disproved by the fact of our some- 



APPENDIX. 355 

times approving or disapproving wrongly. The opposite 
error of Hume, in holding that virtue and vice exist in 
the sense only, lies in a confusion of the subjective feeling 
of approbation with the objective quality which gives rise 
to it* The same confusion has taken place with regard to 
the secondary qualities of body. Heat and colour, as 
sensations, exist only in a sentient being ; but that such 
sensations originate from nothing at all in the bodies them- 
selves, is an absurdity long ago exploded, if indeed ever 
seriously maintained. 

This presentation of right and wrong, however, is by* 
no means accurately exhibited in the account commonly 
given of moral sense. It is not correct to describe our 
perception of the moral character of actions in general 
as coordinate with or including the judgment of our 
own conduct in particular'. Right and wrong are not 
directly presented to me in any other actions than my own. 
Tf I see a murder committed in a puppet-show, I have all 
the same presented phenomena as if I see a murder com- 
mitted by a man. I do not feel the same moral disappro- 
bation, because I do not attribute to the puppet the 
same internal consciousness of obligation as to the man. 
But this consciousness is not presented except in the case 
of my own acts, and, from these, is transferred represent- 
atively to other men, whose mental constitution I believe 
to be in this respect similar to my own. The intuitive 
faculty is properly limited to the approbation or disappro- 
bation of my personal acts; and to this personal conscious- 
ness must thus be traced the original notions of Right and 
Wrong, as of Cause, and of Substance, and of all internal 



' As is done by Bishop Sanderson, in his PralecHone* de ObUgatione 
Oonscientue, as well as by Shaftesbury, Hutoheson, and most of the 
advocates of a moral sense, and stall more by Smith, in his theory of 
Sympathy. 



356 APPENDIX. 

phenomena. Hence, if the terms Moral Sense and Con- 
science be used according to the ordinary philosophical 
distinction, it will be more correct to describe Moral 
Sense as an extension of Conscience, than Conscience 
as a limitation of Moral Sense*. ~ 



Note H, p. 263. 

The difference between the relations of the several 
Forms of Thought to Psychology and to Logic has not 
hitherto been accurately marked. Psychologically, all 
that is communicated by, not given to, the act of thinking, 
belongs to the form, not to the matter, of the product* 
But these psychological forms do not come within the 
province of Logic, unless some further process of pure or 
formal thinking is affected by them. In its psychological 
relation, modality is clearly one of the forms of judgment. 
The necessary judgment, " A must be B," expresses the 
existence of a law, of some kind or other, by which the 
attributes are inseparably connected: the contingent 
judgment, whose full expression is, V A may or may not 
be B," denies the existence of any law of the kind : while 
the pure judgment, "Aw B," states the fact of an existing 
connection, without taking into account the question of 
law at all. The psychological question is this: " Is the 
presence or absence of a law connecting the terms of a 

9 This is exactly the reverse of the theory of Adam Smith, who main- 
tains that our judgments concerning the morality of our own acts is 
entirely derived from that which we pass on others. This theory he 
carries so far as to assert, " Were it possible that a human creature could 
grow up to manhood in some solitary place, without any communication 
with his own species, he could no more think of his own character, of the 
propriety or demerit of his own sentiments and conduct, of the beauty 
or deformity of his own mind, than of the beauty or deformity of his 
own face.*' 



APPENDIX. 357 

judgment given to or by the act of judging ? Is it part of 
the given phenomena, or a manner in which the mind 
regards them ? In other words : Is modality an affection 
of the predicate, or of the copula? Do I in thought 
decide on the actual connection of A with a given 
necessary -B, or on the necessary connection of A with a 
given B? In the former case, the modality belongs to 
the matter of the judgment ; in the latter, to the form. 

The true answer to this question is sufficiently plain. 
If sensible experience is incompetent to furnish the 
notion of identity between two phenomena, it is equally 
incompetent to furnish that of necessary or contingent 
identity. These are additional products of the act of 
thought; experience having only presented the pheno- 
mena in a constant or variable juxtaposition. Nay further, 
the hypothesis that modality is given in the predicate of 
a judgment, not thought in the copula, becomes, in ulti- 
mate analysis, destructive of itself. For, if in thought 
we connect A with what is given as necessarily B, this 
implies that B has previously been thought as necessarily 
connected with some subject or other* A necessary-B 
has no intelligible sense, except in relation to some 
previous judgment, " C must be B." The identification 
of A with B then takes place through the medium of C ; 
and the supposition that modality can be given as an 
affection of the predicate, implies that it has been pre- 
viously thought as an affection of the copula. This is 
sufficient to establish the psychological position of modality 
as a form of the judgment. But, thus admitted, it is 
indispensable that it should be expressed in the copula, 
and not, as is frequently done, left to be gathered from 
our knowledge of the matter. A judgment of the form 
" A is B," whatever notions may be expressed by the 
terms, can never be thought as other than a pure or 



358 APPENDIX. 

assertorial judgment. An apodeictical or problematical 
judgment requires a different statement of the copular 
relation, " A must be B," or " A may be B." 

On the other hand, the criticism of Sir W. Hamilton, 
though accurately expressed in relation to one process of 
thought only, may be so extended as to be decisive as 
regards the exclusion of modality from Logic. " Necessity, 
Contingency, &c." he says, " are circumstances which do 
not affect the logical copula or the logical inference. 
They do not relate to the connexion of the subject and 
predicate, of the antecedent and consequent, as terms in 
thought, but as realities in existence; they are meta- 
physical, not logical conditions. The syllogistic inference 
is always necessary ; is modified by no extraformal 
condition ; is equally apodictic in contingent as in 
necessary matter*." 

As regards the syllogistic inference, these remarks are 
strictly accurate, and would be conclusive against any 
modality proposed as a form of reamndng. Were a 
distinction, for example, set up between syllogisms in 
which the conclusion necessarily follows from the pre- 
mises, and syllogisms in which it may be inferred with 
more or less probability, the latter would rightly be 
condemned as extralogical : the true syllogistic inference 
being always necessary. As regards the copula in judg- 
ments, the criticism cannot be accepted as verbally 
accurate, unless we distinguish the logical copula from 
the psychological. That modality relates to realities in 
existence, is not conclusive; for quantity and quality, 
in all synthetical judgments, do the same in the same 
degree, and yet are rightly classed as forms of thought. 
But if we extend the distinction between formal and 
material thinking, so as to embrace judgment and con- 

1 Discussions, p. 146 . 



APPENDIX. 

ception, as well as reasoning, it is clear that the copula 
is always necessary in analytical or formal judging, as 
the inference is always necessary in formal reasoning. 
Material judgments, however, cannot be entirely ex- 
cluded from Logic, in so far as they furnish data for 
formal reasoning. They are admissible, however, only 
in relation to this latter process ; and hence those forms 
of judgment only are rightly to be regarded as logical, 
which affect the formal inference derivable from them. 
This is the case with quantity and quality, but not 
with modality: the latter affects the conclusion of a 
syllogism, not as a conclusion, in its relation to the 
premises, but only in itself, as a proposition. For this 
reason, it is logically preferable to exclude modality as 
a form, and to treat it as if it affected the predicate 
only of the judgment. The logical copula thus becomes 
in every instance assertorial only ; and if this be carefully 
distinguished from the psychological copula, the remarks 
of Sir W. Hamilton may be regarded as applicable to 
the whole of Logic, and to every process of thought. 




THE END. 



BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD. 



c* 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 
BERKELEY 



Return to desk from which borrowed. 
This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 



' 



REC'D LD 

M/3 J6Q 

FEB \ 3 £t» 

^D APR 6 T9g 4 

JUL 25 1988 H 



^17*88 



! -tOOm.9, , *7{A5702il8)47S 



% 31623 




/!?*£ 