LECTURES 

os 

METAPHYSICS AND LOGIC 



Digitized by Google 



ON EARTH, THERE liS NOTHING CRE.VT BUT MAN ; 
IN MAN, THERE 18 NOTHING GREAT BUT MIND. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES 


OK 

METAPHYSICS AND LOGIC 


nr 


SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON, BART. 

rRoremoR or looic ami MiTAPiiraioi ix tub 
CXIVKU tITY or KDIKRl'ROII 

A4ror*(v. A.M. (Oson.) Ac.; rorre^onidinf Mcmb«r of tba ImUtutc of franer; flonormfy MefBb«Tof th« 
AomHcmi AmHobi; of Arta miH RciMca; «n<l of Uio RocM/ of Jom, k*. 


RDiTKn ny tiik 



REV. II. L. MANSEL, B.D., LL.D. 

«T»njrrv rMiKmo* or mrnoi- Ann KitrAmvairAi. rnuni^iiv. nxr««n 
AND 


JOHN YE ITCH, M.A. 



WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON 
MDCCCLX 


Th* Ri^ht nf Trarutothn h rrjirrm^ 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES 


ON* 

LOGIC 


nr 

SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON, BART. 


KDITED BY THE 

llEV. II. L. M.VNSEL, B.D., LL.I). 

WA>'*riJn» nir>rM«nH of MOHAI. AMO MrTAFRAIK At. FHIlmoFRV. o»m*o 
AXD 

JOHN VEITCIl, M.A. 

mnrFMOH OF I4»ic. tmrTnmc. Axn nirrA>H\*t(A. irr AWMinri 


VOL. IT. 


WTIJJAM I5LACKWOOD AND SONS 
EDINBURGH AND I.ONDON 
MDCCCLX 


The Hipht nf Tntmi<*txon U rettn'f't 


Digitized by Coogk 



ERRATA 

VOL. I. 

Page 94, line 23, /or ** Leibnitzian " read Leibuitian.’* 

177, first marginal summary, /or “ withbut" read ‘'without” 

... 200, note /3, col. 2. tranf/er from line 9 to line 4, ” ReidC$ Aca/unt of** and 

to lino 4, after “ Works^ transfer from line 10, “ p. 6S5 et seq.'' 

. . . 208, second marginal summary, for “ and ** reoil “ or.” 

... 247, note, col. 2, lino 1 , after “ alhjemeinen ” delete comma. 

... 261, note, col. 1, line 3, after “ Opera** delete comma 
... 264, note a, col. 1, line II, /or "This” read “Thus.” 

... 294, note 3, col. 2, line 1, after “ p. 469,” tJwrK J [. 

... 340, note 3. col. 2, lino 1,/or “to” read ri.” 

... .363, line 30, /or “permanently ” re<wi “pre-eminently.” 

,,, 379, note a, col. 1, line 2, after “ Sorites" insert “ only.” 

... 390, second marginal summary, after “ Dionysius” insert “ of.” 

VOL. II. 

Page 10, second marginal summary, /or “and ” read “ or.” 

... 61, note a, for ** inlfesondere ” read “ insbesonelere.** 

... 258, lino 18, for “ Mop ” read “ 08otp." 

... 260, note 0, cob 1, lino 4, /or ** praticles read “ particics.** 

... 271, lino 14, after “ its ” inseri “ full.” 

... 278, lino 3, for “ iSioparroi ” read “ 48i4picrrot.” 

... 280, lino 9, for “ Aoporro” read “ A4p«rro.” 

... 292, line 7, /or “ U8 ” trad “ is.” 

... 324, note, col. 2, /or “ B ^ “ • C”rfad“B;. . C." 


Digitized by Google 


CONTENTS OF VOL. II 


Faok 

LECTURE XXIV. 

PURE LOGIC- 

PART n. METHODOLWiY. SECTION I. METHOD IN ORKKRAT. 

— SECTION U.' METHOD IN BPECIAK OR ‘LOGICAL ME- 
THODOLOGY. — 1. DOCTRINE OF DEFIMITION, . . 1 


LECTURE XXV. 

¦ METHODOLOGY. 

LOGICAL METHODOLOGY. — H. DOCTRIXE OF DIVISION. . 22 

LECTURE XXVI. 

LOGICAL METHODOLOGY. — lU. DOCTRINE OF PROBATION, . 37 


• LECTURE XXVII. 

MODIFIED LOGIC. 

PART T. MOmTTKD STOTCHRTOTOGY.— aECTlOII I. DOfTRTNE 

OP TRUTH AND ERROR —TRUTH ITS CHARACTER AUD 

KINDS 60 


LECTURE XXVIIL 

MODIFIED STOICHEIOLQGY. 

SECTION I. DOCTRINE OF TRUTH AND ERROR — SECTION n. 

ERROR ITS CAUSES AND REMEDIES.— A. GENERAL 

CTRCimaiANCES — SOCIETY 75 


Digitized by Google 


vm 


CONTENTS. 


LECTURE XXIX. 

PAfiF. 

ERBOR— ITS CAUSES AND REMEDIES.— A. GENERAL CIRCUM- 
STANCES — SOCIETY. B. AS IN POWERS OF COGNITION. 

FEELINQ, AND DESIRE. — I. AFFECTIONS — PRECIPITANCY 
— SLOTH — HOPE AND FEAR — SELF-LOVE, ¦ 89 

LECTURE XXX. 

ERROR— ITS CAUSES AND RE.MEDIE3,— R AS IN THE COQ - 
NITIONS, FEEUNGS, AND DESIRES. — IL WEAKNESS AND 
DISPROPORTIQNED STRENOTH OF THE FACULTIES OF 
KNOWLEDGE 109 


LECTURE XXXI. 

ERROR — ITS CAUSES AND REMEDIES. — C. LANGUAGE. — D. OB- 
JECTS OF KNOWLEDGE UQ 

LECTURE XXXII. 

MODIFIED METHODOLOGY. 

SECTION I. OF THE ACQUISITION AND PERFECTING OF KNOW- 
LEDGE,— L EXPERIENCE.— A. PERSONAL: — OBSERVATION 
— INDUCTION AND ANALOGY, 152 

LECTURE XXXIIL 

OF THE ACOUTSmON AND PERFECTINQ OP KNOWLEDGE. — 

I. EXPERIENCE. — B. FOREIGN : — ORAL TESTIMONY— ITS 
CREDIBILITY 175 

LECTURE XXXIV. 

OF TIIE ACQUISITION AND PERFECTING OF KNOWLEDGE. — 

I. EXPERIENCE. — B. FOREIGN: RECORDED TESTIMONY 
AND W^TINGS IN GENERaVL.— IL SPECULATION, 191 


Digitized by Google 


CONTENTS. ix 


LECTURE XXXV. 

- PAne 

OF THE ACQtJISinoy AND PERFECTiyO OF KXQWT.gDme. — 

III. COMMUNICATION OF KKQWLEDfiR — A. TySTRUmOW 
— ORAL AND WRITTEN, — R CONFERENCE — DIALOOnE 
AND DISPUTATION. 20A 


APPENDIX. 

I.— THE CHABACTEB AND COMPREHENSION OF LOGIC— A 


FRAGMENT 223 

n. — GENUS OF LOGIC 233 

IIL — DIVISIONS, VARIETIES, AND CONTENTS OF LOGIC, 233 

IV. — LAWS OF THOUGHT, 244 


V.— NEW ANALYTIC OF LOOICAI. FORMS — GENERAT. RESm.Ta 


— FRAGMENTS. 

(tt) EITBACT FROM PHOSPECTrS OF “ EgSAT TOWARDS A MEW 

AKALTTIC OF LOOtCAL FORMS," ^ ^ . 240 

(b) LOOrC, — ITS POSTULATEa, ; ; j . 252 

(c) QrASTTFlCAHOX OF PREDICATE, — IMMEDIATE BiyEBKWCE, — 

coMTEiusioK,— opposmoy, ; ; ; . 255 

(t£) APPUCATION OP DOCTRISE OP QUAKTIPIKD PREDICATE TO 

PBOPosraoss, ...... 277 

(«) APPLICATION OF DOCTRINE OP QUANTIFIED PREDICATE TO 

BTLLOUISllE, ...... 285 

(/) OBJECTIONS TO THE DOCTRINE OP A QUANTIFIED PREDICATE 

CONSIDERED, ...... 289 

(S) HISTORICAL NonOES OF DOCTRINE OF QUANTIFIED PREDICATE, 298 


VL — CANONS OF SYLLOGISM ; GENERAL HISTORICAL NOTICES 
AND CRITICISM. 

A. BI8TORICAL NOTICES. 

(a) FUNDAMENTAL L.IW3 OF STLLOOISH — QUOTATIONS, . . SI 7 

(5) FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF SYLLOGISM — REFERENCES, . . 339 

(c) ENUNCIATIONS OF THE HIGHER LAWS OF SYLLOGISM, . 341 

(rf) OBJECTIONS TO THE DICTUM DB OMNI ET NULLO, . . 342 

(r) GENERAL LAWS OF SYLLOGISM IN VERSE, . . . 343 

(/) SPECIAL LAWS OF SYLLOGISM IN VERSE, . . . 344 


Digitized by Google 


X 


CONTEXTS. 


VI.- 

-TAXONS OF SYLLOGISM — continued. 



B. CRITICISM, 

pAfir 


(a) CBinCISM OF TnK BPEaAL LAWS OF SYLLOGISM, . 

344 


(b) j-Avn or RKCosv FianBB, ..... 

347 


(r) AUTBOB’S 8CPREVK CANONS OF CATlUlOIltCAL SYLLOGISMS. . 

350 


(d) ULTRA-TOTAL QUANTIFICATION OF HIUOLE TERM, . 

351 

m 

— INDUCnON AND EXAMPLE.. 



(«) QUOTATIONS FROM AUTBOBS, .... 

358 


(6| MATERIAL INUCCnuN, ..... 

3C8 


YIII. — HYPOTHETIPAL AMD DISJUXCTIYE REASOXISO — 
iMUrv.nT^TE * ; ^ ^ 


A. author’s IK>CrRlNE— FRAOMBim. 


• 

309 

B, HISTORICAL KOTICEB, 



. 387 

IX. 80EITES 



. 395 


X. — SYLLOGISM. 

A. ITS EyOP.NCKMEKT^AXALTTIC AKP aTMTHETlC — QRDEB Qg 


PnF.MISRS. 


(a) KNOUNCEMSNT OF SYLLOGISM. 


398 

(b) ORDER OF PREMISES. . 

, , 

. 401 


B. WCCBK — iiNrionitKn AWn unnitKn aTi .T/%mau 

(1863^ (a) CONTRAST AND COMPABiaOW OF THE TABIODa 
; BllrtM QF fQRMAL RTIXOQiaH— DiryERKXCE QT TlOVRi 


ACCIOSBTAU ...... 

404 

(b) DOUBLE CONCLUSION IN SECOND AND THIRD FIOURBS. . 

406 

0. HISTORICAL NOTICES BEOARDINO riQUEE OF STLLOOISM. 

413 

- D. SYLLOGISTIC MOODS. 


(a) DIRECT AND INDIRECT MOODS. 

449 

(5) INDIRECT MOODS OF SECOND AND THIRD FIGURES, 

455 

(c) NEW MOODS— NOTES UPON TABLE OF SYLLOGISMS. 

457 

XL LOGICAL NOTATION. 


(a) Lambert’s linear notation. 

460 

(4) NOTATION BY MAASS. ..... 

463 

(e) author’s scheme of notation — no. i. linear. 

484 

((/} author's scheme of notation — UNFIGOUEI) AND 
nOUHEDSTLLOOISM — KO. II. 

468 

(e) author’s scheme of notation — figured SYLLOGISM 
' • - T.VBLE OF MOODS — NO. UI. . 

475 


DigitizecI by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECTURE XXIV. 

PURE LOGIC. 

PART II. — METHODOLOGY. 

SECTION I. — METHOD IN GENERAL. 

SECTION II. — METHOD IN SPECIAL, OR LOGICAL 
METHODOLOGY. 

I. — DOCTRINE OF DEFINITION. 

Gentlemen, — We concluded, in our last Lecture, the lect. 

consideration of Syllogisms, viewed as Incorrect or ^ 

False ; in other words, the doctrine of Fallacies, in so 
far as the fallacy lies within a single syllogism. This, 
however, you will notice, does not exhaust the consider- 
ation of fallacy in general, for there are various species 
of false reasoning which may affect a whole train of 
syllogisms. These, — of w'hich the Pctitio Principii, 
the Ignoratio Elenchi, the Circulns, and the Saltiis in 
Concludendo, are the principal, — wUl be appropriately 
considered in the sequel, when we come to treat of the 
Doctrine of Probation or Demonstration. With Fal- 
lacies terminated the one Great Division of Pure Logic, 

— the Doctrine of Elements, or Stoicheiology, — and I 

VOL. II. A 


Digitized by Google 


LKCT. 

XXIV. 


nor. LX XX. 
Method ia 
geoerml. 


2 LKCTURES ON LOGIC. 

opentheotherGreat Division,- — the Doctrine of Method, 
or Methodology, — with the following paragraph. 

LXXX. A Science is a complement of cog- 
nitions, having, in point of Form, the character 
of Logical Perfection ; in point of Matter, the 
character of Real Truth. 

The constituent attributes of Logical Perfec- 
tion are the Perspicuity, the Completeness, the 
Harmony, of Knowledge. But the Perspicuity, 
Completeness, and Harmony of our cognitions 
are, for the human mind, possible only through 
Method. 

^lethod in general denotes a procedure in the 
treatment of an object, conducted according to 
determinate rules. Method, in reference to Sci- 
ence, denotes, therefore, the arrangement and ela- 
boration of cognitions according to definite rules, 
with the view of conferring on these a Logical 
Perfection. The I^Iethods by which we proceed 
in the treatment of the objects of our knowledge 
are two ; or rather Method, considered in its inte- 
grity, consists of two processes , — Analysis and 
Synthesis. 

I. The Analytic or Regressive ; — in which, de- 
parting from the individual and the determined, 
we ascend always to the more and more general, 
in order finally to attain to ultimate principles. 

II. The Synthetic or Progressive ; — in which 
we depart from principles or universals, and from 
these descend to the determined and the indi- 
vidual. 

Through the former we investigate and ascer- 
tain the reality of the several objects of science ; 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


8 


through the hitter we connect the fragments of 
¦ our knowledge into the unity of a system. 


LEcrr. 

XXIV. 


In its Stoicheiology or Doctrine of Elements, Logic Expiic*- 
considers the conditions of possible thought : for thought PoMibiiuy 
can only be exerted under the general laws of Identity, 1^11™ of 
Contradiction, Excluded Middle, and Reason and Con-^"’*'’*' 
sequent ; and through the general forms of Concepts, 
Judgments, and Reasonings. These, therefore, may 
be said to constitute the Elements of thought. But 
we may consider thought not merely as existing, but 
as existing well ; that is, we may consider it not only 
in its possibility, but in its perfection : and this per- 
fection, in so far as it is dependent on the form of 
thinking, is as much the object-matter of Logic as the 
mere possibility of thinking. Now that part of Logic 
which is conversant with the Perfection, — with the 
Well-being, of thought, is the Doctrine of Method, — 
Methodology. 

ilethod in general is the regulated procedure to- Method in 
wards a certain end ; that is, a progress governed by wh^’~ 
rules which guide us by the shortest way straight 
towards a certain point, and guard us against devi- 
ous aberrations.® Now the end of thought is truth, — 
knowledge, — science, — expressions which may here be 
considered as convertible. Science may, therefore, be Sciroc*,— 
regarded as the perfection of thought, and to the 


a [On Method, see Alex. Aphrod., 
Ih a naL PHor., f. 3b, Aid. 1520. Am- 
monium}, In Pro(rm, /^>r/>AyWi, f. 21b, 
Aid. 1546. Philopomw, In An. Prior.f 
i.4. /nAn. 94. Euatratiua, /» 

An.Po*i.,flF.lb,53b. See also Mol intcus, 
Zabarella, Nunneaius, Timpler, Dow- 
nam.] [Molin8eua,/«oyt<*a, L.ii.,D« dlfe- 
thodo, p. 245 et uff Zaborelln, Opera 
Logica^ De MethodU^ L. i. c. 2, p. 134. 


Peter John Nunncaiua, De ContlUu- 
tione Artie Dialectirie^ p. 43 et eeq.y ett 
1554,withrolativecommentary. Tim- 
pler, Syetema Logicae, L. iv. c. viii. p. 
716 nq. G. Downam, C<mmentarii 
in P. Rami DialecHcam^ L. ii. c. 17, 
p. 472 et seq. On the diatinction be- 
tween Method and Order, see Lceturei 
on Metnphy»ie*t vol. i. lect- ri. p. 96, 
and note. — Ed.] 


Digitized by Google 



4 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


i.ECT. accomplishmeut of this perfection the Methodology of 
— Logic must be accommodated and conducive. But 
Science, that is, a system of true or certain knowledge, 
lu perfcc- supposes two couditious. Of these the first has a re- 
mat and lation to the knowing subject, and supposes that what 
" ¦ is known is known clearly and distinctly, completely, 
and in connection. The second has a relation to the 
objects known, and supposes that what is known has 
a true or real existence. The former of these consti- 
tutes the Formal Perfection of science, the latter is the 
Material. 

Logic ukc« Now, as Logic is a science exclusively conversant 
only the about the form of thought, it is evident that of these 
fc^on^r two conditions, — of these two elements, of science or 
perfect thinking. Logic can only take into account the 
formal perfection, which may, therefore, be distinc- 
tively denominated the logical perfection of thought. 
Logical Logical Methodology will, therefore, be the exposition 
oi^,_l of the rules and ways by which we attain the formal 
or logical perfection of thought. 

Methoain l^Iethod, considered in general, — considered in 

Tsu™' its unrestricted universality, — consists of two processes, 

Matom-” correlative and complementary of each other. For 
it proceeds either from the whole to the parts, or from 
the parts to the whole. As proceeding from the whole 
tiiMn. parts, that is, as resolving, as unloosing, a com- 

plex totahty into its constituent elements, it is Ana- 
lytic ; as proceeding from the parts to the whole, that 
is, as recomposing constituent elements into their 
complex totality, it is Synthetic. These two processes 
are not, in strict propriety, two several methods, but 
together constitute only a single method. Each alone 
is imperfect : — each is conditioned or consummated by 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


h 


the other : and, as I formerly observed,® Analysis and lect . 

Synthesis are as necessary to themselves and to the 

life of science, as expiration and inspiration in connec- 
tion are necessary to each other and to the possibility 
of animal existence. 

It is here proper to make you aware of the confusion Confa.ion 
which prevails in regard to the application of the terms the amilica- 
Analysis &nd oynmesis.p It is manifest, in general, t*rm» am- 
from the meaning of the words, that the term analysis Sjnihcii. 
can only be applied to the separation of a whole into 
its parts, and that the term synthesis can only be ap- 
plied to the collection of parts into a whole. So far, 
no ambiguity is possible, — no room is left for abuse. 


But you are aware that there are different kinds of Thc« cuun- 
whole and parts ; and that some of the wholes, like « 
the whole of Comprehension, (called also the Meta- ict^wHoIcs 
physical), and the whole of Extension, (called also hen.ion and 

, T • • P ,1 Exlcnaion. 

the Logical), are m the inverse ratio of each otner ; so correpond 


a See Lerturti on Mttaphytia, vol. 
i. p. 99. — Ed. 

$ [Zabarella, Opera Logira^ Liber de 
Regrtstu^ pp, 4S1, 489. Seo also, In 
Ancd. PoMter., L. ii. text 81, pp. 1212, 
1213. MuUdsdus, Loglca^ L. ii. Ap- 
pendix, p. 241 et »fq., who notices 
that both the Analytic and Synthetic 
order may proceed from the general 
to the particular. See also to the 
same effect lloffbauer, Vbrr die Ana- 
!yii$ in der Philo»<phitf p. 41 et 
teq.^ Halle, 1810. Gassendi, Pby- 
SfVa, Sectio iii. Memb. Part, L. ix. 
Opera, t. ii. p. 460. Victorin, Neue 
natiirlichere DarttcUiing der Logxk, § 
214. Trendelenburg, ^/rmen fa 
Arietotdiecf^ p. S9. Troxler, Logii\ ii. 
p.100, n.**. Krug, AoyiJl*, § 114, p. 406, 
n. and § 120, p. 431. Wyttenbaeh 
makes Synthetic method progress from 


))articulan to universale ; other logi- 
cians generally the reverse.]— [See 
his Prtrrepta Phil. Logicie, P. III. c. 
i. § 3, p. 84, 1781. — “ Mcntem suapte 
natura Synthcticam Methodum sequi, 
eaque ad universales ideas pervenire. 
. , . , Contrarium est iter Ana- 

lyticro Methodi, qutc ab univcrsalibus 
initium ducit et ad peculiaria pro- 
gn'ditur, diviclcndo Genera in auos 
Fonnas.” “ Contra commtinem sen- 
sum et verborum naturam, Syntheti- 
cam vocant ^lethodum, quro dividit, 
Analyticam contra, qute componit.** 
Pnef. $nh. fin. In the edition of the 
Pr<erepta by Maoss, Wyttenbaeh is 
made to say precisely the reverse of 
what he lays down in the original 
edition. — See Pr<ee. Phil. Log., etl. 
Maass, p. 64 . — Ed.] 


Digitized by Google 



LECT. 

XXIV. 


with each 
other. 


Hence the 
terms An- 
alysis and 
Synthesis 
nsed in a 
contrary 
sense. 


G LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

that what iu the one is a part is necessarily in the 
other a whole. It is evident, then, that the counter 
processes of Analysis and Synthesis, as applied to these 
counter wholes and parts, should fall into one or cor- 
re.spoud ; inasmuch as each in the one quantity should 
be diametrically opposite to itself in the other. Thus 
Analysis, as applied to Comprehension, is the reverse 
process of Analysis as applied to Extension, but a 
corresponding process with Synthesis ; and vice versa. 
Now, should it happen that the existence and opposi- 
tion of the two quantities are not considered, — that 
men, viewing the whole of Extension or the whole of 
Comprehension, each to the exclusion of the other, 
must define Analysis and Synthesis with reference 
to that single quantity which they exclusively take 
into account ; — on this supposition, I say, it is mani- 
fest that, if different philosophers regard different 
wholes or quantities, we may have the terms analysis 
and synthesis absolutely used by different philosophers 
in a contrary or reverse sense. And this has actually 
happened. The ancients, iu general, looking alone to 
the whole of Extension, use the terms analysis and 
analytic simply to denote a division of the genus into 
species, — of the species into individuals ; the moderns, 
on the other hand, in general, looking only at the 
whole of Comprehension, employ these terms to express 
a resolution of the individual into its various attri- 
butes.® But though the contrast in this respect 
between the ancients and moderns hohls in general, 
still it is exposed to sundry exceptions ; for, in both 
periods, there are philosophers found at the same game 
of cro.ss-purposes with their contemporaries as the 

a [Seo AriHtolle, PhyKic<Xy L. iv. c. i. qu. 11, p. 248.] 

3. Tirnpler, Loyicct Sytt€inii^ L. ii. c. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


I 

ancients and modems in general are with each other. 
This difference, which has never, as far as I know, been 
fully observed and stated, is the cause of great con- 
fusion and mistake. It is proper, therefore, when we 
use these terms, to use them not in exclusive relation 
to one whole more than to another ; and at the same 
time to take care that we guard against the misappre- 
hension that might arise from the vague and one-sided 
view which is now universally prevalent. So much 
for the meaning of the words cutahjtic and synthetic, 
which, by the way, I may notice, are, hke most of our 
logical terms, taken fiuin Geometry.® 

The Synthetic Method is likewise called the Pro- 
gressive ; the Analytic is called the Regressive. Now 
it is plain that this application of the temis progressive 
and regressive is altogether arbitrary. For the import 
of these words expresses a relation to a certain point 
of departure, — a terminus a quo, and to a certain point 
of termination, — a termimis ad quern ; and if these 
have only an arbitrary existence, the correlative words 
will, consequently, only be of an arbitrary application. 
But it is manifest that the point of departure, — the 
point from which the Progi-essive process starts, — may 
be either the concrete realities of our experience, — the 
principiata, — the notiora nobis; or the abstract gen- 
eralities of intelligence, — the principia, — the notiora 
natura. Each of these has an equal right to be re- 
garded as the starting-point. The Analytic process is 
chronologically first in the order of knowledge, and 
we may, therefore, reasonably call it the 'progressive, 
as starting from the primary data of our observation. 

a See above, vol. i. p. 279, n. — PhiloponoH, In An. Pont., i. 36* 
Ed. [On theAnalyHis of Geometry, see Venet. 1534.] 

Plotinus, Ennfad.^ iv. L. ix. c. 5. 




LECT. 

XXIV. 


The Synthe- 
tic Method 
has been 
called tho 
ProgTCMive, 
and the An- 
alytic tho 
Rcf^reseivo. 
These deeig- 
nations 
wholly arbi- 
trary, and 
of various 
application. 


Digitized by Googic 



8 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. On the other hand the Synthetic process, as followmg 
the order of constitution, is first in the order of nature, 
and we may, therefore, likewise reasonably call it the 
progressive, as starting from the primary elements of 
existence. The application of these terms as syno- 
nyms of the analytic and synthetic processes, is, as 
wholly arbitrary, manifestly open to confusion and 
contradiction. And such has been the case. I find 
that the philosophers are as much at cross-purposes in 
their application of these terms to the Analytic and 
Synthetic processes, as in the application of analysis 
and synthesis to the different wholes. 

In general, In general, however, both in ancient and modern 
hM^n* times. Synthesis has been called the Progressive, 
the Progree- Analysis the Regressive, process ; an application of 
An.iv>i> terms which has probably taken its rise from a pas- 
»iTo Wo- sage in Aristotle, who says, that there are two ways 
of scientific procedure, — the one from principles (dvro 
Toiv dpx<iiv), the other to principles, {ini rds dp^^ds.) 
From this and from another similar passage in 
Plato (?) the term progressive has been applied to the 
process of Comprehensive Synthesis, {progrediendi a 
principiis ad jyrincipiata), tlie term regressive, to the 
process of Comprehensive Analysis, {ptrogrediendi a 
imncipiatis ad principia.) “ 

Method in So much for the general relations of Method to 
thought, and the general constituents of Method itself. 
It now remains to consider what are the particular 

a Etk. iS7r., L 2 (4). The reference 24, and Proeliis, quoted in Is. Casau* 
to Plato, whom ArUtotie incntiona as bon'snote. On the views of Method of 
making a similar distinction, is pro- Aristotle and Plato, see Scheiblerand 
bably to bo found by comparing two Downam.) [Scheibler, Optra Logica^ 
separate passages in the RrptdAiv, B. Pars iv., Tract. Sgllof/.f c. xviii., J)e 
iv. p. 435, vi. p. 504. — Ed. [Plat^j is J/eMwfo, tit. 7, p. 603. Downam, Com. 
said to have taught Analysis to Leuila* tn P, Pami Dialtctiram, L. ii. c. 1 7, p. 
mas the Thasian. See Laertitis, L. iiL 482 . — Ed.J 


Digitized by Coogle 



LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


9 


applications of Method, by which Logic accomplishes lect. 
the Formal Perfection of thought. In doing this, it is — I — i_ 
evident that, if the formal perfection of thought is 
made up of various virtues, Logic must accommodate 
its method to the acquisition of these in detail ; and 
that the various processes by which these several 
virtues are acquired, will in their union constitute the 
system of Logical Methodology. On this I will give 
you a paragraph. 

LXXXI. The Formal Perfection of thought p»r. lxxxi. 
is made up of the three virtues or characters ; — Wethod- 
1°, Of Clearness; 2°, Of Distinctness, involving Three Part*. 
Completeness; and, 3°, Of Harmony. The char- 
acter of Clearness depends principally on the de- 
termination of the Comprehension of our notions ; 
the character of Distinctness depends principally 
on the development of the Extension of our 
notions ; and the character of Harmony, on the 
mutual Concatenation of our notions. The rules 
by which these three conditions are fulfilled, con- 
stitute the Three Parts of Logical Methodology. 

Of these, the first constitutes the Doctrine of 
Definition; the second, the jDoc/n'nc of Division; 
and the third, the Doctrine oj Probation.'^ 


o Krug, LfMjiky § Tila.— E d. [Ra- 
mus was the hrst to introduce Method 
as a part of Logic under Syllogistic, 
(see his DiaUcticat L. ii. c. 17), and 
the Port Royalists, (1662), made it a 
fourth part of logic. See l^a LotjUfut 
ow VAri dt /V/ijfr, Prem. Dia., p. 26, 
pp. 47 f 60. Quat. Part.,p. 446 et seq. 
od. 1776. Gassendi, in his /nstitutio 
Loi/ica, haa Pars iv., De Mcthc>do. 
Ho died in 1656 ; his Logic appeared 
|M>sthumously in 166S. John of Da> 


mascus apeaka strongly of Method in 
bis Dialectic^ ch. 68, and makes four sj>e- 
cial logioU methods, Division, De6ni- 
tioD , Analysis, Demonstration. Eusta- 
chius treats of Metliod under Judg- 
ment, and Scheibler under Syllogistic.] 
[Eustachius, Summa PhUomphUr.^ Lo- 
yim, P. ii. Tract. 2. Ut .Vr/Aorfo, p. 
106, ed. Lugd. Batav,, 1747. First 
edition, 1609. Scheibler, Opera Lotfx- 
at, Pars iv. c. xviii. p. 695 tt aeq . — 
Ed.] 


Digitized by Google 



10 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. “When we turn attention on our thoughts, and 
^ deal with them to the end that they may be consti- 
tuted into a scientific whole, we must perform a three- 
fold operation. We must, first of all, consider what 
we think, that is, what is comprehended in a thought. 
In the second place, we must consider how many 
things we think of, that is, to how many objects the 
thought extends or reaches, that is, how many are 
conceived under it. In the third place, we must con- 
sider why we think so and so, and not in any other 
manner ; in other words, how the thoughts are bound 
together as reasons and consequents. The first con- 
sideration, therefore, regards the comprehension ; the 
second, the extension ; the third, the concatenation of 
our thoughts. But the comprehension is ascertained 
by definitions ; the extension by divisions ; and the 
concatenation by probations.”® We proceed, therefore, 
to consider these Three Parts of Logical Methodology 
in detail ; and first, of Declaration or Definition, in 
regard to which I give the following paragraph. 

p»r. Lxxxii. ^ LXXXII. How to make a notion Clear, is 
trine of De- shown by the logical doctrine of Declaration, or 

LiTmui- Definition in its wider sense. A Declaration, (or 
Definition in its wider sense), is a Categorical 
Proposition, consisting of two clauses or members, 
viz. of a Subject Defined, {membrwm definituni), 
and of the Defining Attributes of the subject, that 
is, those by which it is distinguished from other 
things, {memhrum difinicns). This latter mem- 
ber really contains the Definition, and is often 
itself so denominated. Simple notions, as con- 

a Krug, Lorjik, § 121".— Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


11 


taining no plurality of attributes, are incapable lect. 
of definition." - 

The terms declaration and definition, which are here Eipiica- 
used as applicable to the same process, express it, xhotorm. 
however, in different aspects. The term declaration, and DcHni- 
{declaratio), is a word somewhat vaguely employed in diTilJlio"** 
English ; it is here used strictly in its proper sense 
of throwing light upon, — clearing up. The term d(fini-“^'*' 
tion, (definitio), is employed in a more general, and in 
a more special, signification. Of the latter we are soon 
to speak. At present, it is used simply in the meaning 
of an enclosing within limits, — the separating a thing 
from others. Were the term declaration not of so vague 
and vacillating a sense, it would be better to employ it 
alone in the more general acceptation, and to reserve 
the term definition for the special signification. 

H LXXXIII. The process of Definition is^Lxxxm. 
founded on the logical relations of Subordination, in iuitricwr 
Co-ordination, and Congnience. To this end we 
discriminate the constituent characters of a no- 
tion into the Essential, or those which belong to 
it in its unrestricted universality, and into the 
U nessential, or those which belong to some only 
of its species. The Essential are again discrim- 
inated into Original and Derivative, a division 
w'hich coincides with that into Internal or Pro- 
per, and External. In giving the sum of the 
original characters constituent of a notion, con- 
sists its Definition in the stricter sense. A De- 
finition in the stricter sense must consequently 

a Krug, Lwjikf § — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


12 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


afford at least two, and properly only two, ori- 
ginal characters, viz. that of the Gemis imme- 
diately superior, (germs 2>roximum), and that of 
the Difference by which it is itself marked out 
from its co-ordinates as a distinct species, (liola 
specialis, differentia specifica.) « 

Declarations (or definitions in the wider sense), ob- 
VMi’oM tain various denominations, according as the process 
D^Siaioii. is performed in different manners and degrees. A 
Explica- Declaration is called an Explication, (explicatio), when 
the predicate or defining member indeterminately 
evolves only some of the characters belonging to the 
Expo<ition. subject. It is called Exposition, (expositio), when 
the evolution of a notion is continued through several 
Dacripiion. cxpHcations. It is called a Description, (descriptio), 
when the subject is made known tlirough a number of 
Definition concrete characteristics. Finally, it is called a Defi- 
*’™**^' ration Proper, when, as I have said, two of the essen- 
tial and original attributes of the defined subject are 
given, whereof the one is common to it with the 
various species of the same genus, and the other dis- 
criminates it from these.^ 

DoRnitionn, Definitions are distinguished also into Verbal or 
Nominal, into Eeal, and into Genetic, (definitiones no- 
Gcnciic. reales, geneticw), according as they are con- 

versant with the meaning of a term, with the nature 
of a thing, or with its rise or production.”'' Nominal 
Definitions are, it is evident, merely explicsitions. 
They are, therefore, in general only used as prelim- 
inary, in order to prepare the way for more perfect 

o [Cf. Aristotle, Topiea, i. 6. Keck- Logit, p. 94.] 
eimann, Sgtlema LogieK Mimit, L. i. $ Cf. Krug, Logit, § 122. — Ed. 

c. 17. Ojiera, t. i. pp. 199, 656. y [Cf. Reuach, .5-y»(e»ia Loyfcwoi, § 
ScheililtT, Topiea, c, 30. Richter, 309 et teq.] 


LECT. 

XXIV. 


Explic*. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


13 


declarations. In Real Definitions the thing defined is 
considered as already there, as existing and the 
notion, therefore, as given, precedes the definition. 
They are thus merely analytic, that is, nothing is 
given explicitly in the predicate or defining member, 
which is not contained implicitly in the subject or 
member defined. In Genetic Definitions the defined 
subject is considered as in the progress to be, as be- 
coming (yiyvofievop) ; the notion, therefore, has to be 
made, and is the result of the definition, which is con- 
sequently synthetic, that is, places in the predicate or 
defining member more than is given in the subject or 
member defined. As examples of these three species, 
the following three definitions of a circle may suffice : — 
1. The Nominal Definition, — The word circle, signifies 
an uniformly curved line. 2. The Real Definition, — 
A circle is a line returning upon itself, of which all 
the parts are equidistant from a given point. 3. The 
Genetic Definition, — A circle is formed when we draw 
around, and always at the same distance from, a fixed 
point, a movable point which leaves its trace, until 
the termination of the movement coincides with the 
commencement." It is to be observed that only those 
' notions can be genetically defined, which relate to 
quantities represented in time and space. Mathema- 
tics are principally conversant with such notions, and 
it is to be noticed that the mathematician usually de- 
nominates such genetic definitions real definitions, 
while the others he calls without distinction nominal 
definitions.” ^ 

The laws of Definition are given in the following 
paragraph. 

a This example i> taken, with some 0 Knig, Ix>gil-, § 122. Anm. 3, pp. 

alteration, from Wolf, Philoiop/im 448, 449.— En. 

ItationalU, § 191. — En. 


LF.CT. 

XXIV. 


Digitized by Google 



14 


I,ECTURES ON LOGIC. 


lect. ^ LXXXIV. A definition should be Adequate 

XXIV « • ^ 

L {adequata), that is, the subject defined, and the 

Par. LXXXIV. predicate defininer, should be equivalent or of the 

DefinilioD, * . i r i 

— ita Laws. Same extension. If not, the sphere of the predi- 

cate is either less than that of the subject, and 
the definition Too Narrow, (angustior), or greater, 
and the definition Too Wide ilaticyr). 

II. It should not define by Negative or Divi- 
sive attributes, (iVe sit negans, ne fiat 'pcv dis- 
juncAa). 

III. It should not be Tautological, — what is 
contained in the defined, should not be repeated 
in the defining clause, {Ne sit circulus vd diallelon 
in definiendo). 

IV. It should be Precise, that is, contain no- 
thing unessential, nothing superfluous, {Definitio 
ne sit ahundans). 

V. It should be Perspicuous, that is, couched 
in terms intelligible, and not figurative, but 
proper and compendious.® 

Expiica- The First of these rules : — That the definition should 

tion. , 

Kint Rule, bo adequate, that is, that the definiens and d^nituin 
should be of the same extension, is too manifest to 
require much commentary. Is the definition too 
wide? — then more is declared than ought to be 
declared ; is it too narrow ? — then less is declared 
than ought to be declared ; — and, in either case, the 
definition does not fully accomplish the end which it 
proposes. To avoid this defect in definition, we must 
attend to two conditions. In the first place, that 

a Cf, Krug, Logih, § 123. — Ed. nitione, Optra, et teq. Bufficr, 

[Victorin, Lotfiky § 223 €t stq. Sig* renl«rferon#e7ucn«r,§45'5l. Gocle- 
wart, Handbwh zu Yorltmitgen iibcr niu», Lexicon Philoitophicu.m, t . DeJin- 
die Logiicy% Z7\. Boethiue, De Deji- I'fi'o, p. 600.] 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


15 


attribute should be given which the thing defined lect. 

has in common with others of the same class ; and, in 1- 

the second place, that attribute should be given which 
not only distinguishes it in general from all other 
things, but proximately from things which are in- 
cluded with it under a common class. This is ex- 
pressed by Logicians in the rule — Definitio constet 
geirere j>>'oximo et d 'lfferenlia uUima, — Let the defin- 
ition consist of the nearest genus and of the lowest 
difference. But as the notion and its definition, if this 
ride be obeyed, are necessarily identical or convertible 
notions, they must necessarily have the same extent ; 
consequently, everything to which the definition ap- 
plies, and nothing to which it does not apply, is the 
thing defined. Thus ; — if the definition, Man is a 
rational onimaZ, be adequate, we shall be able to say 
— Every rational animal is human : — nothing which 
is not a rational animal is human. But we cannot say 
this, for though this may be true of this earth, we can 
conceive in other worlds rational animals which are 
not human. The definition is, therefore, in this case 
too wide ; to make it adequate, it will be necessary to 
add terrestrial or some such term — as, 3Ian is a ra- 
tional animal of this earth. Again, were we to define 
Man, — a rationally acting animal of this earth, — the 
definition would be too narrow ; for it would be false 
to say, no animal of this earth not acting rationally is 
human, for not only children, but many adult persons, 
would be excluded by this definition, which is, there- 
fore, too narrow." 

The Second Rule is, — That the definition should not second 
be made by negations, or disjunctions. In regard to 
the former, — negations, — that we should define a thing 

a Cf. Krug, Lotjik^ g 123. Anm. i, — E d. 


Digitized by Google 



I.F-CT. 

XXIV. 


IG LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

by what it is, and not by what it is not, — the reason 
of the rule is manifest. The dehnition should be an 
affirmative proposition, for it ought to contain the 
positive, the actual, qualities of the notion defined, 
that is, the qualities which belong to it, and which 
must not, therefore, be excluded from or denied of it. 
If there are characters which, as referred to the sub- 
ject, afford purely negative judgments; — this is a proof 
that we have not a proper comprehension of the no- 
tion, and have only obtained a precursory definition 
of it, enclosing it within only negative boundaries. 
For a definition which contains only negative attribu- 
tions, affords merely an empty notion, — a notion which 
is to be called a nothing ; for, as some think, it must 
at least possess one positive character, and its defin- 
ition cannot, therefore, be made up exclusively of 
negative attributes. If, however, a notion stands op- 
posed to another which has already been declared by 
positive characters, it may be defined by negative 
characters, — provided always that the genus is posi- 
tively determined. Thus Cuvier and other naturalists 
define a certain order of animals by the negation of a 
spine or back-bone, — the invertehrata as opposed to 
the vertehmta ; and many such definitions occur in 
Natural History'. 

For a similar reason, the definition must not consist 
of divisive or disjunctive attributions. The end of a 
definition is a clear and distinct knowledge. But to 
say that a thing is this or that or the other, affords us 
either no knowledge at all, or at best only a vague 
and obscure knowledge. If the disjunction be contra- 
dictory, its enunciation is, in fact, tantamount to zero ; 
for to say that a thing either is or is not so and so, 
is to tell us that of which we required no a,ssertiou 


Digitized by GoogI 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


1-7 


to assure us. But a definition by disparate alterna- lect. 

• • , ^ . • XXIV 

tives is, though it may vaguely circumscribe a notion, — I L 

only to be considered as a prelusory definition, and 
as the mark of an incipient and yet imperfect know- 
ledge. We must not, however, confound definitions 
by divisive attributes with propositions expressive of 
a division. 

The Third Rule is, — “ The definition should not be xhini RuI«. 
tautological ; that is, what is defined should not be 
defined by itself This vice is called defining in a Defining in 
circle. This rule may be violated either immediately * 
or mediately. The definition, — Law is a lawful com- 
mand, — is an example of the immediate circle. A me- 
diate circle requires, at least, two correlative defin- 
itions, a principal and a subsidiary. For example, — 

Law is the expressed wish of a ruler, and a rider is 
one who establishes laies. The circle, whether imme- 
diate or mediate, is manifest or occult according as 
the thing defined is repeated in the same terms, or 
with other synonymous words. In the previous 
example it was manifest. In the following it is con- 
cealed : — Gratitude is a virtue of acknowledgment , — 

Right is the competence to do or not to do. Such 
declarations may, however, be allowed to stand as pre- 
lusory or nominal definitions. Concealed circular de- 
finitions are of very frequent occurrence, when they 
are at the same time mediate or remote ; for we are 
very apt to allow ourselves to be deceived by the dif- 
ference of expression, and fancy that we have declared 
a notion when we have only changed the language. 

We ought, therefore, to be strictly on our guard against 
this besetting vice. The ancients called the circular 
definition also by the name of DiaUelon, as in this 
case we declare the definitum and the d^niens reci- 

VOL. II. B 


Digitized by Google 



18 


LECTtJEES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

XXIV. 


Fourth 

Rule. 


procally by each other (St’ aXkij\(ov)\ In probation 
there is a similar vice which bears the same names.”^ 
We may, I think, call them by the homely English 
appellation of the Seesau \ — 

The Fourth Rule is, — “ That the definition should be 
precise ; that is, contain nothing unessential, nothing 
superfluous. Unessential or contingent attributes are 
not sufiiciently characteristic, and as they are now 
present, now absent, and may likewise be met with in 
other things which are not comprehended under the 
notion to be defined, they, consequently, if admitted 
into a definition, render it sometimes too wide, some- 
times too narrow. The well-known Platonic defini- 
tion, — ‘ Man is a two-legged animal toithoul feathers’ 
— could, as containing only unessential characters, be 
easily refuted, as was done by a plucked cock.'*' And 
when a definition is not wholly made up of such attri- 
butes, and when, in consequence of their intermixture 
with essential characters, the definition does not abso- 
lutely fail, still there is a sin committed against logical 
purity or precision, in assuming into the declaration 
qualities such as do not determinately designate what 
is defined. On the same principle, all derivative cha- 
racters ought to be excluded from the definition ; for 
although they may necessarily belong to the thing 
defined, stiU they overlay the declaration with super- 
fluous accessories, inasmuch as such characters do not 
designate the original essence of the thing, but are a 
mere consequence thereof. This fault is committed in 
the following definition ; — The Cirele is a curved Hue 
returning upon itself, the jiarts of which are at an equal 

a Compare .Sextus EmpiriciiB./’i/rrA. S Krug, § 123. Aura. 3. — 

//yp., i. 109, ii. 68 .— Ed. Ed. 

7 Diog. Laert., vi. 40 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


19 


distance from the central point. Here precision is vio- lect. 

^ ^ XXIV, 

lated, though the definition be otherwise correct. For 1 

that every line returning upon itself is curved, and 
that the point from which all the parts of the line are 
equidistant is the central point, — these are mere con- 
sequences of the returning on itself, and of the equi- 
distance. Derivative characters are thus mixed up 
with the original, and the definition, therefore, is not 
precise.” “ 

The Fifth Rule is, — “ That the definition should be Fifth ruIc. 
lierspicuous, that is, couched in terms intelligible, not 
figurative, and compendious. That definitions ought 
to be perspicuous, is self-evident. For why do we de- 
clare or define at all ? The perspicuity of the defini- 1» order u> 
tion depends, in the first place, on the intelligible m 
character of the language, and this again depends on lang^i^ 
the emplojfment of words in their received or ordinary intelligible, 
signification. The meaning of words, both separate 
and in conjunction, is already determined by conven- 
tional usage ; when, therefore, we hear or read these, 
we naturally associate with them their ordinary mean- 
ing. Misconceptions of every kind must, therefore, 
arise from a deviation from the accustomed usage ; 
and though the definition, in the sense of the definer, 
may be correct, stUl false conceptions are almost in- 
evitable for others. If such a deviation becomes neces- 
sary, in consequence of the common meaning attached 
to certain words not corresponding to certain notions, 
there ought at least to be appended a comment or 
nominal definition, by which we shall be warned that 
such words are used in an acceptation wider or more 
restricted than they obtain in ordinary usage. But, in 

a Krug, logik, § 123. Ann). 2 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



20 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIV. 


2. The 
meaning 
must be not 
figurative 
but proper. 


8. Tlic defi* 

nition must 
be brief. 


The other 
kinds of 
Declaration. 


Dilucida- 
tions or Ex- 
plications. 


the second place, words ought not only to be used in 
their usual signification, — that signification, if the de- 
finition be perspicuous, must not be figurative but 
proper. Tropes and figures are logical hieroglyphics, 
and themselves require a declaration. They do not 
indicate the thing itself, but only something similar.”® 
Such, for example, are the definitions we have of Lo- 
gic as the Pharus Intellcctus, — the Lighthouse of the 
Understanding, — the Cynosura Veritatis, — the Cyno- 
sure of Truth, — the Medicina Mentis, — the Physic of 
the Mind, kefi 

“ However, many expressions, originally metapho- 
rical, (such as conception, imagination, comprehension, 
representation, &c. &c.), have by usage been long since 
reduced from figurative to proper terms, so that we 
may employ these in definitions without scruple, — 
nay frequently must, as there are no others to be 
found. 

“ In the third place, the perspicuity of a definition 
depends iq:)on its brevity. A long definition is not 
only burthensome to the memory, but likewise to the 
understanding, which ought to comprehend it at a 
single jet. Brevity ought not, however, to be pur- 
chased at the expense of perspicuity or completeness.”'*' 

“ The rules hitherto considered, proximately relate to 
Definitions in the stricter sense. In reference to the 
other kinds of Declaration, there are certain modifica- 
tions and exceptions admitted. These Dilucidations 
or Explications, as they make no pretence to logical 
perfection, and are only subsidiary to the discovery of 
more perfect definitions, are not to be very rigidly 
dealt with. They are useful, provided they contain 

a Krug, IjOffih, § 123. Anm. 4. — 3 See above, vol. i. p. 35 . — Ed. 

Ed. y Krug, Ed. 


Digitized by Googl 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


21 


even a single tnie character, by which we are con- 
ducted to the apprehension of others. They may, 
therefore, be sometimes too wide, sometimes too nar- 
row. A contingent and derivative character may be 
also useful for the discovery of the essential and ori- 
ginal. Even Circular Definitions are not here abso- 
lutely to be condemned, if thereby the language is 
rendered simpler and clearer. Figurative Expressions 
are likewise in them less faulty than in definitions 
proper, inasmuch as such expressions, by the analogies 
they suggest, contribute always something to the illus- 
tration of the notion. 

“ In regard to Descriptions, these must be adequate, 
and no circle is permitted in them. But they need 
not be so precise as to admit of no derivative or con- 
tingent characters. For descriptions ought to enume- 
rate the characters of a thing as fully as possible ; and, 
consequently, they cannot be so brief as definitions. 
They cannot, however, exceed a certain measure in 
point of length.”® 

a Krug, LogiJCf § 123. Anin. 5. — Eo. 



LECT. 

XXIV, 


Circular 

Dctinitions, 


Figurativo 

Kxprca- 

sioua. 


Detcrip' 

tiona. 


Digitized by Google 


22 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXV. 


Division. 


Division io 
gencnJ. 


LECTURE XXV. 

METHODOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — LOGICAL METHODOLOGY. 

II. — DOCTRINE OF DIVISION. 

I NOW proceed to the Second Chapter of Logical 
Methodology, — the Doctrine of Division, — the doctrine 
which affords us the rules of that branch of Method, 
by which we render our knowledge more distinct and 
exhaustive. I shall preface the subject of Logical 
Division bj"^ some observations on Division in general. 

“ Under Division {divisio, BuiLpeat's) we understand 
in general the sundering of a whole into its parts.® 
The object which is divided is called the divided whole 
{totum divisum), and this whole must be a connected 
many, — a connected multiplicity, for otherwise no 
division would be possible. The divided whole must 
comprise at least one character, affording the condition 
of a certain possible splitting of the object, or through 
which a certain opposition of the object becomes 
recognised ; and this character must be an essential 
attribute of the object, if the division be not aimless 
and without utility. This point of view, from which 
alone the division is possible, is called the 2^i'inciple of 
the dwision {j)rincipium sire fundamcntum dirisi- 

o[On Diviftion and iU Tariouiikiudg, f. 6®, Aid. 1546.] 

8CC .VmmotiiuR, Dc Quinque Voribut, 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


23 


on is) ; and the parts which, by the distraction of the lect. 

whole, come into view, are called the divisive members L 

{membra dividenlia). When a whole is divided into 
its parts, these parts may, either all or some, be them- 
selves still connected multiplicities ; and if these are 
again divided, there results a subdivisio7i {subdivisio), 
the several parts of which are called the siibdivisivc 
membei’S {membra subdividentia). One and the same 
object may, likewise, be differently divided from dif- 
ferent points of view, whereby condivisions {condivisi- 
ones) arise, which, taken together, are all reciprocally 
co-ordinated. If a division has only two members, it is 
called a dichotomy {dichotomia) ; if three, a tricJwtomy 
{trichotoraia) ; if four, a tetrachotomy ; if many, a 
polytomy, &c. 

“ Division, as a genus, is divided into two species, niviMon of 
according to the different kind of whole which it sun- — 
ders into parts." These parts are either contained in 
the divided whole, or they are contained under it. In 
the former case the division is called a partition {par- 
titio, airapCdfiya-o;),^ in the latter, it is named a logical 
division^ Partition finds an application only when 
the object to be divided is a whole compounded of 
parts, — consequently, where the notion of the object 
is a complex one ; Logical Division, on the other hand, 
finds its application only where the notion contains a 
plurality of characters under it, and where, conse- 
quently, the notion is an universal one. The simple 

a [On various kinds of Wholes, see a subject into 8 uccc.^aive beads, firsts 
Caramuel, Rationalit ei Rfalis PhUty &c. See Hermogenes, Ilfpi 

pophia, L. iv. sect. iii. disp. iv. p. 277,] liActoret Orad, i. p. 104, ecL 

and above, Lectures on Aid. — E d. 

?ol. ii. p. 340; o» vol. i. 7 [See Keckermann, ZojTtece, 

p. 201 Ed.] L. i. c. 3. Opero, t. L p. 067. Dro- 

B *Airapl$fAii<rts is properly a rhotori* bisch, ^cuc Danttlluny der Logik^ § 
cal term, and signifies the division of 112. Krug, Loyik^ § 124. Anm. 2.] 


Digitized by Google 



24 


LECrrURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXV. 


PartitioD 
either Real 
or Ideal. 


notion is thus the limit of Partition ; and the indi- 
vidual or singular is thus the limit of Division. Par- 
tition is divided into a physical or real, when the 
parts can actually be separated from each other ; and 
into a metaphysical or ideal, when the parts can only 
be sundered by Abstraction.® It may be applied in 
order to attain to a clear knowledge of the whole, or 
to a clear knowledge of the parts. In the former case, 
the parts are given and the whole is sought ; in the 
latter, the whole is given and the parts are sought. 
If the whole be given aud the parts sought out, the 
object is first of all separated into its proximate, and, 
thereafter, into its remoter parts, until either any 
further partition is impossible, or the partition has 
attained its end. To this there is, however, required 
an accurate knowledge of the object, of its parts proxi- 
mate and remote, and of the connection of these parts 
together, as constituting the whole. We must, like- 
wise, take heed whether the partition be not deter- 
mined from some particular point of view, in conse- 
quence of which the notions of more proximate and 
more remote may be very vague and undetermined. 


a By Partition, triangle may bo die- 
tiuguUhed, 1*, Inb'* a certain portion 
of space includo<l within certain bound- 
aries ; 2°, Into sides and angles ; 3**, 
Into two triangles, or inb^* a trapezium 
and a triangle. The first two parti- 
tions are ideal, they cannot be actually 
accomplished. The last is real, it may. 

By Division, triangle is distingiiish- 
c<l, 1®, Into the two 8{>ecies of recti- 
linear and curvilinear. 2®, Both of 
these are again suMivided (A) by 
reference to the siflee, (B) by refer- 
ence to the angles. By reference to 
the sides, triangles are divided into 
tho three species of equilateral, isos- 


celes, and scalene. (The dichotomic 
division would, however, iMjhere more 
proper.) By reference to the angle.<, 
they are divided into the three iq>eciea 
of rectangular, i,e. triangle which has 
one of its angles right ; into ambly- 
gon, or triangle which has one of its 
angles obtuse ; and into oxygon, i. e. 
triangle which has its three angles 
acute. 

By Definition, triangle is dislin- 
guii<hetl into figure of three sides, 
et|ual to triangulai* figure ; that is, 
into figure, the proximate genus, and 
trilateral or three-sided, tho differen- 
tial quality. 


Diylii/ ad by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


25 


If the parts be given, and from them the whole sought 
out, this is accomplished when we have discovered the 
order, — the arrangement, of the parts ; and this again 
is discovered when the principle of division is dis- 
covered ; and of this we must obtain a knowledge, 
either from the general nature of the thing, or from 
the particular end we have in view. If, for example, 
a multitude of books of every various kind are arranged 
into the whole of a well-ordered library; — in this case 
the greater or lesser similarit)' of subject will afford, 
either exclusively or mainly, the principle of division. 
It happens, however, not unfrequently, that the parts 
are ordered or arranged according to different rules, 
and by them connected into a whole ; and, in this 
case, as the different rules of the arrangement 
cannot together and at once accomplish this, it is 
proper that the less important arrangement should 
yield to the more important ; as, for example, in the 
ordering of a library, when, besides the contents of 
the books, we take into account their language, size, 
antiquity, binding, &c.”“ 

I now proceed to Logical Division, on which I give 
you the following paragraph : — 


LECT. 

XXV. 


H LXXXV. The Distinctness and Completeness p»r. lxxxv. 
of our knowledge is obtained by that logical pro- 
cess which is termed Division (divisio, Suupco-is). 

Division supposes the knowledge of the whole to 
be given through a foregone process of Definition 
or Declaration ; and proposes to discover the 
parts of this whole which are found and deter- 
mined not by the development of the Comprehen- 
sion, but by the development of the Extension. 

a Euer, Logik, g| 134, 186, p. 26144 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECT. 

XXV. 


26 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

As Logical Definition, therefore, proposes to ren- 
der the characters contained in an object, that 
is, the comprehension of a reality or notion. 
Clear ; Logical Division proposes to render the 
characters contained under an object, that is, the 
extension of a notion. Distinct and Exhaustive. 
Division is, therefore, the evolution of the exten- 
sion of a notion ; and it is expressed in a dis- 
junctive proposition, of which the notion divided 
constitutes the subject, and the notions contained 
imder it, the predicate. It is, therefore, regu- 
lated by the law which governs Disjunctive 
Judgments, (the Principle of Excluded Middle), 
although it is usually expressed in the form of a 
Copulative Categorical Judgment. The rules by 
which this process is regulated are seven : — 

1°. Every Division should be governed by 
some principle, (Divisio ne caveat fundamcnto). 

2°. Every Division should be governed by only 
a single principle. 

3°. The principle of Division should be an 
actual and essential character of the divided 
notion, and the division, therefore, neither com- 
plex nor without a purpose. 

4°. No dividing member of the predicate must 
by itself exhaust the subject. 

5°. The dividing members, taken together, 
must exhaust, but only exhaust, the subject. 

6°. The divisive members must be reciprocally 
exclusive. 

7°. The divisions must proceed continuously 
from immediate to mediate differences, {Divisio 
ne fkit 2 >cr saltum). 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


27 


In this paragraph are contained, first, the general lect. 

Principles of Logical Division, and, secondly, the Laws ^ 

by which it is governed. I shall now illustrate these 
in detail. 

In the first place, it is stated that “ the distinct- 
ness and completeness of our knowledge is obtained 
by that logical process which is termed Division 
{divisio, 8iatp€(ri;). Division supposes the know- 
ledge of the whole to be given through a foregone 
process of definition, and proposes to discover the 
parts of this whole which are found and determined 
not by the development of the comprehension, but 
by the development of the extension. As logical 
definition, therefore, proposes to render the characters 
contained in a notion, that is, its comprehension, clear; 
logical division proposes to render the characters con- 
tained under an object, that is, the extension of a 
notion, distinct. Division is, therefore, the evolution 
of the extension of a notion, and it is expressed in a 
disjunctive proposition, of which the notion divided 
constitutes the subject, and the notions contained 
under it, the predicate. It is, therefore, regulated by 
the law which governs disjunctive judgments (the 
principle of excluded middle), although it be usually 
expressed in the form of a copulative categorical 
judgment.” 

The special virtue, — the particular element, of per- &dofDm. 
feet thinking, which Division enables us to acquire, tiuctDMB, 
is Distinctness, but, at the same time, it is evident toIvm 
that it cannot accomplish this without rendering new. 

OUT thinking more complete. This, however, is only 
a secondary and collateral result ; for the problem 
which division proximately and principally proposes 


Digitized by Google 



28 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXV. 


A» manv 
kintU of 
Division 
pottibic as 
there are 
cliaractcra 
affording a 
Principfo of 
Division. 


to solve is, — to afford us a distinct consciousness of 
the extension of a given notion, through a complete 
or exhaustive series of subordinate or co-ordinate 
notions. This utility of Division, in rendering our 
knowledge more complete, is, I find, stated by Aris- 
totle,® though it has been overlooked by subsequent 
logicians. He observes that it is only by a regular 
division that we can be assured, that nothing has been 
omitted in the definition of a thing. 

“As it is by means of division that we discover 
what are the characters contained under the notion of 
an object, it follows that there must be as many kinds 
of division possible as there are characters contained 
under the notion of an object, which may afibrd the 
principle of a different division. If the characters 
which afford the principle of a division are only ex- 
ternal and contingent, there is a division in the wider 
sense ; if, again, they are internal and constant, there 
is a division in the stricter sense ; if, finally, they are 
not only internal but also essential and original, there 

A uni.or.ai is a division in the strictest sense. From the very 

notioD thfi , 

odIt object conception of logical division, it is manifest that it 

of Logical i*'ii 1 !• 1 

Diviiion. can only be applied where the object to be divided is 
a universal notion, and that it is wholly inapplicable 
to an individual ; for as the individual contains no- 
thing under it, consequently it is not susceptible of 
an ulterior division. The general problem of which 
division affords the solution is, — To find the subor- 
dinate genera and species, the higher or generic notion 
being given. The higher notion is always something 
abstracted, — something generalised from the lower 
notions, with which it agrees, inasmuch as it contains 
all that is common to these inferior concepts, and from 

a Anal. L. li. c. 13. 


Genend 
^blom of 
DirUion. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC, 


29 


which it differs, inasmuch as they contain a greater 
number of determining characters. There thus sub- 
sists an internal connection between the higher and 
the lower concepts, and there is thus afforded a tran- 
sition from the superior notion to the subordinate, 
and, consequently, an evolution of the lower notions 
from the higher. In order to discover the inferior 
genera and species, we have only to discover those 
characters which afford the proximate determinations, 
by which the sphere or extension of the higher notion 
is circumscribed. But to find what characters are 
wanted for the thorough-going determination of a 
higher notion, we must previously know what char- 
acters the higher notion actually contains, and this 
knowledge is only attainable by an analysis, — a sund- 
ering of the higher notion itself. In doing this, the 
several characters must be separately drawn forth and 
considered ; and in regard to each, we must ascertain 
how far it must still be left undetermined, and how 
far it is capable of opposite determinations. But 
whether a character be still undetermined, and of 
what opposite determinations it is capable, — on these 
points it is impossible to decide a priori, but only 
a posteriori, through a knowledge of this particular 
character and its relations to other notions. And the 
accomplishment of this is rendered easier by two 
circumstances ; — the one, that the generic notion is 
never altogether abstract, but always realised and held 
fast by some concrete form of imagination ; — the 
other, that, in general, we are more or less acquainted 
with a greater or a smaller number of special notions, 
in which the generic notion is comprehended, and 
these are able to lead us either mediately or imme- 
diately to other subordinate concepts. 


LECT. 

XXV. 


Digitized by Google 



30 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXV. 


Rules of 

I/igiciU 

Liviiion. 


“ But the determinations or constituent characters 
of a notion which we seek out, must not only be com- 
pletely, but also precisely, opposed. Completely, in- 
asmuch as all the species subordinate to the notions 
ought to be discovered ; and precisely, inasmuch as 
whatever is not actually a subordinate species, ought 
to bo absolutely excluded from the notion of the 
genus. 

“ In regard to the completeness of the opposition, 
it is not, however, required that the notion should 
be determined through every possible contradictory 
opposition ; for those at least ought to be omitted, 
concerning whose existence or non-existence the notion 
itself decides. In regard to the opposition itself, it 
is not required that the division should be carried 
through by contradictory oppositions. The only oppo- 
sition necessary is the reciprocal exclusion of the 
inferior notions into which the higher notion is 
divided.” “ In a mere logical relation, indeed, as we 
know nothing of the nature of a thing more than that 
a certain character either does or does not belong to 
it, a strictly logical division can only consist of two 
contradictory members, for example, — that angles are 
either right or not right, — that men are either white 
or not white. But looking to the real nature of the 
thing known, either a j^riori or a posteriori, the divi- 
sion may be not only dichotomous but polytomous, 
as for example, — angles are right, or acute, or obtuse ; 
men are white, or black, or copper-coloured, or olive- 
coloured, &c. 

We now come, in the second place, to the rules 
dictated for Logical Division. 

These Rules spring either, 1°, From the Principle of 

a Kiwer, Lof/ikf § 136 Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


31 


Division ; or, 2°, From the Eelations of the Dividing lect. 

” Y Y V 

Members to the Divided Whole ; or, 3“, From the !- 

Relations of the several Dividing Members to each 
other ; or, 4°, From the relations of the Divisions to 
the Subdivisions. 

The first of these heads, — the Principle of Division, thoM 
— comprehends the three first rules. Of these the I. From the 
first is self-evident, — There must be some principle, wSm 
some reason, for every division ; for otherwise there **“'"• 
would be no division determined, no division carried 
into effect. 

In regard to the second rule, — That every division Second, 
should have only a single principle, — the propriety of 
this is likewise sufficiently apparent. In every divi- 
sion we should depart from a definite thought, which 
has reference either to the notion as a unity, or to some 
single character. On the contrary, if we do not do 
this, but carry on the process by different principles, 
the series of notions in which the division is realised, 
is not orderly and homogeneous, but heterogeneous 
and perplexed. 

The third rule, — That the principle of division should 'nunL 
be an actual and essential character of the divided 
notion, — is not less manifest. “ As the ground of divi- 
sion is that which principally regulates the correctness 
of the whole process, that is, the completeness and 
opposition of the division, — it follows that this groimd 
must be of notoriety and importance, and accommo- 
dated to the end for the sake of which the division is 
instituted. Those characters of an object are best 
adapted for a division, whose own determinations 
exert the greatest influence on the determinations of 
other characters, and, consequently, on those of the 
notion itself ; but such are manifestly not the external 


Digitized by Google 



32 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXV. 


and contingent, but the internal and essential, cha- 
racters, and, of these, those have the pre-eminence 
through whose determination the greater number of 
others are determined, or, what is the same thing, 
from which, as fundamental and original attributes, 
the greater number of the others are derived. The 
choice of character is, however, for the most part, regu- 
lated by some particular end ; so that, under certain 
circumstances, external and contingent characters may 
obtain a preponderant importance. Such ends cannot, 
however, be enumerated. The character affording the 
principle of division must likewise be capable of being 
clearly and definitely brought out ; for unless this be 
possible, we can have no distinct consciousness of the 
completeness and contrast of the determination of 
which it is susceptible. We ought, therefore, always 
to select those characters for principles of division, 
which are capable of a clear and distinct recogni- 
tion.”* 

The second part of the rule, — That the division be 
not, therefore, too complex, and without a purpose, — is 
a corollary of the first. “ In dividing, we may go on 
to infinity. For while, as was formerly shown, there 
is, in the series of higher and lower notions, no one 
which can be conceived as absolutely the lowest ; 
so in subdividing, there is no necessary limit to the 
process. In like manner, the co-ordinations may be 
extended ad infinitum. For it is impossible to exhaust 
all the possible relations of notions, and each of these 
may be employed as the principle of a new division. 
Thus we can divide men by relation to their age, to 
their sex, to their colour, to their stature, to their 
knowledge, to their riches, to their rank, to their man- 

a Esaer, § 137 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


33 


ner of life, to their education, to their costume, &c. &c. 
It would, however, be ridiculous, and render the divi- 
sions whoUy useless, if we multiplied them in this 
fashion without end. We, therefore, intentionally 
restrict them, that is, we make them comparatively 
limited, inasmuch as we only give tliem that complete- 
ness which is conducive to a certain end. In this 
manner, divisions become relatively useful, or acquire 
the virtue of adaptation. In the selection of a prin- 
ciple of division, we must take heed whether it be 
fertile and pertinent. A ground of division is fertile, 
when it affords a division out of which again other 
important consequences may be drawn ; it is pertinent, 
when these consequences have a proximate relation to 
the end, on account of which we were originally in- 
duced to develop the extension of a concept. A prin- 
ciple of division may, therefore, be useful with one 
intent, and useless with another. Soldiers, for example, 
may be conveniently divided into cavalry and infantry, 
as this distinction has an important influence on their 
determination as soldiers. But in considering man in 
general and his relations, it would be ludicrous to 
divide men into foot and horsemen ; while, on the 
contrary, their division would be here appropriate 
according to principles which in the former case would 
have been absurd. Seneca “ says well, — ‘ Quicquid in 
majus crevit facUius agnoscitur, si discessit in partes ; 
quas innumerabiles esse et parvas non oportet. Idem 
enim vitii habet nimia, quod nulla divisio. Simile 
confuso est, quicquid usque in pulverem sectum est.’ 

Under the second head, that is, as springing from 
the relations of the Dividing Members to the Divided 
Wholes, there are included the fourth and fifth laws. 

a Epist., 90. $ Krug, Loffih, g 126. Anm. 4 . — Ed. 

VOL. II. C 


LECT. 

XXV. 


II, Prom 
the rela- 
tiona of the 
Dividing 
Member! to 


Digitized by Google 



u 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. “ As the notion and the notions into which it is di- 
— ^ — — vided, stand to each other in the relation of whole and 
Divided parts, and as the whole is greater than the part, the 
Fourth. fourth rule is manifestly necessary, viz. That no divid- 
ing member of tlie predicate must by itself exhaust 
the subject. When this occurs, the division is ^ucious, 
or, more properly, there is no division. Thus the 
division of mcui into rational animals and unailti- 
vated nations, would be a violation of this law. 

Fifth. “ On the other hand, as the notions into which a 

notion is divided, stand to each other in the relation of 
constituting parts to a constituted whole, and as the 
whole is only the sum of all the parts, the nece.ssity 
of the fifth rule is manifest, — That the dividing mem- 
bers of the predicate, taken together, must exhaust the 
subject. For if this does not take place, then the 
division of the principal notion has been only partial 
and imperfect. AVe transgress this law, in the first 
place, when we leave out one or more members of divi- 
sion ; as for example, — The actions of men are either 
good or bad, — for to these we should have added w 
indifferent. And in the second place, we transgress it 
when we co-ordinate a subdivision with a division ; as 
for example, — Philosojyh-i/ is either theoretical philo- 
sophy or moral philosophy : here the jiropcr opposition 
would have been theoi'eticad pihilosophy and jiractical 
philosophy!’ “ On the other hand, the dividing mem- 
bers, taken together, must not do more than exhaust 
the subject. The definition of the whole must apply 
to eveiy one of its parts, but this condition is not ful- 
filled if there be a dividing member too much, thixt is, 
if there be a notion brought as a dividing member, 
which, however, does not stand in subordination to 

a Enver, LwjUc, g 137 Kd. 


Digitized by Coogle 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


.So 


the divided whole. For example, — Mathematical fig- lf.ct. 
ure^ are cither solids or surfaces [or lines or ^ 

Here the two last members {lines and points) are re- 
dundant and erroneous, for lines and points, though 
the elements of mathematical figures, are not them- 
selves figures. 

Under the third head, as springing from the rela- m. From 
tions of the several Dividing Members to Each Other, tion« of the 
there is a single law, — the sixth, — which enjoins, — niwTing 
That the dividing members be reciprocally exclusive. lUrh olher"! 

“ As a division does not present the same but the dif- 
ferent determinations of a single notion, (for otherwise 
one and the same determination would be presented 
twice), the dividing members must be so constituted 
that they are not mutually coincident, so that they 
either in whole or in part contain each other. This 
law is violated when, in the first place, a subdivision 
is placed above a division, as, — Philosophy is either 
theoretical philosophy, or moral p>hilosophy, or prac- 
tical jihilosophy ; here moral ph ilosophy falls into 
practical ph ilosojjhy as a subordinate part ; or when, 
in the second place, the same thing is divided in dif- 
ferent points of view, as, — Human actions are either 
necessai'y, or free, or tisefd, or detrimental.”'^ 

Under the fourth and last head, as arising from the iv. From 
relations of the Divisions to the Subdivisions, there is lions of uic 

. . ii>i *1 Divisiou* to 

contained one law, the seventh, which prescribes, — ti.c Hub- 
That the divisions proceed continuously from imme- Seventh.’ 
diate to mediate difiTerences, {Dicisio ne fiat per saltum 
I’d hiatum). 

“ As divisions originate in the character of a notion, 
capable of an opposite determination, receiving this 
determination, and as the subdivisions originate in 

a Eiwer, Loffit, § 137. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


30 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXV. 


these opposite determinations being themselves again 
capable of opposite determinations, in which gradual 
descent we may proceed indefinitely onwards, — from 
this it is evident, that the divisions should, as far as 
possible, be continuous, that is, the notion must first 
be divided into its proximate, and then into its re- 
moter parts, and this without overleaping any one 
part ; or in other words, each part must be immedi- 
ately subordinated to its whole.”® Thus, when some 
of the ancients divided philosophy into rational, and 
•natural, and moral, the first and second members are 
merely subdivisions of theoretical philosophy, to which 
moral as practical jhHosophy is opposed. Sometimes, 
however, such a spring, — such a saltus, — is, for the sake 
of brevity, allowed ; but this only imder the express 
condition, that the omitted members are interpolated 
in thought. Thus, many mathematicians say, angles 
are either right, or acute, or obtuse, although, if the 
division were continuous, — without hiatus, it would 
run, angles arc either right or oblique ; and the ob- 
lique, again, either acute or obtuse. 

a E»scr, Loffil, § 1 37. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTUUES ON LOGIC. 


37 


LECTURE XXVI. 

METHODOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — LOGICAL METHODOLOGY. 

III. — DOCTRINE OF PROBATION. 

We now proceed to the Third Part of Pure Meth- lect. 

odology, that which guides us to the third character I 

or virtue of Perfect Thinking, — the Concatenation of 
Thought ; — I mean Probation, or the Leading of Proof. 

I commence with the following paragraph. 

1 LXXXVI. When there are propositions or pm. lxxxvl 
judgments which are not intuitively manifest, N»ture»ndEio- 
and the truth of which is not admitted, then 
their validity can only be established when we 
evolve it, as an inference, from one or more judg- 
ments or propositions. This is called Probation, 

Proving, or the Leading of Proof (probalio, ar- 
gumentatio, or dcmonstratio in its wider sense). 

A Probation is thus a series of thoughts, in which 
a plurality of difi'erent judgments stand to each 
other, in respect of their validity, in the depend- 
ence of determining and determined, or of antece- 
dents and consequents. In every Probation there 
are three things to be distinguished, — 1°. The 
Judgment to be Proved, {thesis) ; 2°. The Ground 


Digitized by Google 



38 


loECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

X.WI 


Kxplioa* 

tiOU. 

Terms cm- 
ployetl. 
Ar^monta* 
tioii. 

Argument. 


Oomuiutni' 


Lovlint; of 
Proof of two 
sorts. 


or Principle of Proof, {aryumentum) ; and, 3°, The 
Cogency of thi.s principle to necessitate the con- 
nection of antecedents and consequents, {vis de- 
monstrationis or ne7-vus prohandi). From the 
nature of Probation, it is evident that Probation 
without inference is impossible ; and that the 
Thesis to be proved and the Principles of Proof 
stand to each other as conclusion and premises, 
with this difference, that, in Probation, there is a 
judgment (the thesis) expressly supposed, which in 
the Syllogism is not, at least necessarily, the case.” 

In regard to the terms here employed, it is to be 
noticed that the tenn ai'yumentation {ai'gumentatio) 
is applied not only to a reasoning of many syllogisms, 
but likewise to a reasoning of one. The term aryu- 
ment {aryumentnm), in like manner, is employed not 
only for the ground of a consecutive reasoning, but 
for the middle term of a single syllogism. But it is, 
moreover, vulgarly employed for the whole process of 
argumentation.^ 

The term demonstration {demonsl ratio) is used in a 
looser, and in a stricter, signification. In the former 
sense, it is equivalent to j^^ohation, or aryuraenta- 
tion in yeneral; in the latter, to necessat-y pn-ohation, 
or aryumentation from intuitive pnnciples. 

The expression Icadiny of proof might, perhaps, be 
translated by the term deduction, but then this term 
must be of such a latitude as to include induction, to 
which it is commonly opposed ; for Probation may be 
either a process of Deduction, that is, the leading of 

a Es-ior, Lo<jiL\ § 138. Cf. Krug, thn GojenMaml nnd den VnxfartQ der 
127. — Ei>. [Cl. UicliUT, g 32 e/ 

3 See above, vol. i. p. 278 .— Ed. 


Digitized by Googk 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


39 


proof out of one higher or more general proposition, 
or a process of Induction, that is, the leading of proof 
out of a plurality of lower or less general judgments. 

To prove, is to evince the truth of a proposition not 
admitted to be true, from other propositions the truth 
of which is already established. In every probation 
there are three things to be distinguished : — 1°. The Pro- 
position to be Proved, — the Thesis; 2’. The Grounds 
or Principle of Proof, — the Argument ; and, 3°. The 
Degree of Cogency with which the thesis is inferred 
by the argumentum or argumenta, — the vis or nervus 
l^robandi. All probation is thus syllogistic ; but all 
syllogism is not probative. The peculiarity of proba- 
tion consists in this, — that it expressly supposes a 
certain given proposition, a certain thesis, to be tnie ; 
to the establishment of this proposition the proof is 
relative ; this proposition constitutes the conclusion 
of the syllogism or series of syllogisms of which the 
probation is made up : whereas, in the mere syllogistic 
process, this supposition is not necessarily involved. 
It is also evident that the logical value of a probation 
depends, — 1°. On the truth of its principles or argu- 
menta, 2°. On their connection with each other and 
with the thesis or proposition to be proved, and, 3°. 
On the logical formality of the inference of the thesis 
from its argumenta. No proposition can be for an- 
other the principle of proof, which is not itself cither 
immediately or mediately certain. A proposition is 
immediately certain, or evident at first hand, when, 
by the very nature of thought, we cannot but think 
it to be true, and when it, therefore, neither requires 
nor admits of proof. A proposition is mediately cer- 
tain, or evident at second hand, when it is not at 
once and in itself thought as necessarily true, but 


LECT. 

XXVI. 


Probation 
iu t^cucral. 


How (liatin- 
lingniHlitHl 
from Syllo- 
gifim. 


Whcrcou 
depends tlitf 
logical valuo 
of a proba^ 
tion. 


Digitized by Coogle 



40 


LECTUBES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

X.WI. 


Ground of 
Proof either 
Aheoluto or 
RclAtive. 


DlBtinction 
of PropoHi- 
tions in ru- 
«pcct of tho 
general funu 
of a BTBtcm 
of Proof. 
Tlieoretical 
and Practi- 
cal. 


when we are able to deduce it, with a consciousness of 
certainty, from a proposition which is evident at first 
hand. The former of these certainties is called self- 
evident, intuitive, (yr^iginal, primary, ultimate, &c., and 
the latter, demonstrative, derivative, secondary, &c. 

According to this distinction, the Ground or Prin- 
ciple of Proof is either an absolute or a relative. Ab- 
solute, when it is an intuitive ; relative, when it is 
a demonstrative, proposition. That every proposition 
must ultimately rest on some intuitive truth, — on some 
judgment at first hand, is manifest, if the fact of pro- 
bation itself be admitted ; for otherwise the regress 
would extend to infinity, and all probation, conse- 
quently, be impossible. When, for example, in tho 
series of grounds H, G, F, E, D, C, B, there is no ulti- 
mate or primary A, and when, consequently, every 
A is only relatively, in respect of the consequent 
seriesj, but not absolutely and in itself, first ; — in this 
case, no sufficient and satisfactory probation is pos- 
sible, for there always remains the question concern- 
ing a still higher principle. But positively to show that 
such primary judgments are actually given, is an ex- 
position which, as purely metaphysical, lies beyond 
the sphere of Logic.® 

To the general form of a system of Proof belong the 
following distinctions of propositions, to which I 
formerly alluded,^ and which I may again recall to 
your remembrance. Propositions are either Theore- 
tical or Practical. Practical, when they enounce the 
way in which it is possible to effectuate or produce 
something ; Theoretical, when they simply enunciate 
a tnith, without respect to the way in which this may 

a Comivuv Eiuur, Lvjik, § 138. — ¦ 0 Sco above, voL i. [i. 265. — Eu. 

Eu. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


41 


be realised or produced.* A Theoretical proposition, lect. 

if a primary or intuitive principle, is styled an Axiom. — 1- 

Examples of this are given in the four Fundamental A»om. 
Laws of Logic, and in the mathematical common 
notions — Tlte whole is greater than its part, — If equals 
be added to equals, the wholes are equal, &c. A Prac- 
tical proposition, if a primary or intuitive principle, 
is styled a Postulate. Thus Geometry postulates the Po.tui«f. 
possibility of drawing lines, — of producing them ad 
infinitum, of describing circles, &c. 

A Theoretical proposition, if mediate and demon- Thoorcm. 
strable, is called a Theorem. This is laid down as a 
Thesis, — as a judgment to be proved, — and is proved 
from intuitive principles, theoretical and practical. 

A Practical proposition, if mediate and demonstrable, 
is called a Problem. In the probation, the Problem Problem, 
itself is first enounced ; it is then sliown in the solu- 
tion how that which is required is to be done, — is to 
be effected ; and, finally, in the proof, it is demonstrated 
that through this procedure the solution of the prob- 
lem is obtained. For example, in the geometrical 
problem, — to describe an equilateral triangle on a given 
straight line ; — there this problem is first stated ; the 
solution then shows that, with this given line as a semi- 
diameter, we are to describe from each of its points 
of termination a circle ; the two circles will intersect 
each other, and we are then, from the point of inter- 
section, to draw straight lines to each point of ter- 
mination ; this being done, the proof finally demon- 
strates that these circles must intersect each other, 
that the drawn straight lines necessarily constitute a 
triangle, and that this triangle is necessarily equila- 
teral. 

o [Frie«, System dcr Logikf § 73.] 


Digitized by Google 



42 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. CorolUiries or Con^ectaries are propositions which, 

1- as flowing immediately as collateral result of others, 

require no separate proof. Empeiremata or Empiri- 
cal Judgments are propositions, the validity of which 
Scholia, reposes upon observation and experience. Scholia or 
Comments are propositions which serve only for illus- 
Lcmmata. tration. Lemmata or Sumptions are propositions, bor- 
rowed either from a difierent part of the system we 
treat of, or from sciences other than that in which we 
Hjpoihcucs.now employ them. Finally, Hypotheses are proposi- 
tions of two difierent significations. For, in the first 
place, the name is sometimes given to the arbitrary 
assumption or choice of one out of various means of 
accomplishing an end ; when, for example, in the 
division of the periphery of the circle, we select the 
division into 360 degrees, or when, in Arithmetic, we 
select the decadic scheme of numeration. But, in the 
second place, the name of hyjJothesis is more emphati- 
cally given to provisory suppositions, which serve to 
explain the phenomena in so far as observed, but 
which are only asserted to be true, if ultimately con- 
firmed by a complete induction. For example, the 
supposition of the Copernican solar system in Astro- 
nomy.® 

Now these various kinds of projiositions are mutu- 
ally concatenated into system by the Leading of Proof, 
— by Probation. 

So much for the character of this process in general. 
The paragraph, already dictated, contains a summary 
of the various particular characters by which Proba- 
tions are distinguished. Before considering these in 
detail, I shall ofier some preparatory obser\"ations. 

a [Fries, Sj/nlem dtr § 73. Krug, Lojik SS 67, 68.] 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


43 


“ The differences of Probations are dependent lect. 

• ^ XXVI 

partly on their Matter, and partly on the Form in J L 

which they are expressed. 


cuce« of 
ProbatiuDtt 


“In respect of the former ground of difference, — 
the Matter, — Probations are distinguished into Pure 
or a prion and into Empirical or a postei-iori, accord- “‘'ul’clr 
ing as they are founded on principles which we must ^ 
recognise as true, as constituting the necessary 
ditions of all experience, or which we do recognise as wioiu’aro 

• , 1-1 • ° 1- Pure™.! 

true, as particular results given by certain applies- Empirici. 
tions of experience. In respect of the latter ground 2, in ro- 
of difference, — the Form, — Probations fall into various tti^ Form, 
classes according to the difference of the form itself, 
which is either an External or an Internal. 

“ In relation to the Internal Form, probations are »; 
divided into Direct or Ostensive and into Indirect orj^oiomai 
Apagogical, according as they are drawn from the Prob^ion. 
tiling itself or from its opposite, in other words, ac- or 0 *tonsivc 

1 . . 1 « I . , . and Imlirect 

cording as the principles of probation are positive ororApagu- 
are negative.”® — Under the same relation of Internal synthetic or 
Form, they are also distinguished by reference to their 
order of procedure, — this order being either Essential 
or Accidental. The essential order of procedure re- 
gards the nature of the inference itself, as either from 
the whole to the part, or from the parts to the whole. 

The former constitutes Deductive Probation, the latter 
Inductive. The accidental order of procedure regards 
only our point of departure in considering a probation. 

If, commencing with the highest principle, we descend 
step by step to the conclusion, the process is Synthe- 
tic or Progressive ; here the conclusion is evolved out 
of the principle. If again, starting from the conclu- 


a EsDcr, Lo(fik, § 141. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



44 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

i.ECT. sion, we ascend step by step to the highest principle, 
the process is Analytic or Regressive ; here the prin- 
ciple is evolved out of the conclusion, 
b. External In respect to the External Form, Probations arc 
plXtion. Simple or MonosyUogistic, if they consist of a single 
reasoning. Composite or Polysyllogistic if they consist 
^riKind ^ plurality of reasonings. Under the same relation 

p"ri£t“'d external form, they are also divided into Regular 

imporffct. and Irregular, into Perfect and Imperfect. 

3. Accord- Another division of Probations is by reference to 
their Cogency, or the Degree of Certainty with which 
their inference is drawn. But their cogency is of 
various degree.s, and this either objectively considered. 
Probable, determined by the conditions of the proof 

itself, or subjectively considered, that is, by reference 
to those on whom the proof is calculated to operate 
conviction. In the former or objective relation, pro- 
bations are partly Apodcictic, or Demonstrative in the 
stricter sense of that term, — when the certainty they 
necessitate is absolute and complete, that is, when the 
opposite alternative involves a contradiction ; partly 
Probable, — when they do not produce an invincible 
assurance, but when the evidence in favour of the 
conclusion preponderates over that which is opposed 
to it. In the latter or subjective relation, probations 
Univereaiiy apo either Universally Valid, when they are calculated 

and Parti- . . ... _ 

€u\u\y to operate conviction on all reasonable minds, or Par- 
ticularly Valid, when they are fitted to convince only 
certain individual minds. 


Par. LXXXVll. 
Probations, 

— tljcir 
Divisions. 


If LXXXVll. Probations are divided by refer- 
ence to their Matter, to their Form, and to their 
Degree of Cogency. 

In relation to their Matter, they are partly 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


45 


Pure, or a partly Empirical or a paste- lect. 

inori. . 

As to their Form, — this is either Internal or 
External. In respect to their Internal Form, 
they arc, 1°, By reference to the Manner of Infer- 
ence, Direct or Ostensive, (SeiAcriicat, ostensiva), 
and Indirect or Apagogical {prohaliones apago- 
giccB, reductiones ad ahsurdmn) ; 2°, By refer- 
ence to their Essential or Internal Order of Pro- 
cedure, they are either Deductive or Inductive ; 

3°, By reference to their Accidental or Exter- 
nal Order of Procedure, they are partly Synthetic 
or Progressive, partly Analytic or Regressive. 

In respect to their External Form, they are, 

1°, Simple or MonosyUogistic, and Composite or 
Poly syllogistic; 2°, Perfect and Imperfect; 3°, 
Regular and Irregular. 

In respect to their Degree of Cogency, they 
arc, 1°, As objectively considered, either A^jodcic- 
tic or Demonstrative in the stricter signification 
of the term, {dnohei^eis, demonstrationes stricte 
dicta), or Probable, ( probationes sensu latiori) ; 

2°, As subjectively considered, they are either 
Universally Valid, (/car dXrjdelav, secundum veri- 
iatem), or Particularly Valid (tear ardpomov, 
ad hominem).’^ 


To speak now of these distinctions in detail. In the Erpii™- 
first place, “ Probations,” we have said, “ in relation to p™b«tioni, 
their matter, are divided into Pure or a priori, andoilhe'^'^ 
into Empirical or a p>osterioii. Pure or a priori 
proofs are those that rest on principles which, although 


o Cf. Krug £<^'1;, §§ 128, 129, 130, [Cf. Degorando, Dr»/Sij 7 nff, t.ir. eh. 7, 
131, 132. Emcr, Logit, | 139. — Ed. p. 234.] 


Digitized by Google 



40 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


LF.CT. 

XXVI. 


Tliis distinc- 
tion of Pro- 
liatioDs not 
Ukcn into 
Recount by 
liO^C. 


rising into consciousness only on occasion of some 
external or internal observation, — of some act of expe- 
rience, are still native, are still original, contributions 
of the mind itself, and a contribution without which no 
act of experience becomes possible. Proofs again are 
called Empirical or a posteriori, if they rest on prin- 
ciples which are exclusively formed from experience or 
observation, and whose validity is cognisable in no 
other way than that of experience or observation. 
^Vhen the principles of Probation are such as are not 
contingently given by experience, but spontaneously 
engendered by the mind itself, these principles are 
always characterised by the qualities of necessity and 
universality ; consequently, a proof supported by them 
is elevated altogether above the possibility of doubt. 
AVhen, on the other hand, the principles of Probation 
are such as have only the guarantee of observation 
and experience for their truth, — (supposing even that 
the observation be correct and the experience stable 
and constant), — these principles, and, consequently, 
the probation founded on them, can pretend neither 
to necessity nor universality ; seeing that what pro- 
duces the observation or experience, has only a rela- 
tion to individual objects, and is only competent to 
infonn us of what now is, but not of what always is, 
of what necessarily must be. Although, however, 
these empirical principles are impressed with the cha- 
racter neither of necessity nor of universality, they 
play a very important part in the theatre of human 
thought.”® This distinction of Proofs, by reference 
to the matter of our knowledge, is one, indeed, which 
Logic does not take into account. Logic, in fact, con- 
siders every inference of a consequent from an antece- 

a Krt«er, Lotjtk^ § 140. — Kd. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTDRE8 ON LOOTC. 


^•7 


dent as an inference a pi'iort, supposing even that the lect. 
antecedents themselves are only of an empirical cha- — 1 
racter. Thus we may say, that, from the general rela- 
tions of distance found to hold between the planets, 

Kant and Olbers proved a priori that between Jlars 
and Jupiter a planetary body must exist, before Ceres, 

Pallas, Juno, and Vesta were actually discovered.® 

Here, however, the a 2>riori principle is in reality only 
an empirical rule, — only a generalisation from expe- 
rience. But with the manner in which these empi- 
rical rules, — (Bacon would call them a-xioms), — are 
themselves discovered or evolved, — with this Pure 
Logic has no concern. This will fall to be considered 
in Modified Logic, when we treat of the concrete 
Doctrine of Induction and Analogy. 

In the second place, “in respect of their Form, and 2. inre.poci 
that the Internal, Probations are, as we said, first of 
all, divided into Direct or Ostensive, and into Indirect in'* 
or Apagogical. A proof is Direct or Ostensive, when 
it evinces the truth of a thesis through positive princi- 
ples, that is, immediately; it is Indirect or Apagogical, 
when it evinces the truth of a thesis through the false- 
hood of its opposite, that is, mediately. The indirect 
is specially called the apagogical, {argumentatio apa- 
gogica sive dcductio ad impossibile), because it shows 
that something cannot be admitted, since, if admitted, 
consequences would necessarily follow impossible or 
absurd. The Indirect or Apagogical mode of proof is Principip 
established on the principle, that that must be con- Proof, 
coded to be true whose contradictory opposite con- 
tains within itself a contradiction. This principle 
manifestly rests on the Law of Contradiction and on 

a Soo Kants VorUmngtn iihtr ?i. p. 449 .— Kd. 

Phyttitche OtfMfmpkitj 1802; Wtrlt, 


Digitized by Google 



48 


LEcrnniES on logic. 


LECT. 

XXVI. 


Differencca 
of Indirect 
or Aparogi. 
c»l Proba> 
lions. 


the Law of Excluded Middle ; for what involves a 
contradiction it is impossible for us to think, and if a 
character must be denied of an object, — and that it 
must be so denied the probation has to show, — then 
the contradictory opposite of that character is of 
necessity to be affirmed of that object. The Direct 
mode of probation has undoubtedly this advantage 
over the Indirect, — that it not only furnishes the 
sought-for truth, but also clearly develops its neces- 
sary connection with its ultimate priuciples; whereas 
the Indirect demonstrates only the repugnance of some 
proposition with certain truths, without, however, 
positively evincing the truth of its opposite, and 
thereby obtaining for it a full and satisfactory recog- 
nition. It is, therefore, usually employed only to 
constrain a troublesome opponent to silence, by a dis- 
play of the absurdities which are implied in, and 
which would flow out of, his assertions. Nevertheless 
the indirect probation establishes the proposition to 
be proved not less certainly than the direct ; nay, it 
stUI more precisely excludes the supposition of the 
opposite alternative, and, consequently, afibrds an 
intenser consciousness of necessity. We ought, how- 
ever, to be on our guard against the paralogisms to 
which it is peculiarly exposed, by taking care — 1°, 
That the opposites are contradictory and not con- 
trary ; and 2°, That an absimdity really is, and not 
merely appears to be. The difierences of Apagogical 
Probations correspond to the diSerent kinds of propo- 
sitions which may be indirectly demonstrated ; and 
these are, in their widest generality, either Categorical, 
or Hypothetical, or Disjunctive. Is the thesis a cate- 
gorical proposition 1 Its contradictory opposite is 
supposed, and from this counter proposition conclu- 


Digitized by Google 


LECTCEES ON LOGIC. 


49 


sions are deduced, until we obtain one of so absurd a lect. 
character, that we are able to argue back to the false- . 
hood of the original proposition itself. Again, is the 
thesis an hypothetical judgment? The contradictory 
opposite of the consequent is assumed, and the same 
process to the same end is performed as in the case of 
a categorical proposition. Finally, is the thesis a dis- 
junctive proposition ? In that case, if its membra 
diyuncta are contradictorily opposed, we cannot, either 
directly or indirectly, prove it false as a whole ; all that 
we can do being to show that one of these disjunct 
members cannot be affirmed of the subject, from which 
it necessarily follows that the other must.” “ 

Under the Internal Form, Probations are, in the 

tive aud 

second place, in respect of their Essential or Internal inJucUve. 
Order of procedure, either Deductive or Inductive, 
according as the thesis is proved by a process of rea- 
soning descending from generals to particulars and 
individuals, or by a process of reasoning ascending 
from individuals and particulars to generals. On this 
subject it is not necessary to say anything, as the 
ndes which govern the formal inference in these pro- 
cesses have been already stated in the Doctrine of 
Syllogisms ; and the consideration of Induction, as 
modified by the general conditions of the matter to 
which it is applied, can only be treated of when, in 
the sequel, we come to Modified or Concrete Method- 
olog}’-. 

“ Under the Internal Form, Probations are, how- c. synthetic 
ever, in the third place, in respect of their External uc. 
or Accidental Order of procedure, Synthetic or Pro- 
gressive, and Analytic or Regressive. A probation 

a Eaaer, Lojik, § 142. — Ed. 

VOL. II. D 


Digitized by Google 



50 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. is called synthetic or progressive, when the conclusion 
— ^ ^ is evolved out of the principles, — analytic or regressive 
when the principles are evolved out of the conclusion. 
In the former case, the probation goes from the sub- 
ject to the predicate •, in the latter case, from the 
predicate to the subject. Where the probation is com- 
plex, — if synthetic, the conclusion of the preceding syl- 
logism is the subsumption of that following ; if analy- 
tic, the conclusion of the preceding syllogism is the 
sumption of that following. In respect of certainty, 
both procedures are equal, and each has its peculiar 
advantages ; in consequence of which the combination 
of these two modes of proof is highly expedient. But 
the Analytic Procedure is often comjjetent where 
the Synthetic is not ; whereas the Synthetic is never 
possible where the Analytic is not, and this is 
never possible where we have not a requisite stock of 
propositions already verified. When the Probation is 
partly analytic, partly synthetic, it is called Mixed.’"' 

Pjj^xxvm. LXXXVIII. The Formal Legitimacy of a 

Jf’m Probation is determined by the following rules. 

1 °, Nothing is to be begged, borrowed, or stolen ; 
that is, nothing is to be presupposed as proved, 
which itself requires a demonstration. The vio- 
lation of this rule affords the vice called the 
Petitio princijni, or Fallacia qucesiti medii (to tv 
a.p'Xji 

2°, No proposition is to be employed as a prin- 
ciple of proof, the truth of which is only to be 

a Easer, Logil\ § 142. — Ed. i*' priiicipio; Bed 

/3 [On error of this term, see rov iv iipxv irpoK«tfi4vovt id «}t, ejua 
PaciuB, CommentariuM in Or^. [In problematis, quod initio fuit propoai- 
Anal. Prior ii. 16. “Non eat j>e- turn et in disquisitionem vocatum.** 
titio principii, vel lOid. ii. 24 . — Ed.] 


Digitized by Google 



LECTUIIES ON LOGIC. 


51 


evinced as a consequence of the proposition lkct. 

* * ^ XXVI 

which it is employed to prove. The violation of ___1 
this rule is the vice called v<rrepov nporepov. 

3“, No circular probation is to be made ; that 
is, the proposition which we propose to prove 
must not be used as a principle for its own pro- 
bation. The violation of this rule is called the 
Orbis vel circulus in dcmonstrando, — diallchis , — 

6 he dXkTj\(t)V Tp01T0<S.'^ 

4°, No leap, no hiatus, must be made ; that is, 
the syllogisms of which the probation is made up, 
must stand in immediate or continuous connec- 
tion. From the transgression of this rule results 
the vice called the Saltua vel Hiatus in demon- 
slrando. 

5°, The scope of the probation is not to be 
changed ; that is, nothing is to be proved other 
than what it was proposed to prove. The violation 
of this rule gives the lIcierozHesis, Ignoratio vel 
Mutatio elencJii, and the Transitus in aliiid 
gen us vel o genet'e ad genus , — /xcrdjSacris eis oXXo 
•yevos.^ 


In this paragraph, I have given, as different 
those canons which are opposed to vices not abso-iwo. 
lutely identical, and which have obtained different 
denominations. But you must observe, that the first 
three rules are all manifestly only various modifications 
— only special cases, — of one general law. To this law, 
likewise, the fourth rule may with perfect propriety 
be reduced, for the saltus or hiatus in probando is, in 


a See Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrh. ^ [See Reinhold, />iV 

1C9, ii. 68. Laertius, L. ix, albjemeine DmlfornimUhre, % l&O, p. 
§§ 88, 89. [Cf. Facciolati, Acrva$i«^ 407, Jena, 1827.] [Cf. Krug, Lofjik, 
V. p. 69 ct top'l § 133. Loyik^ § 14 L — Ed.) 


Digitized by Google 



52 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. fact, no less the assumption of a proposition as a prin- 
ciple of probation which itself requires proof, than 
either the petitio principii, the hysteron j^roteron, or 
the circvlus in prohando. These five laws, therefore, 
and the correspondent vices, may all be reduced to 
two ; the one of which regards the means, — the 
principles of proof ; the other the end, — the propo- 
sition to be proved. The former of these laws pre- 
scribes, — That no proposition be employed as a prin- 
ciple of probation, which stands itself in want of 
proof ; the latter, — That nothing else be proved than 
the proposition for whose proof the probation was in- 
stituted. You may, therefore, add to the last para- 
graph the following supplement : — 


Par.LXXXIX. 
Kulcft of 
!*rubation 
reduced to 
two. 


7 LXXXIX. These rules of the logicians may, 
however, all be reduced to two. 

1°, That no proposition be employed as a Prin- 
ciple of Probation, which stands itself in need of 
proof 

2% That nothing else be proved than the Pro- 
position for whose proof the Probation was in- 
stituted. 


Explic^ Of these two, the former comprehends the first four 
rules of the logicians, — ^the latter the fifth. I shall 
now, therefore, proceed to illustrate the five rules in 
detail. 

Firet Rule. The First Rule — Nothing is to be begged, borrowed, 
or stolen ; that is, nothing is to be presupposed as 
proved, which itself requires a demonstration, — is, in 
fact, an enunciation of the first general rule I gave 
you, and to this, therefore, as we shall see, the second, 
third, and fourth are to be reduced as special appli- 


Digiiized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


63 


cations. But, in considering this law in its univer- lect. 
sality, it is not to be understood as if every probation 
were at once to be rejected as worthless, in which „n7CT‘^l™h 
anything is presupposed and not proved. Were this ^ 
its sense, it would be necessary in every probation to 
ascend to the highest principles of human knowle<lge, 
and these themselves, as immediate and, consequently, 
incapable of proof, might be rejected as unproved 
assumptions. Were this the meaning of the law, 
there could be no probation whatever. But it is not 
to be understood in this extreme rigour. That pro- 
bation alone is a violation of this law, and, conse- 
quently, alone is vicious, in which a proposition is 
assumed as a principle of proof, which may be doubted 
on the ground on which the thesis itself is doubted, 
and where, therefore, we prove the uncertain by the 
equally uncertain. The probation must, therefore, 
depart from such principles as are either immediately 
given as ultimate, or mediately admit of a proof from 
other sources than the proposition itself in question. 

When, for example, it was argued that the Newtonian 
theory is false, which holds colours to be the result 
of a diversity of parts in light, on the ground, ad- 
mitted by the ancients, that the celestial bodies, and, 
consequently, their emanations, consist of homoge- 
neous elements ; — this reasoning was inept, for the 
principle of proof was not admitted by modern 
philosophers. Thus, when Aristotle defends the in- 
stitution of slavery as a natural law, on the ground 
that the barbarians, as of inferior intellects, are the 
born bondsmen of the Greeks, and the Greeks, as of 
superior intellect, the bom masters of the barbarians,® 

o Polit., L 2. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



54 


LfICTURES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

XXVI. 


Second 

Rule. 


— (an argument wliicli has, likewise, been employed 
in modern times in the British Parliament, with the 
substitution of negroes for barbarians, and whites 
for Greeks), — this argument is invalid, as assuming 
what is not admitted by the opponents of slavery. 
It would be a petitio principii to prove to the Mo- 
hammedan the divinity of Christ from texts in the 
New Testament, for he does not admit the authority 
of the Bible ; but it would be a valid argumentum 
ml hominem to prove to him from the Koran the pro- 
phetic mission of Jesus, for the authority of the Koran 
he acknowledges. 

The Second Ride, That no proposition is to be em- 
ployed as a principle of proof, the truth of which is 
only to be evinced as a consequence of the proposi- 
tion which it is emiiloyed to prove, — is only a special 
case of the jireceding. For example, if we were to 
argue that man is a free agent, on the ground that 
he is morally responsible for his actions, or that his 
actions can be imputed to him, or on the ground 
that vice and virtue are absolutely diflferent, — in these 
cases, the hysteron protevon is committed ; for only 
on the ground that the human will is free, can man 
be viewed as a morally responsible agent, and his ac- 
tions be imputed to him, or can the discrimination of 
vice and virtue, as more than a merely accidental rela- 
tion, be maintained. But we must pause before we 
reject a reasoning on the ground of hysteron proterem; 
for the reasoning may still be valid, though this logi- 
cal fault be committed. Nay, it is frequently neces- 
sary for us to reason by such a regress. In the very 
examjde given, if we be unable to prove directly that 
the will of man is free, but are able to prove that he 
is a moral agent, responsible for his actions, as sub- 


Digiti.- > ' ' 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


55 


jected to the voluntary but unconditioned Law of lf.ct. 

Duty, and if the fact of this law of duty and its un- L 

qualified obligation involve, as a postulate, an eman- 
cipation from necessity, — in that case, no competent 
objection can lie taken to this process of reasoning. 

This, in fact, is Kant’s argument. From what he calls 
the categorical imperative, that is, from the fact of 
the unconditioned law of duty as obligatory on man, 
he postulates, as conditions, the liberty of the human 
will, and the existence of a God, as the moral gover- 
nor of a moral universe." 

The Third Law, — That no circular probation is to Third RuI*. 
be made, that is, the proposition which we propose to 
prove must not be used as a principle for its own pro- 
bation, — this, in like manner, is only a particular case 
of the first. “ To the Circle there are required properly 
two probations, which are so reciprocally related that 
the antecedent in the one is proved by its own conse- 
quent in the other. The proposition A is tme be- 
cause the proposition B is true ; and the proposition 
B is true because the proposition A is true. A circle 
BO palpable as this would indeed be committed by no 
one. The vice is usually concealed by the interpola- 
tion of intermediate propositions, or by a change in 
the expression.”^ Thus Plato, in his Phado^ demon- 
strates the immortality of the soul from its simplicity ; 
and, in the Republic,^ he demonstrates its simplicity 
from its immortality. 

In relation to the Hysteron Proteron and the Circle, Rceiw.iT* 

.ndPro- 

I must observe that these present some peculiar dim- giw.iTe 

, . ^ ^ ^ 1 fVoofi not 

culties for the systematic arrangement of our know- to be con- 

a Kritik der reinen. Ytmunfl^ Me- /5 Krug, Xoytl*, § 1S3. Anm. 3.— 
thoilenlehre, Hauptiit., il. Abscbn., 2« Eo. 

Kritik der jyraklitrhetx VtmHnftf p, 7 P. 78.— -Kd. 

274, ed. Uosenkranz. — E d. J B. x. p. 611 , — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LKCT. 

XXVI. 


founileU 
with the 
tautniogicft] 
CircJo, 


Fonrth 

Rule. 


Tlic SalfHt 

til demon* 
itrando. 


.jC 

lodge. Through the Circle, (the result of which is only 
the proof of an assertion), — through the circle by itself, 
nothing whatever is gained for the logical develop- 
ment of our knowledge. But we must take care not 
to confound the connection of Eegressive and Pro- 
gressive Proofs with the tautological Circle. When, 
in the treatment of a science out of the observed 
facts, we wish to generalise universal laws, we lead, 
in the first place, an inductive probation, that (ori) 
certain laws there are. Having assured ourselves of 
the existence of these laws by this regressive process, 
we then place them in theory at the head of a pro- 
gressive or synthetic probation, in which the facts 
again recur, reversed and illustrated from the laws, 
which, in the antecedent process, they had been em- 
ployed to est.ablish ; that is, it is now shown why 
(SioTi) these facts exist. 

The Fourth Rule, — No leap, no gap, must be made, 
that is, the syllogisms of which the probation is made 
up must stand in immediate or continuous connection, 

¦ — may be, likewise, reduced to the first. For here 
the only vice is that, by an ellipsis of an intennediate 
link in the syllogistic chain, we use a proposition which 
is actually without its proof, and it is only because 
this proposition is as yet unproved, that its employ- 
ment is illegitimate. The Saltiis is, therefore, only a 
special case of the Petitio. 

The Sahus is committed when the middle term of 
one of the syllogisms in a probation is not stated. 
If the middle term be too manifest to require state- 
ment, then is the saltus not to be blamed, for it is 
committed only in the expression and not in the 
thought. If the middle term be not easy of dis- 
covery, then the saltus is a fault ; but if there be 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


57 


no middle term to be found, then the saltus Is a vice lect. 
which invalidates the whole remainder of the proba- 
tion. The proper saltus , — the real violation of this 
law, is, therefore, when we make a transition from one 
proposition to another, the two not being connected 
together as reason and consequent." The (vulgar) 
Enthymeme and the Sorites do not, therefore, it is 
evident, involve violations of this law. 

The Fifth Eule, — The scope of the probation is not Fifth KuI*. 
to be changed, that is, nothing is to be proved other 
than what was proposed to be proved, — corresponds 
to the second of the two rules which I gave, and of 
which it is only a le.ss explicit statement. It evidently Aamitu of 
admits of three kinds or degrees. In the first case, 
the proposition to be proved is changed by the 
change of its subject or predicate into different no- 
tions. Again, the proposition may substantially re- 
main the same, but may be changed into one either of 
a wider or of a narrower extension, — the second and 
third cases. 

The first of these cases is the Mulatto Elenchi, or Pint 
Transitus ad aliud genus, properly so called. “ When j/wT/o 
a probation does not demonstrate what it ought to 
demonstrate, it may, if considered absolutely or in 
itself, be valid ; but if considered relatively to the pro- 
position which it behoves us to prove, it is of no value. 

We commute by this procedure the whole scope or pur- 
port of the probation ; we desert the proper object of 
inquiry, — the point in question. If a person would 
prove the existence of ghosts, and to this end prove 
by witness the fact of unusual noises and appear- 
ances during the night, he would prove something 
very different from what he proposed to establish ; 
a Cf. Krug, Lojik, g 133. Anm. 4 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



58 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LEOT. 

XXVI. 


Second Do* 
grec,— in 
which too 
little ii 
proved. 


Third De- 
gree, — in 
which too 
much if 
proved. 


for this would be admitted without difficulty by those 
who still denied the apparition of ghosts : it, therefore, 
behoved him to show that the unusual phenomena 
were those of a spirit good or bad.” “ 

The two other cases, — when the proposition actually 
proved is either of a smaller or of a greater extension 
than the proposition which ought to have been proved, 
— are not necessarily, like the preceding, altogether 
irrelevant. They are, however, compared together, of 
various degrees of relevancy. In the former case, 
where too little is proved, — here the end proposed is, 
to a certain extent at least, changed, and the proba- 
tion results in something different from what it was 
intended to accomplish. For example, if we propose 
to prove that Sempronius is a virtuous character, 
and only prove the legality of his actions, we here 
prove something less than, something different from, 
what we professed to do ; for we proposed to prove 
the internal morality, and not merely the external law- 
fulness, of his conduct. Such a proof is not absolutely 
invalid ; it is not even relatively null, for the exter- 
nal legality is always a concomitant of internal mor- 
ality. But the existence of the latter is not evinced 
by that of the former, for Sempronius may conform 
his actions to the law from expediency and not from 
duty.^ 

In the other case, in which there is proved too much, 
the probation is lawful, and only not adequate and 
precise. For example, if we propose to prove that the 
soul does not peri.sh with the body, and actually prove 
that its dissolution is absolutely impossible, — here 
the proof is only superabundant. The logical rule, — 

o Krug, Logikf § 133. Anm. 2. — $ Cf. Knig, Logik, § 133. Aiim. 6. 

Ed. — Ej). 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


59 


Qui nimium probat, nihil prohat, is, therefore, in its 
universal or unqualified expression, incorrect. The 
proving too much is, however, often the sign of a 
saltus having been committed. For example, — when 
a religious enthusiast argues from the strength of his 
persuasion, that he is, therefore, actuatal by the Holy 
Spirit, and his views of religion consequently true, — 
there is here too much proved, for there is implied 
the antecedent, omitted by a saltus, that whoever is 
strongly persuaded of his inspiration is really inspired, 
— a proposition too manifestly absurd to bear an ex- 
plicit enouncement. In this case, the apparent too 
much is in reality a too much which, when closely 
examined, resolves itself into a nothing.® 

We have thus terminated the consideration of Pure 
or Abstract Logic, in both its Parts, and now enter on 
the Doctrine of Modified or Concrete Logic. 

a [Cf. Sigwart, Ilandbuch zu Vorlciungen iAzr (lit Logik, § <07, p. 252.] 


LECT. 

XXVI. 


Digitized by Google 



GO 


J.ECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

XXVII. 


Modified 
Logic,— 
itji object. 


LECTURE XXVII. 

MODIFIED LOGIC. 

PART I. — MODIFIED STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION I. — DOCTRINE OF TRUTH AND ERROR. 

TRUTH. ITS CHARACTER AND KINDS. 

Having now terminated the Doctrine of Pure or Ab- 
stract Logic, we proceed to that of Modified or Con- 
crete Logic. In entering on this subject, I have to 
recall to your memory what has formerly been stated 
in regard to the object which Modified Logic pro- 
poses for consideration. Pure Logic takes into ac- 
count only the necessary conditions of thought, as 
founded on the nature of the thinking process itself. 
Modified Logic, on the contrary, considers the condi- 
tions to which thought is subject, arising from the 
empirical circumstances, external and internal, under 
which exclusively it is the will of our Creator that 
man should manifest his faculty of thinking. Pure 
Logic is thus exclu.sively conversant with the form ; 
Modified Logic is, likewise, occupied with the matter, 
of thought. And as their objects are different, so, 
likewise, must be their ends. The end of Pure Logic 
is formal truth, — the harmony of thought with 
thought ; the end of Modified Logic is the harmony 
of thought with existence. Of these ends, that which 
Pure Logic proposes is less ambitious, but it is fully 
and certainly accomplished ; the end which Modified 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


Cl 


Logic proposes is higher, but it is far less perfectly LErr. 
attained. The problems which Modified Logic has to ^ 
solve may be reduced to three; 1°, What is Truth 
and its contradictory opposite, — Error 1 2°, What 

are the Causes of Error and the Impediments to Truth, 
by which man is beset in the employment of his facul- 
ties, and what are the Means of their Removal 1 And, 

3°, What are the Subsidiaries by which Human 
Thought may be strengthened and guided in the 
exercise of its functions 1 

From this statement it is evident that Concrete An.i iiiari. 
Logic miglit, like Pure Logic, have been divided iutot^wDiu 

r, • 1 • 1 1 1 1 1 1 r Slokhcio- 

a btoicheiology and a Metliodology, — the former com- ion «¦.! iu 

1 7 1 11 1 1 • 1 T1 Mfll.O.1- 

prismg the first two heads, — the latter the third, r or oi«gy. 
if to IModified Stoicheiology we refer the considera- 
tion of the nature of concrete truth and error, and of 
the conditions of a merely not erroneous employment 
of thought, — this will be exhausted in the First and 
Second Chapters ; whereas if we refer to ^Methodology 
a consideration of the means of employing thought 
not merely without error but with a certain positive 
perfection, — this is what the Third Chapter professes 
to expound. 

I commence the First Chapter, which proposes to 
answer the question, — What is Truth 1 with its cor- 
relatives, — by the dictation of the following paragraph. 

If XC. The end which all our scientific efforts p«t. xc. 
are exerted to accomplish, is Truth and Ccr- Ccruinty, 
taintij. Truth is the correspondence or agree- 
ment of a cognition with its object ; its Criterion 
is the necessity determined by the laws which 
govern our faculties of knowledge ; and Certainty 
is the consciousness of this necessity.® Certainty, 

o Cf. Tweaten, Die Lofjih, inheeondere die Analytik^ § 306, — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



62 


LECTUREa ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXVII. 


or the conscious necessity of knowledge, abso- 
lutely excludes the admission of any opposite 
supposition. Where such appears admissible, 
doubt and uncertainty arise. If we consider 
truth by relation to the degree and kind of Cer- 
tainty, we have to distinguish Knowledge, Belief, 
and Opinion. Knowledge and Belief differ not 
only in degree but in kind. Knowledge is a 
certainty founded upon insight ; Belief is a cer- 
tainty founded upon feeling. The one is per- 
spicuous and objective ; the other is obscure and 
subjective. Each, however, supposes the other ; 
and an assurance is said to be a knowledge or 
a belief, according as the one element or the other 
preponderates. Opinion is the admission of 
something as true, where, however, neither in- 
sight nor feeling is so intense as to necessitate a 
perfect certainty. What prevents the ailmission 
of a proposition as certain is called Doubt. The 
approximation of the imperfect certainty of 
opinion to the perfect certainty of knowledge or 
belief is called Probability. 

If we consider Truth with reference to Know- 
ledge, and to the way in which this knowledge 
arises, we must distinguish Empirical or a pos- 
teriori, from Pure or a priori Truth. The former 
has reference to cognitions which have their 
source in the presentations of Perception, Ex- 
ternal and Internal, and which obtain their form 
by the elaboration of the Understanding or Fa- 
culty of Relations (Suivota.) The latter is con- 
tained in the necessary and universal cognitions 
afforded by the Regulative Faculty, — Intellect 
Proper, — or Common Sense, (voOs ) 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


C3 


This paragraph, after statiog that Truth and Cer- lect. 

tainty constitute the end of all our endeavours after L 

knowledge, for only in the attainment of truth and 
certainty can we possibly attain to knowledge or 
science ; — I say, after the statement of this manifest 
proposition, — it proceeds to define what is meant by 
the two terms Truth and Certainty ; and, to com- 
mence with the former, — Truth is defined, the corre- 
spondence or agreement of a cognition or cognitive act 
of thought with its object. 

The question — What is Truth ? is an old and cele-Tmth,— 
brated problem. It was proposed by the Koman * 
Governor, — by Pontius Pilate, — to our Saviour ; and it 
is a question which stiU recurs, and is still keenly agi- 
tated in the most recent schools of Philosophy. In one Definition 
respect, all are nearly agreed in regard to the defini- 
tion of the term, for all admit that by truth is under- 
stood a harmony, — an agreement, — a correspondence 
between our thought and that which we think about. 

This definition of truth we owe to the schoolmen. 

“ Veritas intellectus,” says Aquinas, “est adaequatio in-, 
tellectus et rei, secundum quod intellectus dicit esse, 
quod est, vel non esse, quod non est.” “ From the 
schoolmen, this definition had been handed down to 
modern philosophers, by whom it is currently em- 
ployed, without, in general, a suspicion of its origin. 

It is not, therefore, in regard to the meaning of the 
term truth, that there is any difference of opinion 
among philosophers. The questions which have pro- QuMtions 
yoked discussion, and which remain, as heretofore, regwding 
without a definitive solution, are not whether truth be 

a [Confra Gentiles^ lib. i. c. 69. See Ruiz, Comment, de Scientia, de Ideity 
Biunde, Uher TTnArAtn't in Erhenneny de &c. DUp. Ixxxv., p. 871 

p. 11. On Truth in general, see et$eq.'\ 


Digitized by Google 



LECT. 

XXVII. 


For mui 
only two 
kinds of 
Truili, — 
Formal and 
Real. 


I. Formal 
Truth. 


Formal 
Truth of 
two kinds, 
— l.«j{it:al 
and Matho- 
maticol. 


64 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

the harmony of thought and reality, but whether this 
hannony, or truth, be attainable, and whether we pos- 
sess any criterion by which we can be assured of its 
attainment. Considering, however, at present only the 
meaning of the term, philosophers have divided Truth, 
(or the harmony of thought and its object), into differ- 
ent species, to which they have given diverse names ; 
but they are at one, neither in the division nor in the 
nomenclature. 

It is plain that for man there can only be conceived 
two kinds of Truth, because there are for human thought 
only two species of oly’ect. For that about which we 
think, must either be a thought, or something which a 
thought contains. On this is founded the distinction 
of Formal Knowledge and Real Knowledge, — of For- 
mal Truth and Real Truth. Of these in their order. 

I. In regard to the former, a thought abstracted 
from what it contains, that is, from its matter or what 
it is conversant about, is the mere form of thought. 
The knowledge of the form of thought is a formal 
knowledge, and the harmony of thought with the form 
of thought is, consequently. Formal Truth. Now Formal 
Knowledge is of two kinds ; for it regards either the 
conditions of the Elaborative Faculty, — the Faculty 
of Thought Proper, — or the conditions of our Presen- 
tations or Representations of external things, that is, 
the intuitions of Space and Time. The former of these 
sciences is Pime Logic, — the science which considers 
the laws to which the Understanding is astricted in its 
elaborative operations, without inquiring what is the 
object, — what is the matter, to which tliese operations 
are applied. The latter of these sciences is l^Iathema- 
tics, or the science of Quantity, which considers the re- 
lations of Time and Space, without inquiring whether 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


65 


there be any actual reality in space or time. Formal 
truth will, therefore, be of two kinds, — Logical and 
Mathematical. Logical truth is the harmony or agree- 
ment of our thoughts with themselves as thoughts, in 
other words, the- correspondence of thought with the 
universal laws of thinking. These laws are the object 
of Pure or General Logic, and in these it places the cri- 
terion of truth. This criterion is, however, only the nega- 
tive condition — only the conditio sine qua non, of truth. 
Logical truth is supposed in supposing the possibUity 
of thought ; for all thought presents a combination, the 
elements of which are repugnant or congruent, but 
which cannot be repugnant and congnient at the same 
time. Logic might be true, although we possessed no 
truth beyond its fundamental laws ; although we knew 
nothing of any real existence beyond the formal hypo- 
thesis of its possibility. 

But were the liaws of Logic purely subjective, that 
is, were they true only for our thought alone, and 
without any objective validity, all human sciences, 
(and Mathematics amcmg the rest), would be purely 
subjective likewise ; for we are cognisant of objects 
only under the forms and rules of which Logic is the 
scientific development. If the true character of ob- 
jective validity be universality, the laws of Logic are 
really of that character, for these laws constrain us, 
by their own authority, to regard them as the univer- 
sal laws not only of human thought, but of universal 
reason. 

The case is the same with the other formal science, 
the science of Quantity, or Mathematics. Without 
inquiring into the reality of existences, and without 
borrowing from or attributing to them anything. 
Arithmetic, the science of Discrete Quantity, creates 

VOL. II. E 


LECT. 

XX\’1I. 


Logical 

Truth. 


Mathemati- 
cal Truth. 


Digitized by Google 



LECT. 

XXVII. 


II. Real 
Truth. 


Real and 
1*' orrnal 
Sciences. 


GG LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

its numbers, and Gcometr)’’, the science of Continuous 
Quantity, creates its figures ; and both operate upon 
these their objects in absolute independence of all 
external actuality. The two mathematical sciences 
are dc])cndent for their several objects only on the 
notion of time and the notion of space, — notions under 
which alone matter can be conceived as possible, for 
all matter supposes space, and all matter is moved in 
space and in time. But to the notions of space and time 
the existence or non-existence of matter is indifferent ; 
indifferent, consequently, to Geometry and Arithmetic, 
so long at least as they remain in the lofty regions of 
pure speculation, and do not descend to the practical 
application of their principles. If matter had no exist- 
ence, nay, if space and time existed only in our minds, 
mathematics would still be true ; but their truth would 
be of a pm-ely formal and ideal character, — would fur- 
nish us with no knowledge of objective realities.® 

So much for Formal Truth, under its two species of 
Logical and Mathematical. 

The other genus of truth, — (the end which the Real 
Sciences propose), — is the harmony between a thought 
and its matter. The Real Sciences are those which 
have a determinate reality for their object, and which 
are conversant about existences other than the forms 
of thought. The Formal Sciences have a superior 
certainty to the real ; for they are simply ideal com- 
binations, and they construct their objects without 
inquiring about their objective reality. The real sci- 
ences are sciences of fact, for the point from which 
they depart is always a fact, — always a presentation. 
Some of these rest on the presentations of Self-con- 


m Cf. Es-sior, Loffii’, § 172. — Ed. [Fries, Lotjil:, § 124.] 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


C7 

sciousness, or the facts of miud ; others on the pre- lect. 
sentations of Sensitive Perception, or the facts of — ^ ^ 
nature. The former are the Mental Sciences, the 
latter the Material. The facts of mind are given 'nc“j^tho 
partly as contingent, partly as necessary ; the latter, — aK"* 
the necessary facts, — are universal virtually and in 
themselves ; the former, — the contingent facts, — only 
obtain a fictitious universality by a process of gener- 
alisation. The facts of nature, however necessary in 
themselves, are given to us only as contingent and 
isolated phenomena; they have, therefore, only that 
conditional, that empirical, generality, which we bestow 
on them by classification. 

Real truth is, therefore, the correspondence of our How cu we 
thoughts with the existences which constitute their th““rei.a 
objects. But here a difiiculty arises ; — How can we cnee bo- 
know that there is, that there can be, such a corre- th^Ki.r»mi 
spondence ? All that we know of the objects is through '** ' 

the presentations of our faculties ; but whether these 
present the objects as they are in themselves, we can 
never ascertain, for to do this it woidd be requisite to 
go out of ourselves, — out of our faculties,-^o obtain a 
knowledge of the objects by other faculties, and thus 
to compare our old presentations with our new. But 
all this, even were the supposition possible, would be 
incompetent to afibrd us the certainty required. For 
were it possible to leave our old, and to obtain a new, 
set of faculties, by which to test the old, still the 
veracity of these new faculties would be equally ob- 
noxious to doubt as the veracity of the old. For 
what guarantee could we obtain for the credibility in 
the one case, which we do not already possess in the 
other 1 The new faculties could only assert their own 
truth ; but this is done by the old ; and it is impos- 


Digitized by Google 


LRCT. 

XXVII. 


Real 

Truth, — 
iu But^ri- 
•ions. 


Mctaphysi 

caL 


Piychologi 

cal. 


Physical. 


Various ap* 
plications 
the term 
Truth. 


G8 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

sible to imagine any presentations of tlie non-ego by 
any finite intelligence, to which a doubt might not be 
raised, whether these presentations were not merely 
subjective modifications of the conscious ego itself. 
All that could be said in answer to such a doubt is, 
that if such were true, our whole nature is a lie, — a 
supposition which is not, without the strongest evi- 
dence, to be admitted ; and the argument is as com- 
petent against the sceptic in our present condition, as 
it would be were we endowed with any other con- 
ceivable form of Acquisitive and Cognitive Faculties. 
But I am here trenching on what ought to be re- 
served for an explanation of the Criterion of Truth. 

Such, as it appears to me, is the only rational divi- 
sion of Truth, according to the different character of 
the objects to which thought is relative, — into Formal 
and into Real Truth. Formal Truth, as we have seen, 
is subdivided into Logical and into Mathematical. 
Real Truth might likewise be subdivided, were this 
requisite, into various species. For example. Meta- 
physical Truth might denote the harmony of thought 
with the necessary facts of mind ; Psychological 
Truth, the harmony of thought with the contingent 
facts of mind ; and Physical Truth, the harmony of 
thought with the phoenomena of external experience. 

It now remains to say a word in regard to the con- 
fusion which has been introduced into this subject, by 
the groundless distinctions and contradictions of philo- 
sophers. Some have absurdly given the name of truth 
to the mere reality of existence, altogether abstracted 
from any conception or judgment relative to it, in any 
intelligence human or divine. In this sense physical 
truth has been used to denote the actual existence of 
a thing. Some have given the name of metaphysical 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


69 


truth to the congruence of the thing with its idea in lect. 

the mind of the Creator. Others again have bestowed 1 

the name of metaphysical truth on the mere logical 
possibility of being thought ; whDe they have deno- 
minated by logical truth the metaphysical or physical 
correspondence of thought with its objects. Finally, 
the term moral or ethical truth has bfeen given to 
veracity, or the correspondence of thought with its 
expression. In this last case, tnith is not, as in the 
others, employed in relation to thought and its object, 
but to thought and its enouncement. So much for the 
notion, and the principal distinctions of Truth. 

But returning to the paragraph, I take the next pie cnw- 
clause, which is, — ‘ The Criterion of truth is the neces- Truth, 
sity determined by the laws which govern our faculties 
of knowledge ; and the consciousness of this necessity is 
certainty.’ That the necessity of a cognition, that 
is, the impossibility of thinking it other than as it 
is presented, — that this necessity, as founded on the 
laws of thouglit, is the criterion of tmth, is shown 
by the circumstance, that where such necessity is 
found, all doubt in regard to the correspondence of 
the cognitive thought and its object must vanish ; 
for to doubt whether what we necessarily think in a 
certain manner, actually exists as we conceive it, is 
nothing less than an endeavour to think the necessary 
as the not necessary or the impossible, which is con- 
tradictory. 

What has just been said also illustrates the truth of 
the next sentence of the paragraph, — viz. ‘ Certainty or 
the conscious necessity of a cognition absolutely ex- 
cludes the admission of any opposite supposition. 

When such is found to be admissible, doubt and un- 
certainty arise.’ This sentence requiring no explan- 


Digitized by Google 



70 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXVII. 


Knowlerlffo 
ftod Belief, 
— ihoir dif- 
ference. 


That the 
certainty of 
all know- 
led^ is 
oltimotely 
resolvable 
into a cer- 
tainty of 
Belief, 
maintained 
by Luther. 


Aristotle. 


ation, I proceed to the next — viz., ‘ If we consider 
truth by relation to the degree and kind of Certainty, 
we have to distinguish Knowledge, Belief, and Opinion. 
Knowledge and Belief differ not only in degree but 
in kind. Knowledge is a certainty founded on intui- 
tion. Belief is a certainty founded upon feeling. The 
one is perspicuous and objective, the other is obscure 
and subjective. Each, however, supposes the other, 
and an assurance is said to be a knowledge or a belief, 
according as the one element or the other prepon- 
derates.’ 

In reference to this passage, it is necessary to say 
something in regard to the difference of Knowledge 
and Belief In common language the word Belief is 
often used to denote an inferior degree of certainty. 
We may, however, be equally certain of what we be- 
lieve as of what we know, and it has, not without 
ground, been maintained by many philosophers, both 
in ancient and in modern 'times, that the certainty of 
all knowledge is, in its ultimate analysis, resolved into 
a certainty of belief “ All things,” says Luther, “ stand 
in a belief, in a faith, which we can neither see nor 
comprehend. The man who would make these visible, 
manifest and comprehensible, has vexation and heart- 
grief for his reward. May the Lord increase Belief in 
you and in others.” “ But you may perhaps think that 
the saying of Luther is to be taken theologically, and 
that, philosophically considered, all belief ought to be 
founded on knowledge, not all knowledge in belief. 
But the same doctrine is held even by those philo- 
sophers who are the least disposed to mysticism or 
blind fiitli. Among these Aristotle stands distin- 

o Th. iii. Abih. 2. IVarij, p. 778 . — Ed. 

Quoted by Sir \V. Hamilton, Ucid'g 


Digitized by Google 



LECTUIIES ON LOGIC. 


71 


guished. He defines science, strictly so culled, or the 
knowledge of indubitable truths, merely by the inten- 
sity of our conviction or subjective assurance ; “ and 
on a primary and incomprehensible belief he hangs 
the whole chain of our comprehensible or mediate 
knowledge. The doctrine which has been called The 
Philosophy of Common Sense, is the doctrine which 
founds all our knowledge on belief ; and, though this 
has not been signalised, the doctrine of Common Sense 
is perhaps better stated by the Stagiiite than by 
any succeeding thinker. “ What,” he says, “ appears 
to all men, that we affirm to be, and he who rejects 
this belief (ttioti?) will assuredly advance nothing 
better worthy of credit.” This passage is from his 
Nicomachean Ethics.^ But, in his Physical Treatises, 
he founds in belief the knowledge we have of the re- 
ality of motion, and by this, as a source of knowledge 
paramount to the Understanding, he supersedes the 
contradictions which are involved in our conception 
of motion, and which had so acutely been evolved by 
the Eleatic Zeno, in order to show that motion was 
impossible.'*' In like manner, in his Logical Treatises, 
Aristotle shows that the primary or ultimate princi- 
ples of knowledge must be incomprehensible ; for if 
comprehensible, they must be comprehended in some 
higher notion, and this again, if not itself incompre- 
hensible, must be again comprehended in a stiU higher, 
and so on in a progress ttd injinitum, is absurd.® 
But what is given as an ultimate and incomprehen- 
sible principle of knowledge, is given as a fact, the exist- 

a Various paHsagcs from AriatoUe y R vxii. c. 3. Soo IUid$ Works, 
to thia effect arc cited by the Author, p. 773 . — Ed. 

Reid's Warier, p. 771 . — Ed. 8 Meiaphys., iii. (iv.) 4. Ct Anal, 

3 B. X. c, 2 . — Ed. Post., L 2, 3. — Ed. 


LECT. 

XXVII. 


Digitized by Google 



72 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. ence of which we must admit, but the reasons of whose 
^ existence we cannot know, — we cannot tmderstand. 
y But such an admission, as it is not a knowledge, must 
be a belief ; and thus it is that, according to Aristotle, 
all our knowledge is in its root a blind, a passive faith, 
in other words, a feeling. The same doctrine was 
subsequently held by many of the acutest thinkers of 
The Platon- ancient times, more especially among the Platonists ; 
PTOiue. and of these Proclus is perhaps the philosopher in 
whose works the doctrine is turned to the best account.® 
In modern times we may trace it in silent operation, 
though not explicitly proclaimed, or placed as the 
foimdation of a system. It is found spontaneously 
recognised even by those who might be supposed the 
least likely to acknowledge it without compulsion, 
iiumc. Hume, for example, against whose philosophy the 
doctrine of Common Sense was systematically ar- 
rayed, himself pointed out the weapons by which his 
adversaries subsequently assailed his scepticism ; for 
he himself was possessed of too much philosophical 
acuteness not to perceive that the root of knowledge 
is belief. Thus, in his Inquiry, he says — “ It seems 
evident that men are carried by a natural instinct 
or prepossession to repose faith in their senses : and 
that, without any reasoning, or even almost before the 
use of reason, we always suppose an external universe 
which depends not on our preception, but would exist 
though we and every sensible creature were absent or 
annihilated. Even the animal creation are governed 
by a like opinion, and preserve this belief, — the belief 
of external objects, in all their thoughts, designs, and 
actions .... This very table, which we see 


a In Platonit TheoUxjiam, i. c, 25. Quoted inReidt Worktj p. 776.— Ei>. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


73 


white, and which we feel hard, is believed to exist lect. 

XXVIT. 

independent of our perception, and to be something — ^ 1 
external to our mind which perceives it.” “ 

But, on the other hand, the manifestation of this The i^i- 
belief necessarily involves knowledge ; for we cannot i^iiciTn-" 
believe without some consciousness or knowledge of Knowledge, 
the belief, and, consequently, without some conscious- -f- 
ness or knowledge of the object of the belief. Now, 
the immediate consciousness of an object is called an intuition,- 

• e e • e Whikt, 

intuition , — an insight. It is thus impossible to separ- 
ate belief and knowledge, — feeling and intuition. 

They each suppose the other. 

The consideration, however, of the relation of Belief tti* qu«- 
and Knowledge does not properly belong to Logic, the rei«tion 
except in so far as it is necessary to explain the nature »nd Know, 
of Truth and Error. It is altogether a metaphysical por^ m™t*. 
discussion ; and one of the most difficult problems of 
which Metaphysics attempts the solution. 

The remainder of the paragraph contains the state- 
ment of certain distinctions and the definition of cer- 
tain terms, which it was necessary to signalise, but 
which do not require any commentary for their illus- 
tration. The only part that might have required an 
explanation is the distinction of Truth into Pure, or 
a pinoi’i, and into Empirical, or a posteriori. The 
explanation of this division has been already given 
more than once in the course of the Lectures,^ but the 
following may now be adiled. 

Experience presents to us only individual objects, Pum and 
and as these individual objects might or might not TraS."'"** 


a fnfpitry concerning the Uuman pky^eSf vol. iL p. 194 et $eq, Cf. 
CmUrMtanding, sect. 12. PhilotophU Ea*er, Xoyi/fc, §§ 4, 171 . — Ed. [Eries, 
cal Work$, iv. p. 177.— Ed. Logik, § 124.] 

0 See above, Lccturei on Meta^ 


Digitized by Google 


7 * 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 
XX vn. 


have come within our sphere of observation, our whole 
knowledge of and from these objects might or might 
not exist ; — it is merely accidental or contingent. But 
as our knowledge of individual objects affords the 
possibility, as supplying the whole contents, of our 
generalised or abstracted notions, our generalised or 
abstracted notions are, consequently, not more neces- 
sary to thought, than the particular observations out of 
which they are constructed. For example, every horse 
I have seen I might not have seen ; and I feel no more 
necessity to think the reality of a horse than the 
reality of a hippogriff ; I can, therefore, easily anni- 
hilate in thought the existence of the whole species. 
I can suppose it not to be, — not to have been. The 
case is the same with every other notion which is 
mediately or immediately the datum of observation. 
We can think away each and every part of the know- 
ledge we have derived from experience ; our whole em- 
pirical knowledge is, therefore, a merely accidental 
possession of the mind. 

But there are notions in the mind of a very different 
character, — notions which we cannot but think, if we 
think at all. These, therefore, are notions necessary 
to the mind ; and, as necessary, they cannot be the 
product of experience. For example, I perceive some- 
thing to begin to be. I feel no necessity to think 
that this thing must be at all, but thinking it exist- 
ent, I cannot but think that it has a cause. The no- 
tion, or rather the judgment, of Cause and Effect is, 
therefore, necessary to the mind. If so, it cannot be 
derived from experience. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


75 


LECTURE XXVllI. 

MODIFIED STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION I. — DOCTRINE OF TRUTH AND ERROR. 

SECTION II. — ERROR, — ITS CAUSES AND REMEDIES. 

A. — general circumstances — SOCIETY. 

I NOW proceed to the consideration of the opposite lect. 

^ it XXVIII 

of Truth, — Error, and, on this subject, give you the — ^ ^ 
following paragraph. 

H XCI. Error is opposed to Tnith ; and Error pw. xci. 
arises, 1°, From the commutation of what is Sub-cim^ 
jective with what is Objective in thought ; — 

2°, From the Contradiction of a supposed know- 
ledge with its Laws; or, 3°, From a want of Ade- 
quate Activity in our Cognitive Faculties. 

Error is to be discriminated from I(jn<yrance 
and from Illusiun: these, however, along with 
Arbitrary Assumption, afford the most frequent 
occasions of error.” 

This paragraph consists of two parts, and these I &piia»- 
shall successively consider. The fii-st is — ‘ Error is 

a Twest^ii, Die htyilcy xrOte^mUrt Ruiz, 0/mmcntar\ui de ScUntlay Ac. 
di« § § 308, 309. Ed. [Cf. Di«p. xcii. p. 925.] 


Digitized by Coogle 


76 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. opposed to truth ; and Error arises, 1°, From the 

XXVIII. ^ * . , . , 

1 commutation of what is subjective with what is ob- 
jective in thought ; 2°, From the contradiction of a 
supposed knowledge with its laws ; or, 3°, From a 
want of adequate activity in our cognitive faculties.’ 
Er™r,- “ In the first place, we have seen that Truth is the 

wb*t* * 

agreement of a thought with its object. Now, as 
Error is the opposite of truth, — Error must necessarily 
consist in a want of this agreement. In the second 
place, it has been shown, that the criterion or stand- 
ard of tnith is the necessity founded on the laws of 
our cognitive faculties ; and from this it follows that 
the essential character /)f error must be, either that it 
is not founded on these laws, or that it is repugnant to 
them. But these two alternatives may be viewed as 
only one ; for inasmuch as, in the former case, the 
judgment remains undecided, and can make no pre- 
tence to certainty, it may be thrown out of ac- 
count no less than in the latter, where, as positively 
contradictory of the laws of knowledge, it is neces- 
AjM»»«ri»L sarily false. Of these statements the first, that is, the 
non-agreement of a notion with its object, is error 
viewed on its material side ; and as a notion is the 
common product, — the joint result, afforded by the 
reciprocal action of object and subject, it is evident 
that whatever the notion contains not correspondent 
to the object, must be a contribution by the thinking 
subject alone, and we are thus warranted in saying 
that Material Error consists in the commuting of 
what is subjective with what is objective in thought ; 
in other words, in mistaking an ideal illusion for a 
Am Formal, real representation. The second of these statements 
that is, the incongruence of the supposed cognition 
with tlie laws of knowledge, is error viewed on its 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


77 


formal side. Now here the question at once presents lect. 

* ^ XXVIIL 

itself, — How can an act of cognition contradict its 

own laws ? The answer is that it cannot ; and error, AriBei from 
when more closely scrutinised, is found not so much ° 
to consist in the contradictory activity of our cogni- “c c^i- 
tive faculties as in their want of acti\uty. And this ““ 
may be in consequence of one or other of two causes. 

For it may arise from some other mental power, — the 
will, for example, superseding, — taking the place of, 
the defective cognition, or, by its intenser force, turn- 
ing it aside and leading it to a false result ; or it may 
arise from some want of relative perfection in the ob- 
ject, so that the cognitive faculty is not determined by 
it to the requisite degree of action. 

“ What is actually thought, cannot but be correctly 
thought. Error first commences when thinking is re- 
mitted, and can in fact only gain admission in virtue 
of the truth which it contains ; — every error is a per- 
verted truth. Hence Des Cartes “ is justified in the 
establishment of the principle, — that we would never 
admit the false for the true, if we would only give 
assent to what we clearly and distinctly apprehend. — 

‘Nihil nos unquam falsum pro vero admissuros, si 
tantum iis assensum praebeamus, quse dare et dis- 
tincte percipimus.’” ^ In this view the saying of the 
Roman poet: — 

“ Nam nequo decipitur ratio, ncc decipit unquam,” y 

— is no longer a paradox ; for the condition of error 
is not the activity of intelligence, but its inactivity. 

So much for the first part of the paragraph. The E^r 
second is — ‘ Error is to be discriminated from Ignor- from ignor- 

a Prindpia Philo$ophifFf i, 43, Cf. 0 Twesten, Loffikf § 308. — Ed. 

Med. ir. De r<ro et FaUo. y Manilius, iL 131 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



78 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

xxvni. 


an CO and 
Illusion. 

Ignorance. 


IlIuKioD. 


ance and from Illusion, which, however, along with 
Arbitrary Assumption, afford the usual occasions of 
Error.’ 

“ Ignorance is a mere negation, — a mere not-know- 
ledge ; whereas in error there lies a positive pretence 
to knowledge. Hence a representation, be it imper- 
fect, be it even without any correspondent objective 
reality, is not in itself an error. The imagination of 
a hippogriff is not in itself false ; the Orlando Furioso 
is not a tissue of errors. Error only arises when we 
attribute to the creations of our minds some real 
object, by an assertory judgment; we do not err and 
deceive either ourselves or others, when we hold and 
enounce a subjective or problematic supposition only 
for what it is. Ignorance, — not-knowledge, — however, 
leads to error, when we either regard the unknown as 
non-existent, or when we falsely fill it up. The latter 
is, however, as much the result of WiU, of arbitrary 
assumption, as of ignorance; and, frequently, it is the 
result of both together. In general, the will has no 
inconsiderable share in the activity by which know- 
ledge is realised. The will has not immediately an 
influence on our judgment, but mediately it has. 
Attention is an act of volition, and attention fur- 
nishes to the Understanding the elements of its deci- 
sion. The will determines whether we shall carry on 
our investigations, or break them off, content with the 
first apparent probability ; and whether we shall apply 
our observations to all, or, only partially, to certain, 
momenta of determination. 

“ The occasions of Error w'hich lie in those qualities 
of Presentation, Representation, and Thought arising 
from the conditions and influences of the thinking 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


79 


subject itself, are called Illitsio7is. But the existence lect. 
of illusion does not necessarily imply the existence of 
error. Illusion becomes error only when we attribute 
to it objective truth ; whereas illusion is no error 
when we regard the fallacious appearance as a mere 
subjective affection. In the jaundice, we see every- 
thing tinged with yellow, in consequence of the suf- 
fusion of the eye with bile. In this case, the yellow 
vision is illusion ; and it would become error, were 
we to suppose that the objects we perceive were really 
so coloured. All the powers which co-operate to the ii*iourc». 
formation of our judgments, may become the sources 
of illusion, and, consequently, the occasions of error. 

The Senses," the Presentative Faculties, External and 
Internal, the Representative, the Retentive, the Repro- 
ductive, and the Elaborative, Faculties, are immediate, 
the Feelings and the Desires are mediate, sources of 
illusion. To these must be added the Faculty of 
Signs, in all its actual manifestations in language. 

Hence we speak of sensible, psychological, moral, and 
symbolical, illusion.”^ In all these relations the causes 
of illusion are partly general, partly particular ; and 
though they proximately manifest themselves in some 
one or other of these forms, they may ultimately he 
found contained in the circumstances by which the 
mental character of the individual is conformed. 

Taking, therefore, a general view of all the possible 


a Tji Fontiino. See Mazurc, Cours 
tie Philxitophie^ ii. 241. [Toutes lea 
sciences naturellea ne aont autre 
choHG qu\me guerre ouverte de la 
raisou centre lee ddeeptiona de la 

aenaibilitd e’est-a-dire, qu'ellca 

ont pour objet de reformer lea cireurs 
da nos sens, et de aubatituer lea r<3- 


alit45a de la acicnce aux apporcncea 
facticea qua noa sens noua augg^i'oni. 
Ce«t ce qne La Fontaine a trda bicn 
exprimd dan.H lea vura auivant ; 

** Quand Teau courbe un biion, ma 
raiaon le redreHse/* Ac. — Ed. 
j3 [Twesten, Lorrik^ g 309, p. 288- 
289. Cf. Sigu-art, Lwja-, gg 484, 485.] 


Digitized by Coogle 



80 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. Sources of Error, I think they may be reduced to the 

XXVIII « . 

1 following classes, which, as they constitute the heads 

and determine the order of the ensuing discussion, I 
shall comprise in the following paragraph, with which 
commences the consideration of the Second Chapter of 
Modified Logic. Before, however, proceeding to con- 
tion of ihc sider these several classes in their order, I may observe 
error. that Bacon is the first philosopher who attempted a 
systematic enumeration of the various sources of error; “ 
and his quaint classification of these, under the signi- 
ficant name of idols, into the four genera of Idols of 
the Tribe (idola tribiis). Idols of the Den, {idola speeds), 
Idols of the Forum {idola fori), which may mean 
either the marketplace, the bar, or the place of public 
assembly, and Idols of the Theatre, {idola theatri), he 
thus briefly characterises. 

Pm. xcn. H XCII. The Causes and Occasions of Error 

MiircoV are comprehended in one or other of the four 

following classes. For they are found either, 
1°, In the General Circumstances which modify 
the intellectual character of the individual ; or, 
2°, In the Constitution, Habits, and Beciprocal 
Relations of his powers of Cognition, Feeling, 
and Desire ; or, 3°, In the Language which he 
employs, as an Instrument of Thought and a 
Medium of Communication; or, 4°, In the nature 
of the Objects themselves, about which his know- 
ledge is conversant. 

Pi^xcTii. IT XCIII. Under the General Circumstances 

circumitan- which modify the character of the individual, are 

cct which 

a Nornm Orffanum, i. Aph. xxxiz. — E d. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


81 


comprehended 1°. The particular degree of Culti- lect. 

ration to which his nation has attained ; for its ^ 

rudeness, the partiality of its civilisation, and its 
over-refinement are all manifold occasions of 
error ; and this cultivation is expressed not 
merely in the state of the arts and sciences, but 
in the degree of its religious, political, and social 
advancement ; 2°. The Stricter Associations, in so 
far as these tend to limit the freedom of thought, 
and to give it a one-sided direetion ; such are 
Schools, Sects, Orders, Exclusive Societies, Cor- 
porations, Castes, &c. — “ 

In the commencement of the Course, 1 had occasion Expiic- 
to allude to the tendency there is in man to assimilate mui by 
in opinions and habits of thought to those with whom ^iai. *nd 
he lives.<* Man is by nature, not merely by acciden- by “h“ 
tal necessity, a social being. For only in society does h« w!“iA. 
he find the conditions which his different faculties 
require for their due development and application. 

But society, in all its forms and degrees, from a family 
to a State, is only possible under the condition of a 
certain harmony of sentiment among its members ; 
and as man is by nature destined to a social existence, 
he is by nature determined to that analogy of thought 
and feeling which society supposes, and out of which 
society springs. There is thus in every association, 
great and small, a certain gravitation of opinions 
towards a common centre. As in our natural body 
every part has a necessary sympathy with every 
other, and all together form, by their harmonious 
conspiration, a healthy whole ; so, in the social body, 

a Bachmann, Logik, §J 402, 403.— $ See laturrt o* J/etopAyn'e*, vol. 

Ed. i. p. 48 .— Ed. 

VOL. II. F 


Digitized by Coogle 



82 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

xxvm. 


Pascal 

ouotod on 
the power 
of custom. 


there is always a strong predisposition in each of its 
members to act and think in unison with the rest. 
This universal sympathy or fellow-feeling is the prin- 
ciple of the different spirit dominant in different ages, 
countries, ranks, sexes, and periods of life. It is the 
cause why fashions, why political and religious en- 
thusiasm, why moral example either for good or evil, 
spread so rapidly and exert so powerful an influence. 
As men are naturally prone to imitate others, they, 
consequently, regard as important or insignificant, as 
honourable or disgraceful, as true or false, as good or 
bad, what those around them consider in the same 
light." 

Of the various testimonies I formerly quoted, ot 
the strong assimilating influence of man on man, and 
of the power of custom to make that appear true, 
natural, and necessary, which in reality is false, un- 
natural, and only accidentally suitable, I shall only 
adduce that of Pascal. “ In the just and the unjust,” 
says he, “ we find hardly anything which does not 
change its character in changing its climate. Three 
degrees of an elevation of the pole reverses the whole of 
jurisprudence. A meridian is decisive of truth, and a 
few years, of possession. Fundamental laws change. 
Right has its epochs. A pleasant justice which a river 
or a mountain limits ! Truth on this side the Pyre- 
nees, error on the other ! ”^ It is the remark of an in- 
genious philosopher, “ that if we take a survey of the 
universe, all nations will be found admiring only the 
reflection of their own qualities, and contemning in 


a [MoinerH, ? (vol. iL p. 126, ed Faugere.) Com- 

iJenkkrafU und WUUmkriifte df4 pai*e Ijecturxs on Metai>hyiic4, vol. L 
iVcMjfArji, ii, 322.] p, 86 .— Ed, 

& PeHiic*, pariie i, art. vi. § 8, 


Digitized by Googic 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


83 


others whatever is contrary to what they are accus- lect. 

•' •' xxvin, 

toraed to meet with among themselves. Here is the ! 

Englishman accusing the French of frivolity ; and 
here the Frenchman reproaching the Englishman with 
selfishness and brutality. Here is the Arab persuaded 
of the infallibility of his Caliph, and deriding the 
Tartar who believes in the immortality of the Grand 
Lama. In every nation we find the same congratula- 
tion of their own wisdom, and the same contempt of 
that of their neighbours. 

“ Were there a sage sent down to earth from heaven, 
who regulated his conduct by the dictates of pure rea- 
son alone, this sage would be universally regarded as 
a fool. He would be, as Socrates says, like a physi- 
cian accused by the pastry-cooks, before a tribunal of 
children, of prohibiting the eating of tarts and cheese- 
cakes ; a crime undoubtedly of the highest magnitude 
in the eyes of his judges. In vain would this sage 
support his opinions by the clearest arguments, — the 
most irrefragable demonstrations ; the whole world 
would be for him like the nation of hunchbacks, 
among whom, as the Indian fabulists relate, there 
once upon a time appeared a god, young, beautiful, 
and of consummate symmetry. This god, they add, 
entered the capital ; he was there forthwith sur- 
rounded by a crowd of natives ; his figure appeared 
to them extraordinary ; laughter, hooting, and taunts 
manifested their astonishment, and they were about 
to carry their outrages still further ; had not one of 
the inhabitants (who had imdoubtedly seen other 
men), in order to snatch him from the danger, sud- 
denly cried out — ‘ My friends 1 my friends I What 
are we going to do I Let us not insult this miserable 
monstrosity. If heaven has bestowed on us the gene- 


Digiiized by Google 



84 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. ral gift of beauty, — if it has adorned our backs with 
xxYiii. ^ of let ^iti^ pious gratitude repair to 

the temple and render our acknowledgment to the 
immortal gods.” This fable is the history of human 
vanity. Every nation admires its own defects, 
and contemns the opposite qualities in its neighbours. 

To succeed in a country one must be a bearer of 
the national hump of the people among whom he 
sojourns. 

Them of There are few philosophers who undertake to make 

their countrymen aware of the ridiculous figure they ' 

rndtoi^*! cut in the eye of reason ; and still fewer the nations 
who are able to profit by the advice. All are so punc- 
tiliously attached to the interests of their vanity, that 
none obtain in any country the name of wise, except 
those who are fools of the common folly. There is no 
opinion too absurd not to find nations ready to believe 
it, and individuals prompt to be its executioners or its 
martyrs. Hence it is that the philosopher declared, 
that if he held all truths shut up within his hand, he 
would take especial care not to show them to his 
fellow-men. In fact, if the discovery of a single 
truth dragged Galileo to the prison, to what punish- 
ment would he not be doomed who should discover 
all ? Among those who now ridicule the folly of the 
human intellect, and are indignant at the persecution 
of Galileo, there are few who would not, in the age of 
that philosopher, have clamoured for his death. They 
would then have been imbued with different opinions ; 
and opinions not more passively adopted than those 
which they at present vaunt as liberal and enlight- 
ened. To learn to doubt of our opinions, it is suffi- 
cient to examine the powers of the human intellect, 
to survey the circumstances by which it is affected. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


85 


and to study the history of human follies. Yet in lect. 

modem Europe six centuries elapsed from the foun- _ ! 1 

dation of Universities until the appearance of that 
extraordinary man, — I mean Descartes, — whom his 
age first persecuted, and then almost worshipped as a 
demi-god, for initiating men in the art of doubting, — 
of doubting well, — a lesson at which, however, both 
their sceptieism and credulity show that, after two 
centuries, they are still but awkward scholars. Socrates 
was wont to say — “ All that I know is that I know 
nothing.” “ In our age it would seem that men know 
everything except what Socrates knew. Our errors 
would not be so frequent were we less ignorant ; and 
our ignorance more curable, did we not believe our- 
selves to be all-wise. 

Thus it is that the influence of Society, both in 
its general form of a State or Nation, and in its par- 
ticular forms of Schools, Sects, &c., determines a 
multitude of opinions in its members, which, as they 
are passively received, so they are often altogether 
erroneous. 

Among the more general and influential of these Twogcnerei 



however, both, in reality, founded on the same in- i‘ pre^dice 
capacity of independent thought, — on the same influ- Ih/oia!’^ 
ence of example, — I mean the excessive admiration of 
the Old, and the excessive admiration of the New. 

The former of these prejudices,^ — under which may be 
reduced the prejudice in favour of Authority, — was at 

a Plato, A pot., p. 23 . — Ed, Erreurt et de$ Pr(jug4t ripandiit dan* 

jS [On Prejudice in general see the la Societit Paris, 1810-1813, 3 vols. 
following works : — Dumarsais, Euai 8to. J. L. Castillon, Ensai wr let 
tur let PrSjwfht new ed., Paris, 1822. Errtur* et le$ $uper$titiom Ancienne$ 

Examtn de VEs»ai sur U* PrijagU^ ef ilfoderaes, Amsterdam, 1705; Paris, 

Berl. 1777. Ettai $ur Us Prijug^s^ 1767. Sir Thomas Brown, Vulgar 
Keuchatel, 1796. J. B. Sulques, Des Errors. Olanvil, 


Digitized by Google 



86 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. one time prevalent to an extent of which it is difficult 

for US to form a conception. This prejudice is pre- 

by pared by the very education not only which we do, 
but which we all must, receive. The child necessarily 
learns everything at first on credit, — he believes upon 
authority. But when the rule of authority is once 
established, the habit of passive acquiescence and 
belief is formed, and, once formed, it is not again 
always easily thrown aflf. When the child has grown 
up to an age in which he might employ his own reason, 
he has acquired a large stock of ideas ; but who can 
calculate tlie number of errors which this stock con- 
tains ? and by what means is he able to discriminate 
the true from the false 1 His mind has been formed 
to obedience and uninquiry ; he possesses no criterion 
by which to judge ; it is painful to suspect what has 
been long venerated, and it is felt even as a kind of 
personal mutilation to tear up what has become irra- 
dicated in his intellectual and moral being. Ponere 
difficile est qu<B q^ldcuere diu. The adult does not, 
therefore, often judge for himself more than the child; 
and the tyranny of authority and foregone opinion 
continues to exert a sway during the whole course of 
his life. In our infancy and childhood the credit 
accorded to our parents and instructors is implicit ; 
and if what we have learned from them be confirmed 
by what we hear from others, the opinions thus re- 
commended become at length stamped in almost in- 
delible characters upon the mind. This is the cause 
why men so rarely abandon the opinions which vul- 
garly pass current ; and why what comes as new is 
by so many, for its very novelty, rejected as false. 
And hence it is, as already noticed, that truth is as it 
were geographically and politically distributed ; what 


Digitized by Google 


LKCTURES ON LOGIC. 


87 


is truth on one side of a boundary being error and lect. 

^ ^ xxvin 

absurdity on the other. What has now been said of ! 

the influence of society at large, is true also of the 
lesser societies which it contains, aU of which impose 
with a stronger or feebler, — a wider or more contracted, 
authority, certain received opinions upon the faith of 
the members. Hence it is that whatever has once 
obtained a recognition in any society, large or small, 
is not rejected when the reasons on which it was 
originally admitted, have been proved erroneous. It 
continues, even for the reason that it is old and has 
been accepted, to be accepted still ; and the title which 
was originally defective, becomes valid by continu- 
ance and prescription. 

But opposed to this cause of error, from the preju- 2. prejudice 
dice in favour of the Old, there is the other, directly the New. 
the reverse, — the prejudice in favour of the New. 

This prejudice may be, in part at least, the result of 
sympathy and fellow-feeling. This is the cause why 
new opinions, however erroneous, if they once obtain 
a certain number of converts, often spread with a 
rapidity and to an extent which, after their futility 
has been ultimately shown, can only be explained on 
the principle of a kind of intellectual contagion. But 
the principal cause of the prejudice in favour of 
novelty lies in the Passions, and the consideration of 
these does not belong to the class of causes with 
which we are at present occupied. 

Connected with and composed of both these preju- Pr^dice^ 
dices, — that in favour of the old and that in favour of Authority, 
the new, — there is the prejudice of Learned Authority ; 
for this is usually associated with the prejudices of 
Schools and Sects. “ As often as men have appeared, 
who, by the force of their genius, have opened up new 


Digitized by Google 



88 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXVIII. 


views of science, and thus contributed to the progress 
of the human intellect, so often have they, likewise, 
afforded the occasion of checking its advancement, 
and of turning it from the straight path of improve- 
ment. Not that this result is to be imputed as a re- 
proach to them, but simply because it is of the native 
of man to be so affected. The views which influenced 
these men of genius, and which, consequently, lie at 
the foundation of their works, are rarely comprehended 
in their totality by those who have the names of these 
authors most frequently in their mouths. The many 
do not concern themselves to seize the ideal which a 
philosopher contemplated, and of which his actual 
works are only the imperfect representations ; they 
appropriate to themselves only some of his detached 
apophthegms and propositions, and of these compound, 
as they best can, a sort of system suited to their un- 
derstanding, and which they employ as a talisman in 
their controversies with others. As their reason is 
thus a captive to authority, and, therefore, unable to 
exert its native freedom, they, consequently, catch up 
the true and the false without discrimination, and 
remain always at the point of progress where they 
had been placed by their leaders. In their hands a 
system of living truths becomes a mere petrified or- 
ganism ; and they require that the whole science shall 
become as dead and as cold as their own idol. Such 
was Plato’s doctrine in the hands of the Platonists ; 
such was Aristotle’s philosophy in the hands of the 
Schoolmen ; and the history of modern systems affords 
equally the same result.”® 

So much for the first genus into which the Sources 
of Error are divided. 

a Bachmann, Loyii\ § 404, p. 550 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


89 


LECTURE XXIX. 

MODIFIED STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — ERROR — ITS CAUSES AND REMEDIES. 

A. GENERAL CIRCUMSTANCES — SOCIETY. 

B. — AS IN POWERS OF COGNITION, FEEUNG, AND 
DESIRE. 

I. AFFECTIONS. — PRECIPITANCY — SLOTH — HOPE AND 

FEAR — SELF-LOVE. 

In out last Lecture, we entered on the consideration lect. 

of the various sources of Error. These, I stated, L 

may be conveniently reduced to four heads, and con- 
sist, 1°. In the General Circumstances which modify 
the intellectual character of the individual ; 2°. In the 
Constitution, Habits, and Reciprocal Relations of his 
powers of Cognition, Feeling, and Desire ; 3°. In the 
Language which he employs as an Instrument of 
Thought and a Medium of Communication ; and 4°. In 
the nature of the Objects themselves about which his 
knowledge is conversant. 

Of these, I then gave you a general view of the 
nature of those occasions of Error, which originate in 
the circumstances under the influence of which the 
character and opinions of man are determined for 
him as a member of society. Under this head I 


Digitized by Google 



90 


LECTURES ON LOfilC. 


LECT. 

XXIX. 


stated, that, as man is destined by his Creator to fulfil 
the end of his existence in society, he is wisely fur- 
nished with a disposition to imitate those among 
whom his lot is cast, and thus to conform himself to 
whatever section of human society he may by birth 
belong, or of which he may afterwards become a 
member. The education we receive, nay the very 
possibility of receiving education at all, supposes to a 
certain extent the passive infusion of foreign and tra- 
ditionary opinions. For as man is compelled to think 
much earlier than he is able to think for himself, — all 
education necessarily imjioses on him many opinions 
which, whether in themselves true or false, are, in re- 
ference to the recipient, only prejudices ; and it is 
even only a small number of mankind, who at a later 
period are able to bring these obtruded opinions to 
the test of reason, and by a free exercise of their own 
intelligence to reject them if found false, or to acknow- 
ledge them if proved true. 

But while the mass of mankind thus remain, during 
their whole lives, only the creatures of the accidental 
circumstances which have concurred to form for them 
their habits and beliefs ; the few who are at last able 
to form opinions for themselves, are still dependent, 
in a great measure, on the unreasoning judgment 
of the many. Public opinion, hereditary custom, 
despotically impose on us the capricious laws of pro- 
priety and manners. The individual may possibly, in 
matters of science, emancipate himself from their ser- 
vitude ; in the affairs of life he must quietly submit 
himself to the yoke. The only freedom he can here 
prudontly manifest, is to resign himself with a con- 
sciousness that he is a slave not to reason but to con- 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 91 

ventional accident. And while he conforms himself LEcrp. 

XXIX. 

to the usages of his own society, he will be tolerant 1- 

to those of others. In this respect his maxim will be 
that of the Scythian prince : — “ With you such may 
be the custom, — with us it is different.” 

So much for the general nature of the influence to Me^by 
which we are exposed from the circumstances of So- inHucnreof 
ciety ; it now remains to say what are the means by * 

which this influence, as a source of error, may be^un^r- 
coimteracted. 

It has been seen that, in consequenee of the man- nccm^ 
ner in which our opinions are formed for us by the 
accidents of society, our imposed and supposed know- ofX'“n™ 
ledge is a confused medley of truths and errors, knwudgo'! 
Here it is evidently necessary to institute a critical 
examination of the contents of this knowledge. Des- 
cartes proposes that, in order to discriminate, among 
our prejudiced opinions, the truths from the errors, we 
ought to commence by doubting all.® This has ex- 
posed him to much obloquy and clamour ; but most 
imjustly. The doctrine of Descartes has nothing D«*c»rt«, 
sceptical or offensive ; for he only maintains that it «pt." 
behoves us to examine all that has been inculcated on 
us from infancy, and under the masters to whose 
authority we have been subjected, vnth the same at- 
tention and circumspection which we accord to dubi- 
ous questions. In fact there is nothing in the precept 
of Descartes, which had not been previously enjoined 
by other philosophers. Of these I formerly quoted to 
you several, and among others the remarkable testi- 
monies of Aristotle, St Augustin, and Lord Bacon.^ 

* Dueom dc la Mithode, Partie S See Ltclurtt on Uetapkyiia, toI 
ii.— E d. i. p. 90 el teq. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



92 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. But although there be nothing reprehensible in the 

XXIX. ^ ^ • 

1- precept of Descartes, as enounced by him, it is of 

Cunditioni less practical utUity in consequence of no account 
dify'iu”*' being taken of the circumstances which condition and 
•pphcatioB. j£g application. For, in the first place, the 

judgments to be examined ought not to be taken at 
random, but selected on a principle, and arranged in 
due order and dependence. But this requires no 
ordinary ability, and the distribution of things into 
their proper classes is one of the last and most diffi- 
cult fruits of philosophy. In the second place, there 
are among our prejudices, or pretended cognitions, 
a great many hasty conclusions, the investigation of 
which requires much profound thought, skill, and ac- 
quired knowledge. Now, from both of these consider- 
ations, it is evident that to commence philosophy by 
such a review, it is necessary for a man to be a philo- 
sopher before he can attempt to become one. The 
precept of Descartes is, therefore, either unreasonable, 
or it is too unconditionally expressed. And this latter 
alternative is true. 

A What can be rationally required of the student of 

And progTc*- , , x 

lion is not a preliminary and absolute, but a 

snd progressive abrogation, of prejudices. It 
required of him, that, when, in the course 
^pW'o- of his study of philosophy, he meets with a proposi- 
tion which has not been already sufficiently sifted, — 
(whether it has been elaborated as a principle or ad- 
mitted as a conclusion), — he should pause, discuss it 
without prepossession, and lay aside for future con- 
sideration all that has not been subjected to a search- 
ing scrutiny. The precept of Descartes, when rightly 
explained, corresponds to that of St Paul “ ; “ If any 

a 1 Cor., iii. 18. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


93 


man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let lect. 

him become a fool, that he may be wise ; ” that is, let 1- 

him not rely more on the opinions in which he has 
been brought up, and in favour of which he and those 
around him are prejudiced, than on so many visions 
of imagination ; and let him examine them with the 
same circumspection as if he were assured that they 
contain some truth among much falsehood and many 
extravagancies.” 

Proceeding now to the second class of the Sources 
of Error, which are found in the Mind itself, I shall 
commence with the following paragraph : — • 

H XCIV. The Sources of Error which arise p»t^civ. 
from the Constitution, Habits, and Keciprocal of Error 

1*1 i* •• Til* arising from 

Relations of the powers of Cognition, reeling, tho^wcm 
and Desire, may be subdivided into two kinds. 

The first of these consists in the undue prepon- Deiire,— of 
derance of the Affective Elements of mind, (the 
Desires and Feelings), over the Cognitive : the 
second, in the weakness or inordinate strength 
of some one or other of the Cognitive Faculties 
themselves. 

Affection is that state of mind in which the Feel- Expiic*. 
ings and Desires exert an influence not under the con-i. Prepon- 
trol of reason ; in other words, a tendency by which Affection 
the intellect is impeded in its endeavour to think an niuo^ 
object as that object reaUy is, and compelled to think 
it in conformity with some view prescribed by the 
passion or private interest of the subject thinking. 


a This criticum of the precept of talien from Crousaz, Logique, t. iil, 
Deacartee is, with some slight changes, part ii., cb. 6, p. 263 et teq . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


91 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. The human mind, when unruffled by passion, may 
be compared to a calm sea. A calm sea is a clear 
mirror, in which the sun and clouds, in which the 
Influence of forms of heaven and earth, are reflected back pre- 
thTMilid." cisely as they are presented. But let a wind arise ; 
and the smooth clear surface of the water is lifted 
into billows and agitated into foam. It no more re- 
flects the sun and clouds, the forms of heaven and 
earth, or it reflects them only as distorted and broken 
images. In like manner, the tranquil mind receives 
and reflects the world without as it truly is ; but let 
the wind of passion blow, and every object is repre- 
sented, not as it exists, but in the colours and aspects 
and partial phases in which it pleases the subject to 
regard it. The state of passion and its influence 
Bocthim on the Cognitive Faculties are truly pictured by 

quoted. BoejJjjygO 


NnbiLus atris 
(>>ndita nnllnm 

Tu quoque si vis 

Faudere possuut 

Lumine claro 

Sidera lumen. 

Cemere verum. 

.Si mare volvens 

Tramite recto 

Turbidue auater 

Carpere callem : 

Misceat eestum, 

Gaudia pelle, 

Vitrea dudum, 

Pelle timorem. 

Parque serenis 

' Spemque fugato, 

Unda diebuB, 

Neo dolor adsit. 

Mox resoluto 

Niibila mens est, 

Sordida coeno. 

Vinctaque frenis, 

Visibus obstat. 

Htec nbi regnant.' 


Error Every error consists -in this, — that we take some- 
Prob«i,io thing for non-existent, because we have not become 
Rcajioning. gxistencc, and that, in place of this ex- 

a Dt CosmoL Phil.^ L. i., Hetr. 7 .-^Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


95 


istent something, we fill up the premises of a probable 
reasoning with something else. 

I have here limited the possibility of error to Pro- 
bable Reasoning, for, in Intuition and Demonstration, 
there is but little possibility of important error. 
Hobbes indeed asserts that had it been contrary to the 
interest of those in authority, that the three angles of 
a triangle should be equal to two right angles, this 
truth would have been long ago proscribed as heresy, 
or as high treason.® This may be an ingenious illus- 
tration of the blind tendency of the passions to sub- 
jugate intelligence ; but we should take it for more 
than was intended by its author, were we to take it 
as more than an ingenious exaggeration. Limiting, 
therefore, error to probable inference, (and this consti- 
tutes, with the exception of a comparatively small 
department, the whole domain of human reasoning), 
we have to inquire. How do the Passions influence us 
to the assumption of false premises \ To estimate the 
amount of probability for or against a given propo- 
sition, requires a tranquil, an unbiassed, a comprehen- 
sive, consideration, in order to take all the relative 
elements of judgment into due account. But this 
requisite state of mind is disturbed when any interest, 
any wish, is allowed to interfere. 


LF.CT. 

XXIX. 


^ XCV. The disturbing Passions may be re- p«. xcv. 
duced to four : — Precipitancy, Sloth, Hope and '>om, •« 

^ * source* of 

F ear, Self-love. Error,— 

Ok 1 • r 1 • • t reduced to 

1 . A restless anxiety for a decision begets four, 
impatience, which decides before the preliminary 
inquiry is concluded. This is Precipitancy. 

a Leviathan, Port I. ch. 11 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECT. 

XXIX. 


Kxplica* 

tion. 

1. Prtcipi- 
taacy. 


Sen eat. 


Enumtu* 


96 LECTURES ON LOGIC. 

2°. The same result is the effect of Sloth, 
which dreams on in conformity to custom, with- 
out subjecting its beliefs to the test of active 
observation. 

3°. The restlessness of Hope or Fear impedes 
observation, distracts attention, or forces it only 
on what interests the passion ; — the sanguine 
looking only on what harmonises with his hopes, 
the diffident only on what accords with his 
fears. 

4°. Self-love perverts our estimate of proba- 
bility by causing us to rate the grounds of judg- 
ment, not according to their real influence on the 
truth of the decision, but according to their 
bearing on our personal interests therein. 

In regard to Impatience or Precipitation, — “all is 
the cause of this which determines our choice on one 
side rather than another. An imagination excites 
pleasure, and because it excites pleasure we yield our- 
selves up to it. AVe suppose, for example, that we 
are all that we ought to be, and why 1 Because this 
supposition gives us pleasure. This, in some disposi- 
tions, is one of the greatest obstacles to improvement ; 
for he who entertains it, thinks there is no necessity to 
labour in order to become what he is already. ‘ I be- 
lieve,’ says Seneca,® ‘ that many had it in their power 
to have attained to wisdom, had they not been im- 
peded by the belief that wisdom they had already 
attained.’ ‘ Multos puto ad sapientiam potuisse per- 
venire, nisi putassent sepervenisse.’”^ Erasmus gives 

a Dt Tranquilliiate Animi, c. 1. — $ Crou^az, Lo^iquty t. ill, part. ii. 

Ed. ch. 7, p. 297 .— Ed, 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


f)7 


the following as the principal advice to a young lect. 
votaiy of learning in the conduct of his studies : “ To 
read the most learned books, to converse with the 
most learned men ; but, above all, never to conceit 
that he himself was learned.” “ 

“ From the same cause, men flatter themselves with iiiu«r»- 
the hope of dying old, although few attain to longe- 
vity. The less probable the event the more certain 
are they of its occurrence ; and why 1 Because the im- 
agination of it is agreeable. ‘ Decrepit! senes pauco- From 

. .0 T , . Seneca. 

rum annorum accessionem votis mendicant ; minores 
natu seipsos esse fingunt : mendacio sibi blandiuntur : 
et tarn libenter fallunt, quam si fata una decipiant.’ ” ^ 

“ Preachers,” says Montaigne, “ are aware that the From 
emotion which arises during their sermons animates 
themselves to belief, and we are conscious that when 
roused to anger we apply ourselves more intently to 
the defence of our thesis, and embrace it with greater 
vehemence and approbation, than we did when our 
mind was cool and unruffled. You simply state your 
case to an advocate ; he replies with hesitation and 
doubt : you are aware that it is indifierent to him 
whether he undertakes the defence of the one side or of 
the other ; but have you once fee’d him well to take 
your case in hand ; he begins to feel an interest in it, 
his will is animated. His reason and his science be- 
come also animated in proportion. Y our case presents 
itself to his understanding as a manifest and indubit- 
able truth ; he now sees it in a wholly different light, 

a ** JoanneH AlexAnder BraHsicanus Be doctum nunquam putarct.*' Motto 
rogavit Eraamum, qua ratione doctua to G. J. Voasiua, Opuicula de Sfudi- 
posset fieri, reapondit ex tempore : orum Ratione. See Crenius, Cotisilia 
si doctU assidue couviveret, si doctos et Methodue, &c., p. 686, 1692. — Ed. 
audiret non minus submisse quam 0 SenecHf De Brevitate 11. 

honorifice, si doctos strenue legeret, si Crousaz, lagique, t iii p. ii. cb. 7, p. 
doctos (liligenter etliscerct, denique si 297) ed. 1725. — Ed. 

VOL, II. 


Digitized by Google 



98 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. and really believes that you have law and justice on 
XXIX. ^ * 

your side.”” It is proper to observe that Montaigne 

was himself a lawyer, — he had been a counsellor of the 
Parliament of Bordeaux. 

Precipiuto It might seem that Precipitate Dogmatism and an 
mTs^piT inclination to Scepticism were opposite characters of 
of the nme mind. They are, however, closely allied, if not merely 
diipontion. pj^^^ggg £jjg game disposition. This is indeed con- 
fessed by the sceptic Montaigne./® “The most un- 
easy condition for me is to be kept in suspense on 
urgent occasions, and to be agitated between fear 
and hope. Deliberation, even in things of lightest 
moment, is very troublesome to me ; and I find 
my mind more put to it, to undergo the various 
tumbling and tossing of doubt and consultation, 
than to set up its rest, and to acquiesce in whatever 
shall happen, after the die is thrown. Few passions 
break my sleep ; but of deliberations, the least dis- 
turbs me.” 

Remedy Precipitation is no incurable disease. There is for 
it one sure and simple remedy, if properly applied. 
It is only required, to speak with Confucius, manfully 
to restrain the wild horse of precipitancy by the curb 
of consideration, — to weigh the reasons of decision, 
each and all, in the balance of cool investigation, — not 
to allow ourselves to decide imtil a clear conscious- 
ne.s8 has declared these reasons to be true, — to be suffi- 
. cient ; and, finally, to throw out of account the suf- 
frages of self-love, of prepossession, of passion, and to 
admit only those of reflection, of experience, and of 
evidence. This remedy is certain and effectual. In 
theory it is satisfactory, but its practical application 

a Enaxiy L. iL ch. 12. Quoted by 0 EitmUf L. iL c. 17 .>^£d. 

CrouMz, 1. c. — Ed. 


Digitized by Googic 


LECTDRES ON LOGIC. 


99 


requires a moral resolution, for the acquisition of lect. 
which no precept can be given. — 

In the second place, “ Sloth is likewise a cause of 2. sioth. 
precipitation, and it deserves the more attention as it 
is a cause of error extremely frequent, and one of 
which we are ourselves less aware, and which is less 
notorious to others. We feel it fatiguing to continue 
an investigation, therefore we do not pursue it ; but 
as it is mortifying to think that we have laboured in 
vain, we easily admit the flattering illusion that we 
have succeeded. By the influence of this disposition 
it often happens, that, after having rejected what first 
presented itself, — after having rejected a second time 
and a third time what subsequently turned up, be- 
cause not sufficiently applicable or certain, we get 
tired of the investigation, and perhaps put up with 
the fourth suggestion, which is not better, haply even 
worse, than the preceding ; and this simply because it 
has come into the mind when more exhausted and less 
scrupulous than it was at the commencement.” “ “ The Sener* 
volition of that man,” says Seneca, “ is often frus- 
trated, who undertakes not what is easy, but who 
wishes what he undertakes to be easy. As often as 
you attempt anything, compare together yourself, the 
end which you propose, and the means by which it is 
to be accomplished. For the repentance of an un- 
finished work will make you rash. And here it is of 
consequence whether a man be of a fervid or of a 
cold, of an aspiring or of a humble, disposition.” P 

To remedy this failing it is necessary, in conform- la rem«iy. 
ity with this advice of Seneca, to consult our forces, 
and the time we can afibrd, and the difficulty of the 

a Cniusaz, Logique, t. iu. part ii. cIl $ Dt /m, L. iii. c. 7. Quoted by 
7, p. 302 . — Ed. Crousa*, Loijique^ t. iii. p. 802 .— Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



100 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. subjects on which we enter. We ought to labour only 
1 at intervals, to avoid the tedium aud disquiet conse- 
quent on unremitted application ; and to adjourn the 
consideration of any thought which may please us 
vehemently at the moment, until the prepossession in 
its favour has subsided with the animation which gave 
it birth. 

a Hop* The two Causes of premature judgment, — the affec- 

^ tions of Impatience and Sloth, — being considered, I pass 

on to the third principle of Passion, by which the in- 
tellect is turned aside from the path of truth, — I mean 
the disturbing influence of Hope and Fear. These 
passions, though reciprocally contrary, determine a 
similar effect upon the deliberations of the Under- 
standing, and are equally unfavourable for the in- 
terest of truth. In forming a just conclusion upon a 
question of probable reasoning, that is, where the 
grounds of decision are not few, palpable, and of de- 
terminate effect, — and such questions may lie said to 
be those alone on which differences of opinion may 
arise, and are, consequently, those alone which re- 
quire for their solution any high degree of observation 
and ingenuity, — in such questions hope and fear 
exert a very strong and a very unfavourable influ- 
ence. In these questions it is requisite, in the first 
place, to seek out the premises ; and, in the second, 
to draw the conclusion. Of these requisites the first 
is the more important, and it is also by far the more 
difficult. 

How Hope Now the passions of Hope and Fear operate sever- 
ojkcrutc un- ally to prevent the intellect from discovering all the 
OD the I’n- elements of decision, which ought to be considered in 
dtnuodmg. correct conclusion, and cause it to take into 

account those only which harmonise with that con- 


Digiiized by Google 



LECTURKS ON LOGIC. 


101 


elusion to which the actuating passion is inclined. 
And here the passion operates in two ways. In the 
first place, it tends so to determine the associations of 
thought, that only those media of proof are suggested 
or called into consciousness, which support the conclu- 
sion to which the passion tends. In the second place, 
if the media of proof by which a counter conclusion is 
supported, are brought before the mind, still the mind 
is influenced by the passion to look on their reality 
with doubt, and, if such cannot be questioned, to 
undervalue their inferential importance ; whereas it is 
moved to admit, without hesitation, those media of 
proof, which favour the conclusion in the interest of 
our hope or fear, and to exaggerate the cogency with 
which they establish this result. Either passion looks 
exclusively to a single end, and exclusively to the 
means by which that single end is accomplished. 
Thus the sanguine temperament, or the mind under 
the habitual predominance of hope, sees only and 
magnifies all that militates in favour of the wished- 
for consummation, which alone it contemplates ; 
whereas the melancholic temperament, or the mind 
under the habitual predominance of fear, is wholly 
occupied \sdth the dreaded issue, views only what 
tends to its fulfilment, while it exaggerates the pos- 
sible into the probable, the probable into the certain. 
Thus it is that whatever conclusion we greatly hope or 
greatly fear, to that conclusion we are disposed to 
leap ; and it has become almost proverbial, that men 
lightly believe both what they wish, and what they 
dread, to be true. 

But the influence of Hope on our judgments, inclin- 
ing us to find whatever we wish to find, in so far as 
this arises from the illusion of Self-love, is compre- 


LECT. 

XXIX. 


Digitized by Google 



102 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


i.ECT. bended in this, — the fourth cause of Error, — to which 
1 now proceed. 

4. SeU iove. Self-love, under which I include the dispositions of 
Vanity, Pride, and, in general, all those which incline 
us to attribute an undue weight to those opinions in 
which we feel a personal interest, is by far the most 
extensive and influential impediment in the way of 
reason and truth. In virtue of this principle, what- 
ever is ours, — whatever is adopted or patronised by 
us, whatever belongs to those to whom we are at- 
tached, — is either gratuitously clothed with a charac- 
ter of truth, or its pretensions to be accounted true 
are not scrutinised with the requisite rigour and im- 
partiality. I am a native of this country, and, there- 
fore, not only is its history to me a matter of peculiar 
interest, but the actions and character of my country- 
men are viewed in a very difierent light from that in 
which they are regarded by a foreigner. I am bom 
and bred a member of a religious sect, and because 
they constitute my creed, I find the tenets of this 
sect alone in conformity to the Word of God. I am 
the partisan of a philosophical doctrine, and am, 
therefore, disposed to reject whatever does not har- 
monise with my adopted system. 

Ari.u>tie,— It is the part of a philosopher, says Aristotle, inas- 
' much as he is a philosopher, to subjugate self-love, 
and to refute, if contrary to truth, not only the opin- 
ions of lus friends, but the doctrines which he liimself 
may have professed.® It is certain, however, that 
philosophers, — for philosophers are men, — have been 
too often found to regulate their conduct by the oppo- 
iiiiutrations site principle. That man pretended to the name of 
enc« of s«if. philosopher, who scrupled not to declare that he 

a Eih, Nic.f i. 4 (6 ). — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


103 


would rather be in the wTong with Plato than in the 
right with his opponents." “ Gisbert Voetius urged 
Mersennus to refute a work of Descartes a year before 
the book appeared, and before he had himself the 
means of judging whether the opinions it contained 
were right or wrong. A certain professor of philo- 
sophy in Padua came to Galileo, and requested that he 
would explain to him the meaning of the term paral- 
laxis ; which he wished, he said, to refute, having 
heard that it was opposed to Aristotle’s doctrine 
touching the relative situation of the comets. What! 
answered Galileo, you wish to controvert a word 
the meaning of which you do not know! Kedi 
tells us that a sturdy Peripatetic of his acquaint- 
ance would never consent to look at the heavens 
through a telescope, lest he should be compelled to 
admit the existence of the new stars discovered by 
Galileo and others. The same Redi informs us that 
he knew another Peripatetic, a staunch advocate of 
the Aristotelian doctrine of equivocal generation, (a 
doctrine, by the way, which now again divides the 
physiologists of Europe), and who, in particular, main- 
tained that the green frogs which appear upon a 
shower come down with the rain, who would not be 
induced himself to select and examine one of these 
frogs. And why 1 Because he was unwilling to be 
convicted of his error, by Redi showing him the green 
matter in the stomach, and its feculse in the intestines 
of the animal.” ^ The spirit of the Peripatetic 
philosophy was, however, wholly misunderstood by 
these mistaken followers of Aristotle ; for a true 

a Cicero, i. 17. 1766^ §332. First published in 1756, 

0 Kelmarub, p. 3S9. [l>ie Vemumft’ Tlie above four anecdotes arc all taken 
Uhrtf run II.S.R. (Hermann Samuel from this work. — K d.J 
Rcimarus), dritto Aufliige, Hamburg, 


LECT, 

XXIX, 


love on our 
opinions. 


Digitized by Google 



LECT. 

XXIX. 


Self-love 
leeds U8 to 
re^^ard with 
favutir the 
opinions of 
those to 
whom wo 
ATO in any 
way attach* 
od. 


Malo- 
branclic 
adduced to 
this effect. 


KH LEcrruuKs on logic. 

Aristotelian is one who listens rather to the voice of 
nature than to the precept of any master, and it is 
well expressed in the motto of the great French anato- 
mist, — Riolanus est Peripateticus ; credit ea, et ea 
tantum, qu:c vidit. From the same principle pro- 
ceeds the abuse, and sometimes even the persecution, 
which the discoverers of new truths encounter from 
those whose cherished opinions these truths subvert. 

In like manner, as we are disposed to maintain our 
own opinion, we are inclined to regard with favour the 
opinions of those to whom we are attached by love, 
gratitude, and other conciliatory affections. “We do 
not limit our attachment to the persons of our friends, 
— we love in a certain sort all that belongs to them ; 
and as men generally manifest suflBcient ardour in 
support of their opinions, we are led insensibly by a 
kind of sympathy to credit, to approve, and to defend 
these also, and that even more passionately than our 
friends themselves. We bear affection to others for 
various reasons. The agreement of tempers, of inclina- 
tions, of pursuits ; their appearance, their manners, 
their virtue, the partiality which they have shown to 
us, the services we have received at their hands, and 
many other particular causes, determine and direct our 
love. 

“ It is observed by the great Malebranche,® that if 
any of our friends, — any even of those we are disposed 
to love, — advance an opinion, we forthwith lightly 
allow ourselves to be persuaded of its truth. This 
opinion we accept and support, without troubling our- 
selves to inquire whether it be conformable to fact, 
frequently even against our conscience, in conformity 
to the darkness and confusion of our intellect, to the 

a Hechtrchc dt la L. ir. ch. 13 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


105 


corruption of our heart, and to the advantages which lect. 
we hope to reap from our facility and complaisance.”® ^ 

The influence of this principle is seen still more Thi. >bo»n 
manifestly when the passion changes ; for though the wficn tho 
things themselves remain unaltered, our judgments Uumgc*. 
concerning them are totally reversed. How often do 
we behold persons who cannot, or will not, recognise 
a single good quality in an individual from the mo- 
ment he has chanced to incur their dislike, and who 
are even ready to adopt opinions, merely because 
opposed to others maintained by the object of their 
aversion ? The celebrated Arnauld^ goes so far even Amauw 

, 1*1 that 

as to assert, that men are naturally envious and jeal- m»n i> 

« • • .1 . « T 1 naturally 

ous ; that it is with pain they endure the contem- onTiom. 
plation of others in the enjoyment of advantages 
which they do not themselves possess ; and, as the 
knowledge of truth and the power of enlightening 
mankind is of one of these, that they have a secret in- 
clination to deprive them of that glory. This accord- 
ingly often determines them to controvert without a 
ground the opinions and discoveries of others. Self- 
love accordingly often argues thus : — ‘ This is an 
opinion which I have originated, this is an opinion, 
therefore, which is true ; ’ whereas the natural 
malignity of man not less frequently suggests such 
another : ‘ It is another than I who has advanced this 
doctrine ; this doctrine is, therefore, false.’ 

We may distinguish, however, from malignant ornieiovoof 
envious contradiction another passion, which, though tion. 
more generous in its nature and not simply a mode of 
Self-love, tends, nevertheless, equally to divert us from 
the straight road of truth, — I mean Pugnacity, or the 

• Caro, Nomtllt Logique, part ii., $ L'Art dt Penier (Pari Royal Lo- 
ch. vlii., p. 288 . — Ed. gic), p. iu. ch. 20 — Ed. 


Digitized by Googlc 



lOG 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. love of Disputation. Under the influence of this 
passion, wo propose as our end victory, not truth. 
We insensibly become accustomed to find a reason for 
any opinion, and, in placing ourselves above all rea- 
sons, to surrender our belief to none. Thus it is why 
two disputants so rarely ever agree, and why a ques- 
tion is seldom or never decided in a discussion, where 
the combative dispositions of the reasoners have once 
been roused into activity. In controversy it is 
always easy to find wherewithal to reply ; the end 
of the parties is not to avoid error, but to impose 
silence ; and they are less ashamed of continuing 
wrong than of confessing that they are not right.® 

¦nicne »ff«. These affections may be said to be the immediate 
immcdiato causcs of all crror. Other causes there are, but not 
cm!r” immediate. In so far as Logic detects the sources of 
OTndiibM^ our false judgments and shows their remedies, it must 
fOT'tho'” carefully inculcate that no precautionary precept for 
ofrlwcpu particular cases can avail, unless the inmost principle 
Bourcca of of the evil be discovered, and a cure applied. You 
must, therefore, as you would remain free from the 
haUuciuation of false opinion, be convinced of the ab- 
solute necessity of following out the investigation of 
every question calmly and without passion. You must 
learn to pursue, and to estimate, tmth without distrac- 
tion or bias. To this there is required, as a primary 
condition, the unshackled freedom of thought, the 
equal glance which can take in the whole sphere of 
observation, the cool determination to pursue the 
truth whithersoever it may lead ; and, what is still 
more important, the disposition to feel an interest in 
truth, and in truth alone. If perchance some col- 
lateral interest may first prompt us to the inquiry, 

o V Ari dt Pai$ 0 ‘y p. iii., ch. 20. ch. 9, p. 311, ParU, 1820.— Ed. 

Cf. Caro, SoixvtlU Zoyiytur, part ii,, 


Digitized by Google 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


107 


iu our general interest for truth we must repress, — 
we must forget, this interest, until the inquiry be con- 
cluded. Of what account are the most venerated 
opinions if they be untrue ? — At best they are only 
venerable delusions. He who allows himself to be 
actuated in his scientific procedure by any partial in- 
terest, can never obtain a comprehensive survey of the 
whole he has to take into account, and always, there- 
fore, remains incapable of discriminating, with accu- 
racy, error from truth. The independent thinker must, 
in aU his inquiries, subject himself to the genius of 
truth, — must be prepared to follow her footsteps 
without faltering or hesitation. In the consciousness 
that truth is the noblest of ends, and that he pursues 
this end with honesty and devotion, he will dread no 
consequences, — for he relies upon the truth. Does he 
compass the truth, he congratulates himself on his 
success ; does he fall short of its attainment, he knows 
that even his present failure will ultimately advance 
him to the reward he merits. Err he may, and that 
perhaps frequently, but he will never deceive himself. 
We cannot, indeed, rise superior to our limitary na- 
ture, we cannot, therefore, be reproached for fiiilure ; 
but we are always responsible for the calmness and 
impartiality of our researches, and these alone render 
us worthy of success. But though it be manifest, 
that to attain the truth we must follow whithersoever 
the truth may lead, still men in general are found to 
yield not an absolute, but only a restricted, obedience 
to the precept. They capitulate, and do not uncon- 
ditionally surrender. I give up, but my cherished 
dogma in religion must not be canvassed, says one ; — 
ray political principles are above inquiry, and must 
be exempted, says a second ; — my country is the land 
of lands, this cannot be disallowed, cries a third ; — 


LECT. 

XXIX. 


Digitized by Google 



108 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXIX. 


Par. XCVI. 
Rules 
a|i;ainst 
Errors from 
the Affec- 
tion*. 


ray order, my vocation, is undoubtedly the noblest, 
exclaim a fourth and fifth ; — only do not require that 
we should confess our having erred, is the condition 
which many insist on stipulating. Above all, that 
resolve of mind is difficult, which is ready to sur- 
render all fond convictions, and is prepared to re- 
commence investigation the moment that a funda- 
mental error in the former system of belief has been 
detected. These are the principal grounds why, 
among men, opinion is so widely separated from 
opinion ; and why the clearest demonstration is so 
frequently for a season frustrated of victory. 

1 XCVI. Against the Errors which arise from 
the Affections, there may be given the three 
following rules : — 

1°. When the error has arisen from the influ- 
ence of an active affection, the decisive judg- 
ment is to be annulled ; the mind is then to be 
freed, as far as possible, from passion, and the 
process of inquiry to be recommenced as soon 
as the requisite tranquillity has been restored. 

2°. AVhen the error has arisen from a relaxed 
enthusiasm for knowledge, we must reanimate 
this interest by a vivid representation of the 
paramount dignity of truth and of the lofty 
destination of our intellectual nature. 

3°. In testing the accuracy of our judgments, 
we must be particularly suspicious of those 
results which accord with our private inclina- 
tions and predominant tendencies. 

These rules require no comment. 


Digitized by 


LKCTOnES ON LOGIC. 


109 


LECTURE XXX. 

MODIFIED STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — ERROR — ITS CAUSES AND REMEDIES. 

B. — AS IN THE COGNITIONS, FEELINGS, AND DESIRES. 

II. — WEAKNESS AND DISPROPORTIONED STRENGTH 
OF THE FACULTIES OF KNOWLEDGE. 

I NOW go on to the Second Head of the class of Errors 
founded on the Natural Constitution, the Acquired 
Habits, and the Reciprocal Relations of our Cognitive 
and Affective Powers, that is, to the Causes of Error 
which originate in the Weakness or Disproportioned 
Strength of one or more of our Faculties of Knowledge 
themselves. 

Here, in the first place, I might consider the errors 
which have arisen from the Limited Nature of the 
Human Intellect in general, — or rather from the mis- 
takes that have been made by philosophers in denying 
or not taking this limited nature into account." The 
illustration of this subject is one which is relative to, 

o [On this subject sea Crusiua.] mtnichlicKm Erhtnntnm, § 443, 1st 
[Christian August Crusiua, lur ed. 1747 . — Ed.] 

Gacia*heit und Zuverlduiykcit dtr 


LECT. 

XXX. 


Weakneu 
and Dispro' 
portioned 
Strength of 
the Kacal- 
tiee of 
Knowledge. 


Neglect of 
the Limiteil 
Nature of 
the Human 
Intellect a 
source of 
error. 


Digitized by Google 



no 


LECTORES ON LOGIC. 


LF.cT. and supposes an acquaintance with, some of the ab- 

1— strusest speculations in Philosophy, and which belong 

not to Logic, but to Metaphysics. I shall not, therefore, 
do more than simply indicate at present, what it will 
1. piiiio- be proper at another season fully to explain. It is 
aCIjuiL*' ' manifest, that, if the human mind be limited, — if it 
only knows as it is conscious, and if it be only con- 
scious, as it is conscious of contrast and opposition, — 
of an ego and non-ego ; — if this supposition, I say, be 
correct, it is evident that those philosophers are in 
error, who virtually assume that the human mind is 
unlimited, that is, that the human mind is Ciipable ot 
a knowledge superior to consciousness, — a cognition 
in which knowledge and existence, — the Ego and 
non-Ego, — God and the creature, — are identical; that 
is, of an act in which the mind is the Absolute, and 
knows the Absolute. This philosophy, the statement 
of which, as here given, it would require a long com- 
mentary to make you understand, is one w^hich has 
for many years been that dominant in Germany ; it 
is called the Philosophy of the Absolute, or the Phi- 
losophy of Absolute Identity. This system, of which 
Schelling and Hegel are the great representatives, errs 
by denying the limitation of human intelligence with- 
out proof, and by boldly building its edifice on this 
gratuitous negation.® 

• 2 . A ODC- But there are other forms of philosophy, which err 
of tliu finit' not in actually postulating the infinity of mind, but 
' in taking only a one-sided view of its finitude. It is 
a general fact, which seems, however, to have escaped 
the observation of philosophers, that whatever we can 
positively compass in thought, — whatever we can con- 


a 5^ DiM‘u*alon$t^ p. 19. — En. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


Ill 


ccive as possible, — in a word, the omne cogitahile, lies lect. 

between two extremes or poles, contradictorily op- 1- 

posed, and one of which must, consequently, be true, 
but of neither of which repugnant opposites are we 
able to represent to our mind the possibility.® To illustrated 
take one example out of many : we cannot construe ufthJ'a”* 
to the mind as possible the absolute commencement torien, —the 
of time ; but we are equally unable to think the pos - commence- 
sibility of the counter alternative, — its infinite or ab- the intiuitc 
solute non-commencement, in other words, the infinite men cement, 
regress of time. Now it is evident, that, if we looked 
merely at the one of these contradictory opposites and 
argued thus ; — whatever is inconceivable is impos- 
sible, the absolute commencement of time is incon- 
ceivable, therefore the absolute commencement ot 
time is impossible ; but, on the principles of Contra- 
diction and Excluded Middle, one or other of two op- 
posite contradictories must be true ; therefore, as the 
absolute commencement of time is impossible, the ab- 
solute or infinite non-commencement of time is neces- 
sary : — I say, it is evident that this reasoning would 
be incompetent and one-sided, because it might be 
converted ; for, by the same one-sided process, the 
opposite conclusion might be drawn in favour of the 
absolute commencement of time. 

Now, the unilateral and incompetent reasoning ti>c i»mc 
which I have here supposed in the case of time, is cxcmpirned 
one of which the Necessitarian is guilty, in his argu- lho''Ne^J5.u 
ment to prove the impossibility of human volitions 
being free. He correctly lays down, as the founda- 
tion of his reasoning, two propositions which must at ”“[ 1 “ 
once be allowed : 1°, That the notion of the liberty of 


a See I^i$nusion$, p. fiOl rt iteq. ft Ed. 
Lfciurtn on 3fetaj)hy*ic8f vol. ij. p. 368 


Digitized by Google 



112 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


LECT. volition involves the supposition of an absolute com- 
mencement of volition, that is, of a volition which is 
a cause, but is not itself, qua cause, an effect. 2°, 
That the absolute commencement of volition, or of 
aught else, cannot be conceived, that is, cannot be 
directly or positively thought as possible. So far he is 
correct ; but when he goes on to apply these princi- 
ples by arguing, (and be it observed this syllogism 
lies at the root of all the reasonings for necessity). 
Whatever is inconceivable is impossible ; but the sup- 
position of the absolute commencement of volition is 
inconceivable ; therefore, Uie supposition of the abso- 
lute commencement of volition {the condition of free 
will) is impossible, — we may here demur to the sump- 
tion, and ask him, — Can he positively conceive the 
opposite contradictory of the absolute commencement, 
that is, an infinite series of relative non-commence- 
ments 1 If he answers, as he must, that he cannot, 
we may again ask him, — By what right he assumed 
as a self-evident axiom for his sumption, the proposi- 
tion, — that ivhatcvcr is inconceivable is impossible, or 
by what right he could subsume his minor premise, 
when by his own confession he allows that the oppo- 
site contradictory of his minor premise, that is, the 
very proposition he is apagogically proving, is, like- 
wi.se, inconceivable, and, therefore, on the principle of 
his sumption, likewise imjwssible. 

Amiintiio The same inconsequence would equally apply to 
iXrtaii'M file Libertarian, who should attempt to prove that 
h.'wuif'of free-will must be allowed, on the ground that its 
irw wiii. contradictory opposite is impossible, because incon- 
ceivable. He cannot prove his thesis by such a pro- 
cess ; in fact, by all speculative reasoning from the 


Digitized by GoogI( 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


113 


conditions of thought, the two doctrines are in cequiU- lect. 
hrio ; — both are equally possible, — both are equally in- — ^ 1 
conceivable. It is only when the Libertarian descends 
to arguments drawn from the fact of the Moral Law 
and its conditions, that he is able to throw in reasons 


which incline the balance in his favour. 

On these matters I, however, at present only touch, 
in order to show you under what head of Error these 
reasonings would natiu-ally fall. 

Leaving, therefore, or adjourning, the consideration 
of the imbecility of the human intellect in general, 
I shall now take into view, as a source of logical error, 
the Weakness or Disproportioned Strength of the sev- 
eral Cognitive Faculties. Now, as the Cognitive Fa- 
culties in man consist partly of certain Lower Powers, 


WeaknoM 
or dinpn>- 
poriioncMi 
ntrcn^h of 
the M;vcral 
Cognitive 
Faculties, — 
a source of 
Error. 
Cognitive 
Faculties of 


which he possesses in common with other sensible 
existences, namely, the Presentative, the Eetentive, the * 
Kepresentative, and the Reproductive Faculties, and 
partly of certain Higher Powers, in virtue of which he 
enters into the rank of intelligent existences, namely, 
the Elaborative and Regulative Faculties, — it will be 
proper to consider the powers of these two classes 
severally in succession, in so far as they may afford the 
causes or occasions of error. 

Of the lower class, the first faculty in order is the i.tiio 
Presentative or Acquisitive Faculty. This, as youciw.,— 

• • • rj» 1^’ Prc- 

remember, is divided into two, viz. into the laculty Mnutivc 

Fftculiy* 

which presents us with the phenomena of the outer 
world, and into the faculty which presents us with the 
phienomena of the inner.” The former is External 
Perception, or External Sense ; the latter is Self-con- 
sciousness, Internal Perception, or Internal Sense. I 


a See Ledum on ifetaphyiia, vul. ii. p. 23 et leq. — Ed. 
VOL. II. H 


Digitized by Google 



114 


LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. commence, therefore, with the Faculty of External 
.... ¦' ¦' — Perception, in relation to which I give you the follow- 
ing paragraph. 


Par.XCVII, 
A. E-tternal 
Perception, 
— as a 
Rource of 
Krror. 


H XCVII. When aught is presented through the 
outer senses, there are two conditions necessary 
for its adequate perception : — 1°, The relative Or- 
gans must be present, and in a condition to dis- 
charge their functions ; and 2°, The Objects them- 
selves must bear a certain relation to these or- 
gans, so that the latter shall be suitably affected, 
and thereby the former suitably apprehended. 
It is possible, therefore, that, partly through the 
.altered condition of the organs, partly through 
the altered situation of the objects, dissimilar 
presentations of the same, and similar presenta- 
tions of different, objects, may be the result.® 


Eipiic^ “In the first place, without the organs specially 
cLditiom subservient to External Perception, — without the eye, 
sensible perceptions of a precise and de- 
EitTro’.r'^ terminate character, such, for example, as colour or 
Percepuon. are not competent to man. In the second 

place, to perform their functions, these organs must be 
in a healthy or normal state ; for if this condition be 
not fulfilled, the presentations which they furnish are 
null, incomplete, or false. But, in the third place, 
even if the organs of sense are sound and perfect, the 
objects to be presented and perceived must stand to 
these organs in a certain relation, — must bear to them 
a certain proportion ; for, otherwise, the objects can- 
not be presented at aU, or cannot be perceived without 


a Krug, Lotrit, |1 38. — Ed. [Of. p. 273. Bachmann, /-ojn'I-, § 407, p. 
Caro, Nourtlle Logxqut, part ii. ch. vt 553.) 


Digitized by 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


115 


illusion. The sounds, for example, which we are to lect. 
hear, must neither he too high nor too low in quality ; ^ 

the bodies which we are to see, must neither be too il]uf)oiu of 
near nor too distant, — must neither be too feebly nor ***“*"' 
too intensely illuminated. In relation to the second 
condition, there are given, in consequence of the al- 
tered state of the organs, on the one hand, different 
presentations of the same object ; — thus to a person 
who has waxed purblind, his friend appears as an utter 
stranger, the eye now presenting its objects with less 
clearness and distinctness. On the other hand, there 
are given the same, or undistinguishably similar, presen- 
tations of different objects ; — thus to a person in the 
jaundice, all things are presented yellow. In relation 
to the third condition, from the altered position of 
objects, there are, in like manner, determined, on the 
one hand, different presentations of the same objects, 

— as when the stick which appears straight in the air 
appears crooked when partially immersed in water; and, 
on the other hand, identical presentations of different 
objects, as when a man and a horse appear in the dis- 
tance to be so similar, that the one cannot be discrim- 
inated from the other. In all these cases, these illu- 
sions are determined, — illusions which may easily be- 
come the occasions of false judgments.”" 

“ In regard to the detection of such illusions and p^utiom 
obviating the error to which they lead, it behoves usto«hed^ 
to take the following precautions. We must, in the sioiu of tbo 
first place, examine the state of the orgam If found obviating 

defective, we must endeavour to restore it to perfec- to which 
. 1 • 1 • 11 • 
tion, but if this cannot be done, we must ascertam 

the extent and nature of the evil, in order to be upon 

a Krug, Logihf § 138. Aura. — E d. 


Digitized by Google 


116 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


guard in regard to quality and degree of the false 
presentation. 

“ In the second place, we must examine the relative 
situation of the object^ and if this be not accommo- 
dated to the organ, we must either obviate the dis- 
proportion and remove the media which occasion the 
illusion, or repeat the observation under different cir- 
cumstances, compare these, and thus obtain the means 
of making an ideal abstraction of the disturbing 
causes.” “ 

In regard to the other Presentative Faculty, — the 
Faculty of Self-consciousness, — Internal Perception, 
or Internal Sense, as we know less of the material 
conditions which modify its action, we are unable to 
ascertain so precisely the nature of the illusions of 
which it may be the sourca In reference to this sub- 
ject you may take the following paragraph. 

Pw. xcvm. IT XCVIII. The faculty of Self-consciousness, or 
¦ciousncu, Internal Sense, is subject to various changes, 
•ourco of which either modify our apprehensions of ob- 

jects, or influence the manner in which we judge 
. concerning them. In so far, therefore, as false 
judgments are thus occasioned. Self-consciousness 
is a source of error.^ 

Expiic»- It is a matter of ordinary observation, that the 
spif-con- vivacity w’ith which we are conscious of the various 
varies iu phsenomena of mind, differs not only at different times, 
inuMuy. different states of health, and in different degrees 
of mental ffeshness and exhaustion, but, at the same 


a Krug, Lo'jlk, g 155 . — Ed. 


a Krug, Logik, § 1 09. — Eo 


Digitized by Google 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


117 


time, differs in regard to the different kinds of these 
phsenomena themselves. According to the greater or 
less intensity of this faculty, the same thoughts of 
which we are conscious are, at one time, clear and 
distinct, at another, obscure and confused. At one 
time we are almost wholly incapable of reflection, and 
every act of self-attention is forced and irksome, and 
differences the most marked pass unnoticed ; while, 
at another, our self-consciousness is alert, all its appli- 
cations pleasing, and the most faint and fugitive 
phenomena arrested and observed. On one occasion, 
self-consciousness, as a reflective cognition, is strong ; 
on another, all reflection is extinguished in the inten- 
sity of the direct consciousness of feeling or desire. In 
one state of mind our representations are feeble; in 
another, they are so lively that they are mistaken for 
external realities. Our self-consciousness may thus 
be the occasion of frequent error ; for, according to its 
various modifications, we may form the most opposite 
judgments concerning the same things, — pronouncing 
them, for example, now to be agreeable, now to be 
disagreeable, according as our Internal Sense is vari- 
ously affected. 

The next is the Retentive or Conservative Faculty, 
— Memory strictly so called ; in reference to which I 
give you the following paragraph. 

t XCIX. Memory, or the Conservative Faculty, 
is the occasion of Error, both when too weak and 
when too strong. When too weak, the complement 
of cognitions which it retains is small and indis- 
tinct, and the Understanding or Elaborative 
Faculty is, consequently, unable adequately to 


I.ECT. 

XXX. 


Par. XCIX. 
2. Memor}', 
— M a 
w>urce of 
Error. 


Digitized by Google 


118 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXX. 


Explicft- 

iioo. 


Feeble 

memory’. 


Stronj; 

nioniory. 


judge concerning the similarity and differences 
of its representations and concepts. When too 
strong, the Understanding is overwhelmed with 
the multitude of acquired cognitions simultane- 
ously forced upon it, so that it is imable calmly 
and deliberately to compare and discriminate 
these, a 

That both these extremes, — that both the insuffi- 
cient and the superfluous vigour of the Conservative 
Faculty are severally the sources of error, it will not 
require many observations to make apparent. 

In regard to a feeble memory, it is manifest that a 
multitude of false judgments must inevitably arise 
from an incapacity in this faculty to preserve the 
observations committed to its keeping. In conse- 
quence of this incapacity, if a cognition be not wholly 
lost, it is lost at least in part, and the circumstances 
of time, place, persons and things confounded with 
each other. For example, — I may recollect the tenor 
of a passage I have read, but from defect of memory 
may attribute to one author what really belongs to 
another. Thus a botanist may judge two diflferent 
plants to be identical in species, having forgotten the 
diflerential characters by which they were discrimin- 
ated ; or he may hold the same plant to be two diflferent 
species, having examined it at diflferent times and 
places.^ 

Though nothing could be more erroneous than a 
general and unqualified decision, that a great memory 
is incompatible with a sound judgment, yet it is an 
observation confirmed by the experience of all ages 

a [C?f. BachmanD, § 408.] $ Krug, LoQii% § 141. Aum. — E d. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


IID 

and countries, not only that a great memory is no 
condition of high intellectual talent, but that great 
memories are very frequently found in combination 
with comparatively feeble powers of thought.® The 
truth seems to be, that where a vigorous memory is 
conjoined with a vigorous intellect, not only does the 
force of the subsidiary faculty not detract from the 
strength of the principal, but, on the contrary, tends 
to confer on it a still higher power ; whereas when 
the inferior faculty is disproportionately strong, that 
so far from nourishing and corroborating the superior, 
it tends to reduce this facrdty to a lower level than 
that at which it would have stood, if united with a 
less overpowering subsidiary. The greater the maga- 
zine of various knowledge which the memory contains, 
the better for the understanding, provided the un- 
derstanding can reduce this various knowledge to 
order and subjection “ A great memory is the prin- 
cipal condition of bringing before the mind many 
different representations and notions at once, or in 
rapid succession. This simultaneous or nearly simul- 
taneous presence disturbs, however, the tranquil com- 
parison of a small number of ideas, which, if it shall 
judge aright, the intellect must contemplate with a 
fixed and steady attention.” ^ Now, where an intellect 
possesses the power of concentration in a high degree, 
it will not be harassed in its meditations by the offi- 
cious intrusions of the subordinate faculties, however 
vigorous these in themselves may be, but will control 
their vigour by exhausting in its own operations the 


o Compare Ltctnra on Metaphytia, Muet$, quoted by Stewart, EUm., Part 
vuL ii. p. 223 . — Ed. iii. eh. i. Beet. vi. CvlUcUd tVurh, 

3 Diderot, LtUre sur let Saunlt el vol. iv. p. 249. 


LKCT. 

XX.\. 


Digitized by Cooglc 



120 


LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXX. 


R«mcilic8 
for thcw 
oppudiu* 
extremes. 


3. Tlic Re- 

E nhliiclivo 
'acuity. 


whole applicable energy of mind. Whereas w'here 
the inferior is more vigorous than the superior, it will, 
in like manner, engross in its own function the dis- 
posable amount of activity, and overwhelm the prin- 
cipal faculty with materials, many even in proportion 
as it is able to elaborate few. This appears to me the 
reason, why men of strong memories are so often men 
of proportionally weak judgments, and why so many 
errors arise from the possession of a faculty, the per- 
fection of which ought to exempt them from many 
mistaken judgments. 

As to the remedy for these opposite extremes. The 
former, — the imbecility of Memory, — can only be allevi- 
ated by invigorating the capacity of Retention through 
mnemonic exercises and methods ; the latter, — the in- 
ordinate vigour of Memory, — by cultivating the Under- 
standing to the neglect of the Conservative Faeulty. 
It will, likewise, be necessary to be upon our guard 
against the errors originating in these counter sources. 
In the one case distrusting the accuracy of the facts, 
in the other, the accuracy of their elaboration." 

The next faculty is the Reproductive. This, when 
its operation is voluntarily exerted, is called Recollec- 
tion or Reminiscence ; when it energises spontane- 
ously or without volition, it is called Suggestion. The 
laws by which it is governed in either case, but espe- 
cially in the latter, are called the Laivs of Mental 
Associaiion. This Reproductive Faculty, like the 
Retentive, is the cause of error, both if its vigour be 
defective, or if it be too strong. I shall consider Re- 
collection and Suggestion severally and apart. In 
regard to the former I give you the following para- 
graph. 

a Cf. Krug, Loglk, § 156. Anm. — E d. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


121 


1 C. The Reproductive Faculty, in so far leit. 
as it is voluntarily exercised, as l^miniscence, - . 

becomes a source of Error as it is either too . 
sluggish or too prompt, precisely as the Reten- 
tive Faculty, combined with which it constitutes 
Memory in the looser signification. 

It is necessary to say very little in special reference F.^piua- 
to Reminiscence, for what was said in regard to the Rctninin* 
Conservative Faculty or Memory Proper in its higher iu umiu8 
vigour, was applicable to, and in fact supposed a cor- 
responding degree of, the Reproductive. For, however 
great may be the mass of cognitions retained in the 
mind, that is, out of consciousness but potentially 
capable of being called into consciousness, these can 
never of themselves oppress the Understanding by 
their simultaneous crowding or rapid succession, if 
the faculty by which they are revoked into conscious- 
ness be inert ; whereas, if this revocative faculty be 
comparatively alert and vigorous, a smaller magazine 
of retained cognitions may suffice to harass the intel- 
lect with a ceaseless supply of materials too profuse 
for its capacity of elaboration. 

On the other hand, the inactivity of our RecoUec- it« in«cu- 
tion is a source of error, precisely as the weakness of ' 
our Memory proper ; for it is of the same effect in 
relation to our judgments, whether the cognitions re- 
quisite for a decision be not retained in the mind, or 
whether, being retained, they are not recalled into 
consciousness by Reminiscence. 

In regard to Suggestion, or the Reproductive Faculty 
operating spontaneously, that is, not in subservience 
to an act of Will, — I shall give you the following 
paragraph. 


Digitized by Google 


122 


LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXX. 


Pw. Cl. 
l». Sugges- 
tion," u ft 
MMirco of 
Error. 


Rzplicft- 

tion. 


IF CL As our Cognitions, Feelings, and Desires 
are connected together by what are called the 
Laws of Association, and as each link in the 
chain of thought suggests or awakens into con- 
sciousness some other in conformity to these 
Laws, — these Laws, as they bestow a strong sub- 
jective connection on thoughts and objects of a 
wholly arbitrary union, frequently occasion great 
confusion and error in our judgments. 

“ Even in methodical thinking, we do not connect 
all our thoughts intentionally and rationally, but 
many press forward into the train, either in conse- 
quence of some external impression, or in virtue of 
certain internal relations, which, however, are not of a 
logical dependency. Thus, thoughts tend to suggest 
each other, which have reference to things of which 
we were previously cognisant as coexistent, or as im- 
mediately consequent, which have been apprehended 
as bearing a resemblance to each other, or which have 
stood together in reciprocal and striking contrast. 
This connection, though precarious and non-logicaL is 
thus, however, governed by certain laws, which have 
been called the Laivs of Association.” “ These laws, 
which I have just enumerated, viz. the Law of Co- 
existence or Simultaneity, the Law of Continuity or 
Immediate Succession, the Law of Similarity, and the 
Law of Contrast, are all only special modifications of 
one general law which I would call the Law of Redin- 
tegration^ ; that is, the principle according to which 
whatever has previously formed a part of one total 
act of consciousness, tends, when itself recalled into 


o Krug, //oyiA-, § 144. Anin. — E d. iL p. 233 ef — Ed. 
3 See Ltcturci on vol. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


123 


consciousness, to reproduce along with it the other lect. 
parts of that original whole. But though these tend- 
encies be denominated laws, the influence which they 
exert, though often strong and sometimes irresistible, 
is only contingent ; for it frequently happens that 
thoughts which have previously stood to each other in 
one or other of the four relations do not suggest each 
other. The Laws of Association stand, therefore, on 
a very difierent footing from the laws of logical con- 
nection. But those Laws of Association, contingent 
though they be, exert a great and often a very perni- 
cious influence upon thought, inasmuch as by the in- 
voluntary intrusion of representations into the mental 
chain, which are wholly irrelevant to the matter in 
hand, there arises a perplexed and redundant tissue 
of thought, into which false characters may easily 
find admission, and in which true characters may 
easily be overlooked." But this is not all. For, by 
being once blended together in our consciousness, 
things really distinct in their nature tend again natu- 
rally to reassociate, and, at every repetition of this 
conjunction, this tendency is fortified, and their mu- 
tual suggestion rendered more certain and irresistible. 

It is in virtue of this principle of Association and influence 
Custom, that things are clothed by us with the preca- »tion in 
rious attributes of deformity or beauty ; and some Tmio. 
philosophers have gone so far as to maintain that our 
principles of Taste are exclusively dependent on the 
accidents of Association. But if this be an exagger- 
ation, it is impossible to deny that Association en- 
joys an extensive jurisdiction in the empire of taste, 
and, in particular, that fashion is almost wholly sub- 
ject to its control. 

a Krug, Lo^jik, § 144. Auni.— Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



124 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


LECT, 

x.xx. 


Stewart 

quoted 


On this subject I may quote a few sentences from 
the first volume of Mr Stewart’s Elements. “ In mat- 
ters of Taste, the efiects which we consider, are pro- 
duced on the mind itself, and are accompanied either 
with pleasure or with pain. Hence the tendency to 
casual association is much stronger than it commonly 
is with respect to physical events ; and when such 
associations are once formed, as they do not lead to 
any important inconvenience, similar to those which 
result from physical mistakes, they are not so likely 
to be corrected by mere experience, unassisted by 
study. To this it is owing that the influence of asso- 
ciation on our judgments concerning beauty and de- 
formity, is still more remarkable than on our specula- 
tive conclusions ; a circumstance which has led some 
philosophers to suppose that association is sufficient 
to account for the origin of these notions, and that 
there is no such thing as a standard of taste, founded 
on the principles of the human constitution. But this 
is undoubtedly pushing the theory a great deal too 
far. The association of ideas can never account for 
the origin of a new notion, or of a pleasure essentially 
difierent from aU the others which we know. It may, 
indeed, enable us to conceive how a thing indifferent 
in itself may become a source of pleasure, by being 
connected in the mind with something else which is 
naturally agreeable ; but it presupposes, in every in- 
stance, the existence of those notions and those feel- 
ings which it is its province to combine : insomuch 
that, I apprehend, it will be found, wherever associa- 
tion produces a change in our judgments on matters 
of taste, it does so by co-operating with some natural 
principle of the mind, and implies the existence of 
certain original sources of pleasure and uneasiness. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


12.5 


“ A mode of dress, wliich at first appeared awk- 
ward, acquires, in a few weeks or months, the appear- 
ance of elegance. By being accustomed to see it 
worn by those whom we consider as models of taste, 
it becomes associated with the agreeable impressions 
which we receive from the ease and grace and refine- 
ment of their manners. When it pleases by itself, the 
effect is to be ascribed, not to the object actually be- 
fore us, but to the impressions with which it has been 
generally connected, and which it naturally recalls to 
the mind. 

“ This observation points out the cause of the per- 
petual vicissitudes in dress, and in everything whose 
chief recommendation arises from fashion. It is evi- 
dent that, os far as the agreeable effect of an ornament 
arises from association, the effect wiU continue only 
while it is confined to the higher orders. When it is 
adopted by the multitude, it not only ceases to be 
associated with ideas of taste and refinement, but it is 
associated with ideas of affectation, absurd imitation, 
and vulgarity. It is accordingly laid aside by the 
higher orders, who studiously avoid every circum- 
stance in external appearance which is debased by low 
and common use ; and they are led to exercise their 
invention in the introduction of some new peculiari- 
ties, which first become fashionable, then common, and 
last of all, ai’e abandoned as vulgar.” “ 

“ Our moral judgments, too, may be modified, and 
even perverted to a certain degree, in consequence of 
the operation of the same principle. In the same 
manner in which a person who is regarded as a model 
of taste may introduce, by his example, an absurd or 
fantastical dress ; so a man of splendid virtues may 

a Elenentt, voL i.. Tart i. chap. v. ColUclcd Workt, iL p. 32'2 et $eq. 


LF.CT. 

XXX. 


Digitized by Google 



126 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXX. 


Condillftc 
quoted on 
tho influ* 
ence of 
AMociatiuo 


attract some esteem also to his imperfections ; and, if 
placed in a conspicuous situation, may render his vices 
and follies objects of general imitation among the 
multitude. 

“ ‘ In the reign of Charles II.,’ says Mr Smith," ‘ a 
degree of licentiousness was deemed the characteris- 
tic of a liberal'education. It was connected, according 
to the notions of those times, with generosity, sincer- 
ity, magnanimity, loyalty ; and proved that the per- 
son who acted in this manner was a gentleman, and 
not a puritan. Severity of manners and regularity 
of conduct, on the other hand, were altogether un- 
fashionable, and were connected, in the imagination of 
that age, with cant, cunning, hypocrisy, and low man- 
ners. To superficial minds the vices of the great seem 
at all times agreeable. They connect them not only 
with the splendour of fortune, but with many superior 
virtues which they ascribe to their superiors ; with the 
spirit of freedom and independency ; with frankness, 
generosity, humanity, and politeness. The virtues of 
the inferior ranks of people, on the contrary, — their 
parsimonious frugality, their painful industry, and 
rigid adherence to rules, seem to them mean and dis- 
agreeable. They connect them both with the mean- 
ness of the station to which these qualities commonly 
belong, and with many great vices which they suppose 
usually accompany them ; such as an abject, cowardly, 
ill-natured, lying, pilfering disposition.’ 

“ In general,” says Condillac, “ the impression we 
experience in the diSierent circumstances of life, makes 
us associate ideas with a force which renders them 
ever after for us indissoluble. We cannot, for ex- 

a Theory of Moral Sentimentt, $ Elementi, vol. L c. v. § 3. Col- 
P»rt T. c. 2 . — Ed. Uctetl Worh, vol. ii. p. 335. 


Digitized by Googl 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


127 


ample, frequent the society of our fellow-men without 
insensibly associating the notions of certain intellec- 
tual or moral qualities with certain corporeal charac- 
ters. This is the reason why persons of a decided 
physiognomy please or displease us more than others ; 
for a physiognomy is only an assemblage of characters, 
with which we have associated notions which are not 
suggested without an accompaniment of satisfaction 
or disgust. It is not, therefore, to be marvelled at that 
we judge men according to their physiognomy, and 
that we sometimes feel towards them at first sight 
aversion or inclination. In consequence of these 
associations, we are often vehemently prepossessed in 
favour of certain individuals, and no less violently 
disposed against others. It is because all that strikes 
us in our friends or in our enemies is associated with 
the agreeable or the disagreeable feeling which we 
severally experience ; and because the faults of the 
former borrow always something pleasing from their 
amiable qualities ; whereas the amiable qualities of 
the latter seem always to participate of their vices. 
Hence it is that these associations exert a powerful 
influence on our whole conduct. They foster our love 
or hatred ; enhance our esteem or contempt ; excite 
our gratitude or indignation ; and produce those sym- 
pathies, — those antipathies, or those capricious inclin- 
ations, for which we are sometimes sorely puzzled to 
render a reason. Descartes tells us that through life 
he had always felt a strong predilection for squint 
eyes, — ^which he explains by the circumstance, that 
the nursery-maid by whom he had been kindly tended, 
and to whom as a child he was, consequently, much 
attached, had this defect.” “ ’S Gravesande, I think it 

a Oriffint da Ccn»otuaHea Ilumaina, »«ct. iL ch. ii. § 80. — Eo. 


LECT. 

XX.X. 


Digitized by Googlc 



128 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. is, who tells us he knew a man, and a man otherwise 
- of sense, who had a severe fall from a waggon ; and 
thereafter he could never enter a waggon without fear 
and trembling, though he daily used, without appre- 
hension, another and far more dangerous vehicle.® A 
girl once and again sees her mother or maid fainting 
and vociferating at the appearance of a mouse ; if she 
has afterwards to escape from danger, she will rather 
pass through flames than take a patent way, if ob- 
structed by a ridicidm mus. A remarkable example 
of the fake judgments arising from this principle of 
association, is recorded by Herodotus and Justin, in 
reference to the war of the Scythians with their slaves. 
The slaves, after they had repeatedly repuked several 
attacks with arms, were incontinently put to flight 
when their masters came out against them with their 
whips.** 

I shall now ofier an observation in regard to the 
appropriate remedy for thk evil influence of Associa- 
tion. 

re- The only mean by which we can become aware of, 
theinflucDcfl counteract, and overcome, this besetting weakness of 
“io^iTtiir our nature, k Philosophy, — the Philosophy of the 
pi'W^piiy Human Mind ; and thk studied both in the conscious- 
ness of the individual, and in the history of the spe- 
cies. The philosophy of mind, as studied in the con- 
sciousness of the individual, exhibits to us the source 
and nature of the illusion. It accustoms us to discri- 
minate the casual, from the necessary, combinations 
of thought ; it sharpens and corroborates our facul- 

a Introdwtio ad PhUo$ojdkia'niy Lo- low are oUo from ’S Gravcsande. — 
yica, c. 26. The example, however, is Ed. 

given ae a supposed case, not as a & Herod., iv. 3. Justin., li. 5.— 
fact. The two instances which fol- £d. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


129 


ties, encourages our reason to revolt against the blind 
preformations of opinion, and finally enables us to 
break through the enchanted circle within which Cus- 
tom and Association had enclosed us. But in the 
accomplishment of this end, we are greatly aided by 
the study of man under the various circumstances 
which have concurred in modifying his intellectual 
and moral character. In the great spectacle of his- 
tory, we behold in different ages and countries the 
predominance of different systems of association, and 
these ages and countries are, consequently, distin- 
guished by the prevalence of different systems of 
opinions. But all is not fluctuating ; and, amid the 
ceaseless changes of accidental circumstances and pre- 
carious beliefs, we behold some principles ever active, 
and some truths always commanding a recognition. 
We thus obtain the means of discriminating, in so 
far as our unassisted reason is conversant about mere 
worldly concerns, between what is of universal and 
necessary certainty, and what is only of local and 
temporary acceptation ; and, in reference to the latter, 
in witnessing the influence of an arbitrary association 
in imposing the most irrational opinions on our fel- 
low men, our eyes are opened, and we are warned of 
the danger from the same illusion to ourselves. And 
as the philosophy of man affords us at once the indi- 
cation and the remedy of this illusion, so the philo- 
sophy of man does this exclusively and alone. Our 
irrational associations, our habits of groundless credu- 
lity and of arbitrary scepticism, find no medicine in 
the study of aught beyond the domain of mind itself. 
As Goethe has well observed, “ Mathematics remove 
no prejudice ; they cannot mitigate obstinacy, or 
VOL. II. I 


LECT. 

XXX. 


Digitized by Google 



130 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


i.ECT. temper party-spirit in a word, as to any moral 

1.^ influence upon the mind they are absolutely null. 

Hence we may well explain the aversion of Socrates 
for these studies, if carried beyond a very limi ted 
extent. 

Tiio i^pro- The next faculty in order is the Representative, or 
kkuUt, Imagination proper, which consists in the greater or less 

or Imagioa- ® r r > ^ n 

lion Proper, powcr of holding up an ideal object in the light of 
consciousness. The energy of Representation, though 
dependent on Retention and Reproduction, is not to 
be identified with these operations. For though these 
three functions (I mean Retention, Reproduction, and 
Representation), immediately suppose, and are immedi- 
ately dependent on, each other, they are still mani- 
festly discriminated as different qualities of mind, in- 
asmuch as they stand to each other in no determinate 
proportion. We find, for example, in some indivi- 
duals the capacity of Retention strong, but the Re- 
productive and Representative Faculties sluggish and 
weak. In others, again, the Conservative tenacity is 
feeble, but the Reproductive and Representative ener- 
gies prompt and vivid ; while in others the power of 
Reproduction may be vigorous, but what is recalled is 
never pictured in a clear and distinct consciousness. 
It win be generally, indeed, admitted, that a strong re- 
tentive memory does not infer a prompt recollection ; 
and still more, that a strong memory and a prompt 
recollection do not infer a vivid imagination. These, 
therefore, though variously confounded by philoso- 
phers, we are warranted, I think, in viewing as elemen- 
tary qualities of mind, which ought to be theoretically 
distinguished. Limiting, therefore, the term Imagina- 


a WerkCf xxU. p. 258. Quoted by Scheidler, p. 146. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


131 


tion to the mere Faculty of Representing in a more or 
less vivacious manner an ideal object, — this Faculty 
is the source of errors which I shall comprise in the 
following paragraph. 

IT CII. Imagination, or the Faculty of Repre- 
senting with more or less vivacity a recalled ob- 
ject of cognition, is the source of Errors, both 
w’hen it is too languid and when it is too vigor- 
ous. In the former case, the object is represent- 
ed obscurely and indistinctly ; in the latter, the 
ideal representation affords the illusive appear- 
ance of a sensible presentation. 

A strong imagination, that is, the power of holding 
up any ideal object to the mind in clear and steady 
colours, is a faculty necessary to the poet and to the 
artist ; but not to them alone. It is almost equally 
requisite for the successful cultivation of every scien- 
tific pursuit ; and, though differently applied, and 
different in the character of its representations, it 
may well be doubted whether Aristotle did not pos- 
sess as powerful an imagination as Homer. The 
vigour and perfection of this faculty is seen, not so 
much in the representation of individual objects and 
fragmentary sciences, as in the representation of sys- 
tems. In the better ages of antiquity the perfection, 
— the beauty, of all works of taste, whether in Poetry, 
Eloquence, Sculpture, Painting, or ^lusic, was princi- 
pally estimated from the symmetry or proportion of 
all the parts to each other, and to the whole which 
they together constituted ; and it was only in subser- 
vience to this general harmony that the beauty of the 
several parts was appreciated. In the criticism of 


I.EfX 

XXX. 


Par. Cir. 

4. IinA^ina- 
tioD^— ns n 
source of 
Error. 


Explica- 

tion. 

Ncccsiity 
of Imagina- 
tion in 
scientific 
pursuits. 


Oiverso 
character- 
istics of Art 
in ancient 
ami modem 
times. 


Digitized by Google 



132 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXX. 


modern times, on the contrary, the reverse is true ; 
and we are disposed to look more to the obtrusive qua- 
lities of details than to the keeping and unison of a 
whole. Our works of art are, in general, like kinds 
of assorted patch-work ; — not systems of parts all 
subdued in conformity to one ideal totality, but co- 
ordinations of independent fragments, among which 
a seldom comes amiss. The rea- 

son of this difference in taste seems to bo, what at first 
sight may seem the reverse, that in antiquity not the 
Reason but the Imagination was the more vigorous ; — 
that the Imagination was able to represent simultane- 
ously a more comprehensive system ; and thus the 
several parts being regarded and valued only as con- 
ducive to the general result, — these parts never ob- 
tained that individual importance, which would have 
fallen to them had they been only created, and only 
considered, for themselves. Now this power of repre- 
senting to the mind a complex system in all its bear- 
ings, is not less requisite to the philosopher than to 
the poet, though the representation be different in 
kind ; and the nature of the philosophic representa- 
tions, as not concrete and palpable like the poetical, 
supposes a more arduous operation, and, therefore, 
even a more vigorous faculty. But Imagination, in 
the one case and in the other, requires in proportion 
to its own power a powerful intellect ; for imagina- 
tion is not poetry nor philosophy, but only the condi- 
tion of the one and of the other. 


Errors 
wliich arise 
from the 
«liiij»roj>or- 
tion be- 
tween Iina* 
^nation and 
JudgmunU 


But to speak now of the Errors which arise from 
the disproportion between the Imagination and the 
Judgment ; — they originate either in the weakness, or 
in the inordinate strength, of the former. 

In regard to the errors which arise from the imbe- 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


133 


cUity of the Kepresentative Faculty, it is not difficult i,Erx 
to conceive how this imbecility may become a cause 
of erroneous judgment. The Elaborative Faculty, in 
order to judge, requires an object, — requires certain 
differences to be given. Now, if the imagination be ‘‘"°- 
weak and languid, the objects represented by it will 
be given in such confusion and obscurity, that their 
differences are either null or evanescent, and judgment 
thus rendered either impossible, or possible only with 
the probability of error. In these circumstances, to 
secure itself from failure, the intellect must not at- 
tempt to rise above the actual presentations of sense ; 
it must not attempt any ideal analysis or synthesis, — 
it must abandon all free and self-active elaboration, 
and all hope of a successful cultivation of knowledge. 

Again, in regard to the opposite errors, those arising it, 
from the disproportioned vivacity of imagination, — ti’mur'' 
these are equally apparent. In this case the renewed '‘'““y- 
or newly-modified representations make an equal im- 
pression on the mind as the original presentations, 
and are, consequently, liable to be mistaken for these. 

Even during the perception of real objects, a too lively 
imagination mingles itself with the observation, which 
it thus corrupts and falsifies. Thus arises what is 
logically called the vitium suhreptionis^ This is fre- 
quently seen in those pretended observations made by 
theorists in support of their hypotheses, in which, if 
even the possibility be left for imagination to inter- 
fere, imagination is sure to fill up all that the senses 
may leave vacant. In this case the observers are at 
once dupes and deceivers, in the words of Tacitus 
“ Fimjunl simul creduntquc.” P 

a Knig, hnjik, § 142. Anm. — E d. on Mctaphijticif voL L p. 76.— Ed. 

/3 Hut. lib. ii. c. 8. Seo Lcctai'ti 


Digitized by Google 



134 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXX. 


Rcinc4icft 
for llieno 
dcfcclB of 
the Iiuagio> 
atiou. 


Par. cm. 
5. Etaltor* 
alive Ka> 
cully, — as 
a ftourcc of 
Kiror, 


Explica- 

tion. 

Error <locs 
not lie in 
the coutti- 
lions of our 
Higher 
Faculties, 
but is poB- 


In regard to the remedies for these defects of the 
Eepresentative Faculty ; — in the former case, the only 
alleviation that can be proposed for a feeble Imagina- 
tion, is to animate it by the contemplation and study 
of those works of art which are the products of a strong 
Phantasy, and which tend to awaken in the student a 
corresponding energy of that faculty. On the other 
hand, a too powerful imagination is to be quelled and 
regulated by abstract thinking, and the study of phi- 
losophical, perhaps of mathematical, science.® 

The faculty which next follows, is the Elaborative 
Faculty, Comparison, or the Faculty of Relations. 
This is the Understanding, in its three functions of 
Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning. On this fa- 
culty take the following paragraph. 

IT cm. Tlie Affections and the Lower Cog- 
nitive Faculties afford the sources and occasions 
of error ; but it is the Elaborative Faculty, Un- 
derstanding, Comparison, or Judgment, which 
truly errs. This faculty does not, however, err 
from strength or over-activity, but from inac- 
tion ; and this inaction arises either from natural 
weakness, from want of exercise, or from the im- 
potence of attention. ^ 

I formerly observed that error does not lie in the 
conditions of our higher faculties themselves, and that 
these faculties are not, by their own laws, determined 
to false judgments or conclusions : — 

“ Nam noque decipitur ratio, nec decipit unquam." * 


a Cf. Krug, ioyil-, § 156. Aum.— Frica, IxhjH, § 108. Bichmanii, loyi'l, 
Kd. § 411.] 

^ Krug, Lorjik, J 148. — Ed. (Cl. 7 See aboro, vol. iL p. 77 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Googl( 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


135 


If this were otherwise, aU knowledge would be impos- lect. 
sible, — the root of our nature would be a lie. “ But 
in the application of the laws of our higher faculties 
to determinate cases, many errors are possible ; and 
these errors may actually be occasioned by a variety 
of circumstances. Thus, it is a law of our intelligence, 
that no event, no phenomenon, can be thought as 
absolutely beginning to be ; we cannot but think that 
all its constituent elements had a virtual existence 
prior to their concurrence, to necessitate its manifest- 
ation to us ; we are thus unable to accord to it more 
than a relative commencement, in other words, we 
are constrained to look upon it as the effect of ante- 
cedent causes. Now though the law itself of our in- 
telligence, — that a cause there is for every event, — be 
altogether exempt from error, yet in the application 
of this law to individual cases, that is, in the attribu- 
tion of determinate causes to determinate effects, we 
are easily liable to go wrong. For we do not know, 
except from experience and induction, what particular 
antecedents are the causes of particular consequents ; 
and if our knowledge of this relation be imperfectly 
generalised, or if we extend it by a false analogy to 
cases not included within our observation, error is 
the inevitable consequence. But in all this there is 
no fault, no failure, of intelligence, there is only a de- 
ficiency, — a deficiency in the activity of intelligence, 
while the Will detemaines us to a decision before the 
Understanding has become fully conscious of certainty. 

The defeetive action of the Understanding may arise Dofoctiro 
from three causes. In the first place, the faculty of tho Uuilor- 
Judgment may by nature be too feeble. This is the m»y nntw 
case in idiots and weak persons. In the second place, cauK->. 
though not by nature incompetent to judge, the in- fcoUoacu« 


Digitized by Google 



13G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LEOT. 

XXX. 


b. W Ant of 
nocestarj 
cxporieoce. 

c. Incom- 
potoncy of 
AttontioD. 


tellect may bo without the necessary experience, — 
may not possess the grounds on which a correct judg- 
ment must be founded. In the third place, and this 
is the most frequent cause of error, the failure of the 
understanding is from the incompetency of that act of 
will which is called Attention. Attention is the vol- 
untary direction of the mind upon an object, with the 
intention of fully apprehending it. The cognitive 
energy is thus, as it were, concentrated upon a single 
point. We, therefore, say that the mind collects itself, 
when it begins to be attentive ; on the contrary, that 
it is distracted, when its attention is not turned upon 
an object as it ought to be. This fixing — this con- 
centration, of the mind upon an object can only be 
carried to a certain degree, and continued for a certain 
time. This degree and this continuance are both de- 
pendent upon bodily circumstances ; and they are 
also frequently interrupted or suspended by the intru- 
sion of certain collateral objects, which are forced upon 
the mind, either from without, by a strong and sudden 
impression upon the senses, or from within, through 
the influence of Association ; and these, when once 
obtruded, gradually or at once divert the attention 
from the original and principal object. If we are not 
sufiiciently attentive, or if the efibrt which accompanies 
the concentration of the mind upon a single object be 
irksome, there arises hurrj' and thoughtlessness in 
judging, inasmuch as we judge either before we have 
fully sought out the grounds on which our decision 
ought to proceed, or have competently examined their 
validity and eflfect. It is hence manifest that a multi- 
tude of errors is the inevitable consequence.” a 

a Krug, § 148. Anm. In some places slightly changed. — K d. 


Digitized by Googl 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


137 


In regard to the Regulative Faculty, — Common lk(t. 
Sense, — Intelligence, — vows, — this is not in itself a 
source of error. Errors may, however, arise either from 
overlooking the laws or necessary principles which it 
does contain ; or by attributing to it, as necessary 
and original data, what are only contingent general- 
isations from experience, and, consequently, make no 
j)art of its complement of native truths. But these 
errors, it is evident, are not to be attributed to the Re- 
gidating Faculty itself, which is only a place or source 
of principles, but to the imperfect operations of the 
Understanding and Self-consciousness, in not pro- 
perly observing and sifting the phenomena which it 
reveals. 

Besides these sources of Error, which immediately Remoto 
originate in the several powers and faculties of mind, Error in tliu 
there are others of a remoter origin arising from the h«bit. Ho- 
diflferent habits which are determined by the differ- BCX. 
ences of sex,“ of age,^ of bodily constitution,''' of 
education, of rank, of fortune, of profession, of in- &c. ’ 

teUectual pursuit. Of these, however, it is impossible 
at present to attem2)t an analysis ; and I shall only 
endeavour to afford you a few specimens, and to refer 
you for information in regard to the others to the best 
sources. 

Intellectual pursuits or favourite studies, inasmuch Seiocu.) 
as these determine the mind to a one-sided cultiva- of 
tion, that is, to the neglect of some, and to the dis- cultivatiua 
proportioned development of other, of its faculties, are uikctuai 
among the most remarkable causes of error. This 


a [See Stewart, EUments, vol. iii. Croueaz, Ijogiqur, t, i. part i. Beet. i. 
part iii, sect. v. chap. i. voL ch. ?. § 1.5, p. 104.] 

iv. p. 238 et tt€q,\ y [See Ctouruz, Logifpte^ t. i. p. i. 

3 [ArUtutle, Eket., L. ii. c. 12. sect. i. ch. v. p, 91 


Digitized by Coogle 



138 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. partial or one-sided cultivation is exemplified in three 

^ different phases. The first of these is shown in the 

exclusive cultivation of the powers of Observation, to 
luffcMt the neglect of the higher faculties of the Understand- 
EiX.ivc this type are your men of physical science. 

this department of knowledge there is chiefly de- 
manded a patient habit of attention to details, in 
tioo. order to detect phcenomena, and, these discovered, 
their generalisation is usually so easy that there is 
little exercise afforded to the higher energies of Judg- 
ment and Eeasoning. It was Bacon’s boast that In- 
duction, as applied to nature, would equalise all tal- 
ents, level the aristocracy of genius, ‘accomplish mar- 
vels by co-operation and method, and leave little to 
be done by the force of individual intellects. This 
boast has been fulfilled ; Science has, by the Induc- 
tive Process, been brought down to minds, who pre- 
viously would have been incompetent for its cultiva- 
tion, and physical knowledge now usefully occupies 
many who would otherwise have been without any 
rational pursuit. But the exclusive devotion to such 
studies, if not combined with higher and graver specu- 
lations, tends to wean the student from the more 
vigorous efforts of mind, which, though unamusing 
and even irksome at the commencement, tend, how- 
ever, to invigorate his nobler powers, and to prepare 
him for the final fruition of the highest happiness of 
his intellectual nature. 

2 j Of^cta- A partial cultivation of the intellect, opposite to 
3 . this, is given in the exclusive cultivation of Meta- 
physics and of Mathematics. On this subject I may 
Rtj-wart ^ refer you to some observations of Mr Stewart, in two 
chapters entitled 27ic Metaphysician and The Malhe- 


Digitized by Google 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


139 


matician, in the third volume of hia Elements of the 
Philosophy of the Human Mind , — chapters distin- 
guished equally by their candour and their depth of 
observation. On this subject Mr Stewart’s authority 
is of the highest, inasmuch as he was distinguished in 
both the departments of knowledge, the tendency of 
which he so well develops. 


LECT. 

XXX. 


Digitized by Google 



140 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LEfT. 

X.XXI. 


III. I,»n- 
guage,— a* 
a Kourcu uf 
Error. 


Has man 
invvntcti 
l«ani;ua|i^ ? 
Aiuliigulty 
of t!io 
<|uu*tioD« 


In wliat 

KliK' LaD' 
guagc is 
imuiral to 
mau. 


LECTURE XXXI. 

MODIFIED STOICHEIOLOGY. 

SECTION II. — ERROR, — ITS CAUSES AND REMEDIES. 

C. LANGUAGE — D. OBJECTS OF KN04\T.EDGE. 

In my last Lecture, I concluded the survey of the 
Errors which have their origin in the conditions and 
circumstances of the several Cognitive Faculties, and 
now proceed to that source of false judgment, which 
lies in the imperfection of the Instrument of Thought 
and Communication, — I mean Language. 

Much controversy has arisen in regard to the ques- 
tion, — Has man invented Language 1 But the differ- 
ences of opinion have in a great measure arisen from 
the ambiguity or complexity of the terms, in which 
the problem has been stated. By language we may 
mean either the power which mau possesses of associ- 
ating his thought with signs, or the particular systems 
of signs with which different portions of mankind 
have actually so associated their thoughts. 

Taking language in the former sense, it is a natural 
faculty, an original tendency of mind, and, in this 
view, man has no more invented language than he 
has invented thought. In fact, the power of thought 
and the power of language are equally entitled to bo 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. Ill 

considered as elementary qualities of intelligence ; for 
while they are so different that they cannot be identi- 
fied, they are still so reciprocally necessary that the 
one cannot exist without the other. It is true, in- 
deed, that presentations and representations of given 
individual objects might have taken place, although 
there were no signs with which they were mentally 
connected, and by which they could be overtly ex- 
pressed ; but all complex and factitious constructions 
out of these given individual objects, in other words, 
all notions, concepts, general ideas, or thoughts proper, 
would have been impossible without an association to 
certain signs, by which their scattered elements might 
be combined in unity, and their vague and evanescent 
existence obtain a kind of definite and fixed and 
palpable reality. Speech and cogitation are thus the 
relative conditions of each other’s activity, and both 
concur to the accomplishment of the same joint result. 
The Faculty of Thinking, — the Faculty of forming 
General Notions, — being given, this necessarily tends to 
energy, but the energy of thinking depends upon the 
coactivity of the Faculty of Speech, which itself tends 
equally to energy. These faculties, — these tendencies, 
— these energies, thus coexist and have always co- 
existed ; and the result of their combined action is 
thought in language, and language in thought. So 
much for the origin of Language, considered in general 
as a faculty. 

But, though the Faculty of Speech be natural and 
necessary, that its manifestations are to a certain ex- 
tent contingent and artificial, is evident from the 
simple fact, that there are more than a single language 
actually spoken. It may, therefore, be asked, — Was the 
first language, actually spoken, the invention of man. 


I.EfT. 

xxxi. 


Wm t!id 
tint lan- 
guage, 
actually 
spoken, 
tlic inven- 
tion of man 
or an in- 
spiration of 
tlie Deity ? 


DigiiizedJjy Google 



142 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LEOT. 

XXXI. 


The latter 
hvpothcfliii 
f^uuxidered. 


Difficulty 
of iho 
question. 


ha«) a gen> 
oral and a 
aiH.'cial 
ciuuactcr. 


or an inspiration of the Deity ? The latter hypothesis 
cuts, but does not loose, the knot. It declares that 
ordinary causes and the laws of nature are insufficient 
to explain the phainomenon, but it does not prove 
this insufficiency ; it thus violates the rule of Parci- 
mony, by postulating a second and hypothetical cause 
to explain an effect, which it is not shown cannot be 
accounted for without this violent assumption. The 
first and greatest difficulty in the question is thus : — 
It is necessary to think in order to invent a language, 
and the invention of a language is necessary in order 
to think ; for we cannot think without notions, and 
notions are only fixed by words.® This can only be 
solved, as I have said, by the natural attraction be- 
tween thought and speech, — by their secret affinity, 
which is such that they suggest and, pari passu, 
accompany each other. And in regard to the ques- 
tion, — Why, if speech be a natural faculty, it does not 
manifest itself like other natural principles in a uniform 
manner, — it may be answered that the Faculty of 
Speech is controlled and modified in its exercise by 
external circumstances, in consequence of which, 
though its exertion be natural and necessary, and, 
therefore, identical in all men, the special forms of 
its exertion are in a great degree conventional and 
contingent, and, therefore, different among different 
portions of mankind. 

Considered on one side, languages are the results of 
our intelligence and its immutable laws. In conse- 
quence of this, they exhibit in their progress and de- 


a See Rousseau, Ditcourt tur fOri- preudre jicnser, ils out ou bien plus 
ffine d( VInifjaliU parmi la Jlommft. besoiu encore de savoir [wnser pour 
IVemiOre Partic. “Si les hommes trouver Part de la parole, 
out eu becM)iii do la parole pour a|>* 


Digitized by Googl 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


U3 


velopment resemblances and common characters which lect. 

* • • XXXI 

allow us to compare and to recall them to certain pri- JJ — L 
mitive and essential forms, — to evolve a system of 
Universal Grammar. Considered on another side, each 
language is the offspring of particular wants, of special 
circumstances, physical and moral, and of chance. 

Hence it is that every language has particular forms 
as it has peculiar words. Language thus bears the 
impress of human intelligence only in its general 
outlines. There is, therefore, to be found reason and 
philosophy in all languages, but we should be wrong 
in believing that reason and philosophy have, in any 
language, determined everything. No tongue, how per- no Un- 
fect soever it may appear, is a complete and perfect pc£t' * 
instrument of human thought. From its very condi- of thougiit. 
tions every language must be imperfect. The human 
memory can only compass a limited complement of 
words, but the data of sense, and still more the com- 
binations of the understanding, are wholly unlimited 
in number. No language can, therefore, be adequate 
to the ends for which it exists ; all are imperfect, but 
some are far less incompetent instruments than others. 

From what has now been said, you will be pre- 
pared to find in Language one of the principal sources 
of Error; but liefore I go on to consider the particular 
modes in which the Imperfections of Language are the 
causes of false judgments, — I shall comprise the gen- 
eral doctrine in the following paragraph. 

1 CIV. As the human mind necessarily re- p«r. civ. 
quires the aid of signs to elaborate, to fix, and 
to communicate its notions, and as Articulate Em” ° 
Sounds are the species of signs which most 
effectually afford this aid. Speech is, therefore, an 


Digitized by Google 



144 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

xxxr. 


KxpHca> 

tion. 

Sijmn neci'i- 
ear)' for tlio 
iiitemal 
oiM* ration 
of Tliouglit. 


indispensable instrument in the higher functions 
of thought and knowledge. But as speech is a 
necessary, but not a perfect, instrument ; its 
imperfection must react upon the mind. For the 
!M altitude of Languages, the Difficulty of their 
Acquisition, their necessary Inadequacy, and the 
consequent Ambiguity of Words, both singly 
and in combination, — these are all copious sources 
of Illusion and Error.** 


We have already sufficiently considered the reason 
why thought is dependent upon some .system of signs 
or symbols, both for its internal perfection and ex- 
ternal expression.^ The analyses and syntheses, — the 
decompositions and compositions, — in a word, the ela- 
borations, performed by the Understanding upon the 
objects presented by External Perception and Self- 
Consciousness, and represented by Imagination, — 
these operations are faint and fugitive, and would have 
no existence, even for the conscious mind, beyond the 
moment of present consciousness, were we not able to 
connect, to ratify, and to fix them, by giving to their 
parts, (which would otherwise immediately fall asun- 
der), a permanent unity, by associating them with a 
sensible symbol, which we may always recall at plea- 
sure, and which, when recalled, recalls along with it 
the characters which concur in constituting a notion 
or factitious object of intelligence. So far signs are 
necessary for the internal operation of thought itself. 


o Krug, § US. — Ed. [Cf. Er- 
ncsti, Initia fkxtrince Stdidiorlt : Pan 
Altera; Diaheticaj c. 2, § 24. Wytten- 
bach, Pnreepta Phil. Log. P. iii. c. iii. 
p. 98. Tittel, Z/Of/fT*, p. 292. Kirwaii, 
LogicL'y L 214. Fries, Systan der Loyik^ 


§ 109. Caro, Logique^ Port. i. ch. i. 
art. 9, p. 121. Crousaz, Toussaint.] 
(Crouaaz, IjOifique, t. UL part l acet. 
iii. c. 2, p. 68 ei seq. Toussaint, Dc hi 
PeuxSe. Clis. viii. x. Ed.] 

^ Sco above, voL i. p. 137 .— Ed. 


Digitized by Googic 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


145 


But for the communication of thought from one mind 
to another, signs are equally indispensable. For in 
itself thought is known, — thought is knowable, only 
to the thinking mind itself ; and were we not enabled 
to connect certain complements of thought to certain 
sensible symbols, and by their means to suggest in 
other minds those complements of thought of which we 
were conscious in ourselves, we should never be able 
to communicate to others what engaged our interest, 
and man would remain for man, if an intelligence at 
all, a mere isolated intelligence. 

In regard to the question, — What may these sen- 
sible symbols be, by which we are to compass such 
memorable effects, — it is needless to show that mien 
and gesture, which, to a certain extent, afford a kind 
of natural expression, are altogether inadequate to the 
double purpose of thought and communication, which 
it is here required to accomplish. This double pur- 
pose can be effected only by symbols, which express, 
through intonations of the voice, what is passing in 
the mind. These vocal intonations are either inarti- 
culate or articulate. The former are mere sounds or 
cries ; and, as such, an expression of the feelings of 
which the lower animals are also capable. The latter 
constitute words, and these, as the expression of 
thoughts or notions, constitute Language Proper or 
Speech.” Speech, as we have said, as the instru- 
ment of elaborating, fixing, and communicating our 
thoughts, is a principal mean of knowledge, and even 
the indispensable condition on which depends the ex- 
ercise of our higher cognitive faculties. But, at the 
same time, in consequence of this very dependence of 
thought upon language, inasmuch as language is itself 

a Cl Krug, Logiky $ 145. Anzn. — Eo. 

VOL. II. K 


LECT. 

XXXI. 

Aull for 
the com- 
niunicfttioB 
of Thought. 


IntonAtiona 
of the Toico 
the only 
•tlequAle 
ieniible 
s)^bol9 
of thoaght 
and iu com- 
mtmication. 


Tbeae in- 
articulate 
and arti- 
culate. 

The latter 
constitute 
Language 
Proper. 


How Lan- 
guage it a 
source of 
Error. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT 

XXXL 


Tbe ambi- 
guity of 
wor^ the 
principal 
¦oorce of 
error origi- 
Bating in 
Language. 


Two cir- 
cunutancefl 
under thii 
head, which 
mutually 
affect each 
other. 


U6 

not perfect, the understanding is not only restrained 
in its operations, and its higher development, conse- 
quently, checked, but many occasions are given of 
positive error. For, to say nothing of the impedi- 
ment presented to the free communication of thought 
by the multitude of tongues into which human lan- 
guage is divided, in consequence of which all speech 
beyond their mother-tongue is incomprehensible to 
those who do not make a study of other languages, — 
even the accurate learning of a single langiiage is at- 
tended with such diflBculties, that perhaps there never 
yet has been found an individual who was thoroughly 
acquainted with all the words and modes of verbal 
combination in any single language, — his mother- 
tongue even not excepted. But the circumstance of 
principal importance is, that, how copious and expres- 
sive soever it may be, no language is competent ade- 
^juately to denote all possible notions, and all possible 
relations of notions, and from this necessary poverty 
of language in all its different degrees, a certain in- 
evitable ambiguity arises, both in the employment 
of single words and of words in mutual connection. 

As this is the principal source of the error originat- 
ing in Language, it will be proper to be a little more 
explicit. And here it is expedient to take into ac- 
count two circumstances, which mutually affect each 
other. The first is, that as the vocabulary of every 
language is necessarily finite, it is necessarily dispro- 
portioned to the multiplicity, not to say infinity, of 
thought ; and the second, that the complement of 
words in any given language has been always filled 
up with terms significant of objects and relations of 
the external world, before the want was experienced 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGia 


147 


of words to express the objects and relations of the lect. 

. , , XXXL 

internal. 

From the first of these circumstances, considered tti« 
exclusively and by itself, it is manifest that one of every Lm- 
two alternatives must take place. Either the words 
of a language must each designate only a single cm of Uiii. 
notion, — a single fasciculus of thought, — the multitude 
of notions not designated being allowed to perish, 
never obtaining more than a momentary existence in 
the mind of the individual ; or the words of a language 
must each be employed to denote a plurabty of con- 
cepts. In the former case, a small amount of thought 
would be expressed, but that precisely and without 
ambiguity ; in the latter, a large amount of thought 
would be expressed, but that vaguely and equivocally. 

Of these alternatives, (each of which has thus its ad- 
vantages and disadvantages), — the latter is the one 
which has universally been preferred ; and, accord- 
ingly, all languages by the same word express a mul- 
titude of thoughts, more or less differing from each 
other. Now what is the consequence of this ^ It is 
plain that if a word has more than a single mean- 
ing attached to it, when it is employed it cannot of 
itself directly and peremptorily suggest any definite 
thought ; — all that it can do is vaguely and hypothe- 
tically to suggest a variety of different notions ; and 
we are obliged from a consideration of the context, — ¦ 
of the tenor, — of the general analogy, of the discourse, 
to surmise, with greater or less assurance, with greater 
or less precision, what particular bundle of characters 
it was intended to convey. Words, in fact, as lan-woniiK* 
guages are constituted, do nothing more than sug- “nu'w 
gest, — are nothing more than hints ; hints, likewise. 


Digitized by Google 



148 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXI. 


which leave the principal part of the process of inter- 
pretation to be performed by the mind of the hearer. 
In this respect, the effect of words resembles the effect 
of an outline or shade of a countenance with which 
we are familiar. In both cases, the mind is stimu- 
lated to fiU up what is only hinted or pointed at. 
Thus it is that the function of language is not so much 
to infuse knowledge from one intelligence to another, 
as to bring two minds into the same train of thinking, 
and to confine them to the same track. In this pro- 
cedure what is chiefly wonderful, is the rapidity with 
which the mind compares the word with its correla- 
tions, and, in general, without the slightest effort, de- 
cides which among its various meanings is the one 
which it is here intended to convey. But how mar- 
vellous soever be the ease and velocity of this process 
of selection, it cannot always be performed with equal 
certainty. Words are often employed with a plural- 
ity of meanings ; several of which may quadrate, or 
be supposed to quadrate, with the general tenor of the 
discourse. Error is thus possible ; and it is also pro- 
bable, if we have any prepossession in favour of one 
interpretation rather than of another. So copious a 
source of error is the ambiguity of language, that a 
very large proportion of human controversy has been 
concerning the sense in which certain terms should 
be understood ; and many disputes have even been 
fiercely waged, in consequence of the disputants being 
unaware that they agreed in opinion, and only differed 
in the meaning they attached to the words in which 
that opinion was expressed. On this subject I may 
refer you to the very amusing and very instructive 
treatise of Werenfelsius, entitled De Logomachiis 
Eruditorum. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


U9 


“ In regard to a remedy for this description of error, lect. 
— this lies exclusively in a thorough study of the 
language employed in the communication of know-^^y 
ledge, and in an acquaintance with the rules of Criti- 
cism and Interpretation. The study of languages, 
when rationally pursued, is not so unimportant as 
many fondly conceive ; for misconceptions most fre- 
quently arise solely from an ignorance of words ; and 
every language may, in a certain sort, be viewed as a 
commentary upon Logic, inasmuch as every language, 
in like manner, mirrors in itself the laws of thought. 

“ In reference to the rules of Criticism and Interpre- 
tation, — these especially should be familiar to those 
who make a study of the writings of ancient authors, 
as these writings have descended to us often in a very 
mutilated state, and are composed in languages which 
are now dead. How many theological errors, for ex- 
ample, have only arisen because the divines were 
either ignorant of the principles of Criticism and Her- 
meneutic, or did not properly apply them I Doctrines 
originating in a corrupted lection, or in a figurative 
expression, have thus arisen and been keenly defended. 

Such errors are best combated by philological weapons ; 
for these pull them up along with their roots. 

“A thorough knowledge of languages in general 
accustoms the mind not to remain satisfied with the 
husk, but to penetrate in, even to the kernel. With 
this knowledge we shall not so easily imagine that we 
understand a system, when we only possess the lan- 
guage in which it is expressed ; we shall not conceive 
that we truly reason, when we only employ certain 
empty words and formulae ; we shall not betray our- 
selves into unusual and obscure expressions, under 
which our meaning may be easily mistaken ; finally. 


Digitized by Google 


150 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXI. 


IV. Soorc« 
of Error,— 
the ObjecU 
of our 
kaowledge. 


Par. CV. 
Rules 
touching 
the Causes 
and Reroe* 
dies of our 
False Judg- 
ments. 


we shall not dispute with others about words, when we 
are in fact at one with them in regard to things.”® 
So much for the errors which originate in Language. 

As to the last source of Error which I enumerated, 
— the Objects themselves of our knowledge, — it is 
hardly necessary to say anything. It is evident that 
some matters are obscure and abstruse, while others 
are clear and palpable ; and that, consequently, the 
probability of error is greater in some studies than it 
is in others. But as it is impossible to deliver any 
special rules for these cases, different from those which 
are given for the Acquisition of Knowledge in gen- 
eral, concerning which we are soon to speak, — this 
source of error may be, therefore, passed over in 
silence. 

We have now thus finished the consideration of the 
various Sources of Error, and — 

H CV. The following rules may be given, as 
the results of the foregoing discussion, touching 
the Causes and Eemedies of our False Judgments. 

1°. Endeavour as far as possible to obtain a 
clear and thorough insight into the laws of the 
Understanding, and of the Mental Faculties in 
general. Study Logic and Psychology. 

2°. Assiduously exercise your mind in the ap- 
plication of these laws. Learn to think method- 
ically. 

3°. Concentrate your attention in the act of 
Thinking ; and principally employ the seasons 
when the Intellect is alert, the Passions slumber- 
ing, and no external causes of distraction at work. 

a Krug, Lngik^ § 167. Anm. — Ed. 


Digitized by Coogle 



LECTURES OK LOGIC. 


151 


4”. Carefully eliminate all foreign interests 
from the objects of your inquiry, ami allow your- 
selves to be actuated by the interest of Truth 
alone. 

5°. Contrast your various convictions, your 
past and present judgments, with each other ; 
and admit no conclusion as certain, until it has 
been once and again thoroughly examined, and 
its correctness ascertained. 

6“. Collate your own persuasions with those 
of others ; attentively listen to and weigh, with- 
out prepossession, the judgments formed by 
others of the opinions which you yourselves 
maintain." 

a Cf. Krug, Loffii, | 160. Bachnuum, Logil, g 416 . — Ed. 


LECT. 

XXXI. 


Digitized by Google 



152 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECTURE XXXII. 

MODIFIED METHODOLOGY. 

SECTION I. — OF THE ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE. 

I. EXPERIENCE. — A. PERSONAL: — OBSERVATION 
INDUCTION AND ANALOGY. 

LECT. In our last Lecture, having concluded the Second 

XXXII. ° 

^ Department of Concrete Logic, — that which treats of 

whiTow tie Causes of Error, — we now enter upon the Third 
Jb^n'rlK part of Concrete or Modified Logic,— that which con- 
aiders the Means by which our Knowledge obtains the 
Acqulliition character of Perfection. These means may, in gen- 
eral, be regarded as two, — the Acquisition and the 
icL'owie^. Communication of knowledge, — and these two means 
we shall, accordingly, consider consecutively and apart. 
Theac(^ui. In regard to the Acquisition of Knowledge, — we 
Knowledge, must consider this by reference to the diflferent kinds 
of knowledge of which the human intellect is capable. 
And this, viewed in its greatest universality, is of two 
species. 

Humim Human knowledge, I say, viewed in its greatest 

Knowle.lge . •, •• 

of two universality, is of two kinds, h or either it is one of 
which the objects are given as contingent phenomena; 
or one in which the objects are given as necessary 
facts or laws. In the former case, the cognitions are 


Digitized by Coogle 



LECTURES ON LOGIC, 


153 


GsXiedi empirical, expenential, 01 of experience ; in the lect. 

latter, pure, intuitive, rational, or of reason, also of L 

common sense. These two kinds of knowledge are, 
likewise, severally denominated cognitions a postei'icnn 
and cognitions a priori. The distinction of these two 
species pf cognitions consists properly in this, — that 
the former are solely derived from the Presentations 
of Sense, External and Internal : whereas the latter, 
though first manifested on the occasion of such Pre- 
sentations, are not, however, mere products of Seuse ; 
on the contrary, they are laws, principles, forms, no- 
tions, or by whatever name they may be called, native 
and original to the mind, that is, foimded in, or con- 
stituting the very nature of. Intelligence ; and, ac- 
cordingly, out of the mind itself they must be deve- 
loped, and not sought for and acquired as foreign and 
accidental acquisitions. As the Presen tative Facul- 
ties inform us only of what exists and what happens, 
that is, only of facts and events, — such empirical 
knowledge constitutes no necessary and universal 
judgment ; all, in this case, is contingent and particu- 
lar, for even our generalised knowledge has only a 
relative and precarious universality. The cognitions, 
on the other hand, which are given as Laws of Mind, 
are, at once and in themselves, universal and neces- 
sary. We cannot but think them, if we think at all. 

The doctrine, therefore, of the Acquisition of Know- Doctrine of 
ledge, must consist of two parts, — the first treating of 
the acquisition of knowledge through the data of Ex- 
perience, the second, of the acquisition of knowledge 
through the data of Intelligence.® 


a See Eseer, Logik, S 145^Ed. called ar^Ktrrd, ioastnuch as it ia ac> 
In regard to the acquisition of quired either, 1% By experience ; or, 
knowledge, — all knowledge may be 2% On occasion of experience. 


Digitized by Google 



154 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. In regard to the first of these sources, viz. Experi- 

— ! 1 ence, — this is either our own experience or the expe- 

rience of others, and in either case it is for us a mean 
of knowledge. It is manifest that the knowledge we 

kin'll! acquire through our personal experience, is far supe- 
rior in degree to that which we obtain through the 
experience of other men ; inasmuch as our knowledge 
of an object, in the former case, is far clearer and more 
distinct, far more complete and lively, than in the 
latter ; while at the same time the latter also affords 
us a far inferior conviction of the correctness and cer- 
tainty of the cognition than the former. On the 
other hand, foreign is far superior to our proper expe- 
rience in this, — that it is much more comprehensive, 
and that, without this, man would be deprived of those 
branches of knowledge which are to him of the most 
indispensable importance. Now, as the principal dis- 
tinction of experience is thus into our own experience 
and into the experience of others, we must consider it 
more closely in this twofold relation.® First, then, of 
our Personal Experience. 

1 . Pcrwn»i Experience necessarily supposes, as its primary con- 
dition, certain presentations by the faculties of Ex- 
ternal or of Internal Perception, and is, therefore, of 
two kinds, according as it is conversant about the 
objects of the one of these faculties, or the objects of 
the other. But the presentation of a fact of the ex- 
ternal or of the internal world is not at once an expe- 
rience. To this there is required, a continued series 
of such presentations, a comparison of these to- 
gether, a mental separation of the different, a mental 
combination of the similar, and it, therefore, over and 
above the operation of the Presentative Faculties, re- 

a Kbbpt, § 146. — En. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


156 


quires the co-operation of the Retentive, the Eepro- lect. 
ductive, the Representative, and the Elaborative — ^ — 1 
Faculties. In regard to Experience, as the first means 
by which we acquire knowledge through the legiti- 
mate use and application of our Cognitive Faculties, 

I give you the following paragraph : — 

t CVI. The First Mean towards the Acquisi- p»r. cvi. 
tion of Knowledge is Experience {experientia, whSt,^” 
ipnupia). Experience may be, rudely and gener- 
ally, described as the apprehension of the phae- 
nomena of the outer world, presented by the 
Faculty of External Perception, and of the 
phaenomena of the inner world, presented by the 
Faculty of Self-consciousness: — these phaenomena 
being retained in Memory, ready for Reproduc- 
tion and Representation, being also arranged into 
order by the Understanding. 

This paragraph, you will remark, affords only a&pii<»- 
preliminary view of the general conditions of Expe- 
rience. In the first place, it is evident, that without 
the Presentative, or, as they may with equal propriety 
be called, the Acquisitive, Faculties of Perception, 
External and Internal, no experience would be pos- 
sible. But these faculties, though affording the fun- 
damental condition of knowledge, do not of themselves 
make up experience. There is, moreover, required 
of the phenomena or appearances the accumidation 
and retention, the reproduction and representation. 
Memory, Reminiscence, and Imagination must, there- 
fore, also co-operate. Finally, unless the phaenomena 
be compared together, and be arranged into classes, 
according to their similarities and differences, it is 


Digitized by Google 



156 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


TJ5CT. 

XXXII. 


Common 
and Scicn* 
tiftc Expe- 
rience. 


Obecrvtv- 
tion, — 
what. 

Of two 
kinds, — 
Observation 
Proper, and 
Experi- 
ment. 


evident that no judgments, — no conclusions, can be 
formed concerning them ; hut without a judgment 
knowledge is impossible ; and as experience is a know- 
ledge, consequently experience is impossible. The 
Understanding or Elaborative Faculty must, there- 
fore, likewise co-operate. Manilius has well expressed 
the nature of experience in the following lines : — 

“ Per varies usus artera experientia fecit, 

Exemplo monstrante viam.” * 

And Afranius in the others : — 

“ Usus me genuit, mater peperit Memoria ; 

Sophiam vocant me Graii, vos Sapientiam.”j3 

“ Our own observation, be it external or internal, is 
either with, or without, intention ; and it consists 
either of a series of Presentations alone, or Abstrac- 
tion and Reflection supervene, so that the presenta- 
tions obtain that completion and system which they 
do not of themselves possess. In the former case, the 
experience may be called an Unlearned or a Common; 
in the latter, a Learned or Scientific Experience. In- 
tentional and reflective experience is called Obser- 
vation. Observation is of two kinds ; for either the 
objects which it considers remain unchanged, or, pre- 
vious to its application, they are made to undergo 
certain arbitrary changes, or are placed in certain 
factitious relations. In the latter case, the observation 
obtains the specific name of Experiment. Observation 
and Experiment do not, therefore, constitute opposite 
or two diflrerent procedures, — the latter is, in propriety, 
only a certain subordinate modification of the former; 
for, while observation may accomplish its end without 

o I. 61. Latinortim, vol. ii. p. 

^ Fragmentum e ScUa. Vide CW- 1613, Lend. 1713 .— Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


157 


experiment, experiment without observation is impos- lect. 

• ^ * . • • * XXXll 

Bible. Observation and experiment are manifestly L 

exclusively competent upon the objects of our empiri- 
cal knowledge ; and they co-operate, equally and in 
like- manner, to the progress of that knowledge, partly 
by establishing, partly by correcting, partly by ampli- 
fying it. Under observation, therefore, is not to be 
understood a common or unlearned experience, which 
obtrudes itself upon every one endowed with the ordi- 
nary faculties of Sense and Understanding, but an 
intentional and continued application of the faculties 
of Perception, combined with an abstractive and re- 
flective attention to an object or class of objects, a 
more accurate knowledge of which, it is proposed, by 
the observation, to accomplish. But in order that the Prawpiiu 
observation should accomplish this end, — more espe-tion. 
cially w'hen the objects are numerous, and a systematic 
complement of cognitions is the end proposed, — it is 
necessary that we should know certain praecognita, — 

1”. What we ought to observe ; 2°. How we ought 
to observe ; and 3°. By what means are the data of 
observation to be reduced to system. The first of 
these concerns the Object; the second, the Procedure; 
the third, the scientific Completion, of the observa- 
tions. It is proper to make some general observa- 
tions in regard to these, in their order ; and first, 
of the Object of observation, — the what we ought to 
observe. 

“ The Object of Observation can only be some given Pint,— n.# 
and determinate phaenomenon, and this phaenomenon 
either an external or an internal. Through obser-^’"”" 
vation, whether external or internal, there are four xhi. four- 
several cognitions which we propose to compass, — viz., 
to ascertain — 1°. What the Phaenomena themselves 


Digitized by Google 



158 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

xxxn. 


r. wh»t 

the Phe- 
nomena are. 


In their 
individual 
peculiarities 
and con- 
tnati. 


As under 
determinate 
genera and 
species. 


are ; 2°. What are the Conditions of their Reality ; 
S'”. What are the Causes of their Existence ; 4°. What 
is the Order of their Consecution. 

“ In regard to what the phaenomena themselves 
are (quid sint), that is, in regard to what constitutes 
their peculiar nature, — this, it is evident, must be the 
primary matter of consideration, it being always sup- 
posed that the fact (the an sit) of the phaenomenon 
itself has been established.® To this there is required, 
above all, a clear and distinct Presentation or Repre- 
sentation of the object. In order to obtain this, it 
behoves us to analyse, — to dismember, the constituent 
parts of the object, and to take into proximate ac- 
count those characters which constitute the object, 
that is, which make it to be what it is, and nothing 
but what it is. This being performed, we must pro- 
ceed to compare it with other objects, and with those 
especially which bear to it the strongest similarity, 
taking accurate note always of those points in which 
they reciprocally resemble, and in which they recipro- 
cally disagree. 

“ But it is not enough to consider the several phse- 
nomena in their individual peculiarities and contrasts, 
— in what they are and in what they are not, — it is 
also requisite to bring them under determinate genera 
and species. To this end we must, having obtained 
(as previously prescribed) a clear and distinct know- 
ledge of the several phsenomeua in their essential 
similarities and differences, look away or abstract 
from the latter, — the differences, and comprehend the 
former, — the similarities, in a compendious and char- 
acteristic notion, under an appropriate name. 


a Better the Ari«totelic questions, ph^slct, tuI. i. p. 56 . — Ed.] 
^An SUf Ac. [See Ltciartt on .Veto- 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


159 


“ When the distinctive peculiarities of the phae- lect. 

^ XXXII 

nomena have been thus definitively recognised, the 1. 

second question emerges, — What are the Conditions 
of their Reality. These conditions are commonly 
called Reqtiisites, and under requisite we must un- 
derstand all that must have preceded, before the 
phuenomena could follow. In order to discover the 
requisites, we take a number of analogous cases, or 
cases similar in kind, and inquire what are the cir- 
cumstances under which the phenomenon always 
arises, if it does arise, and what are the circumstances 
under which it never arises ; and then, after a com- 
petent observation of individual cases, we construct 
the general judgment, that the phenomenon never 
occurs unless this or that other phenomenon has pre- 
ceded, or at least accompanied, it. Here, however, it 
must be noticed, that nothing can be viewed as a requi- s*. wh»t 
site which admits of any, even the smallest, exception. of*hi*pw 
“ The requisite conditions being discovered, the 
third question arises, — What are the Causes of the 
Phenomena. According to the current doctrine, the 
causes of phenomena are not to be confounded with 
their requisites ; for although a phaeuomenon no more 
occurs without its requisite than without its cause, 
still, the requisite being given, the phsenomenon does 
not necessarily follow, and, indeed, very frequently 
does not ensue. On the contrary, if the cause occurs, 
the pluenomenon must occur also. In other words, 
the requisite or condition is that without which the 
phsenomenon never is ; the cause, on the other hand, 
is that through which it always is. Thus an emotion 
of pity never arises without a knowledge of the mis- 
fortune of another ; but so little does this knowledge 
necessitate that emotion, that its opposite, a feeling 


Digitized by Google 



ICO 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. of rejoicing, complacency, at such suffering may ensue ; 

^ 1 whereas the knowledge of another’s misfortune must 

be followed by a sentiment of pity, if we are predis- 
posed in favour of the person to whom the misfortune 
has occurred. In this view, the knowledge of another’s 
misfortune is only a requisite ; whereas our favour- 
able predisposition constitutes the cause. It must, 
however, be admitted, that in different relations one 
and the same circumstance may be both requisite and 
cause and, in point of fact, it would be more cor- 
rect to consider the cause as the whole sum of ante- 
cedents, without which the phaenomenon never does 
take place, and with which it always must. What 
are commonly called rcqumtes, are thus, in truth, only 
partial causes ; what are called causes, only proximate 
requisites. 

4". wTiat “ In the fourth place, having ascertained the essen- 
tbeir Con- tial qualities — the Conditions and the Causes of phae- 
nomena — a final question emerges, — What is the Order 
in which they are manifested ? and this being ascer- 
tained, the observation has accomplished its end. This 
question applies either to a phsenomenon considered 
in itself, or to a phaenomenon considered in relation 
to others. In relation to itself the question concerns 
only the time of its origin, of its continuance, and of 
its termination ; in relation to othei-s, it concerns the 
reciprocal consecution in which the several pheno- 
mena appear.”^ 

Sccwnd, — We now go on to the Second Precognitum, — the 

of Obaen »- Manner of Observation, — How we are to observe. 
“™- What we have hitherto spoken of, — the Object, — can 
be known only in one way, — the way of Scientific 
Obsen-ation. It, therefore, remains to be asked, — 

a Eaaer, Logit, § 148.— Ed. S ibid. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


161 


How must the observation be instituted, so as to lect. 

afford us a satisfactory result in regard to all the four 

sides on which it behoves an object to be observed 1 
In the first place, as preliminary to observation, it is 
required that the observing mind bo tranquil and 
composed, be exempt from prejudice, partiality, and 
prepossession, and be actuated by no other interest 
than the discovery of truth. Tranquillity and com- 
posure of mind are of pecubar importance in our ob- 
servation of the phenomena of the internal world ; 
for these phienomona are not, like those of the exter- 
nal, perceptible by sense, enclosed in space, continu- 
ous and divisible ; and they follow each other in such 
numbers, and with such a rapidity, that they are at 
best observable with diflficulty, often losing even their 
existence by the interference of the observing, — the re- 
flective energy, itself. But that the observation should 
be always conducted in the calm and collected state 
of mind required to purify this condition, we must 
be carefid to obtain, more and more, a mastery over 
the Attention, so as to turn it with full force upon a 
single aspect of the phaenomena, and, consequently, 
to abstract it altogether from every other. Its proper 
function is to contemplate the objects of observation 
tranquilly, continuously, and without anxiety for the 
result ; and this, likewise, without too intense an 
activity or too vigorous an application of its forces. 

But the observation and concomitant energy of atten- 2°. condi- 
tion will be without result, unless we previously well q™t°oVto 
consider what precise object or objects we are now to min^j 
observe. Nor will our experience obtain an answer to 
the question proposed for it to solve, imless that ques- 
tion be of such a nature as will animate the observing 
faculties by some stimulus, and give them a determi- 
VOL. II. L 


Digitized by Google 



1G2 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXII. 


nate direction. Where this is not the case, attention 
does not effect anything, nay, it does not operate at 
all. On this account such psychological questions as 
the following : What takes place in the process of 
Self-consciousness, — of Perception, — of Vision, — of 
Hearing, — of Imagination, &c., — cannot be answered, 
as thus absolutely stated, that is, ivithout reference to 
some determinate object. But if I propose the pro- 
blem, — What takes place when I see this or that 
object, or better still, when I see this table, — the atten- 
tion is stimulated and directed, and even a child can 
give responses, which, if properly illustrated and ex- 
plained, will afford a solution to the problem. If, 
therefore, the question upon the object of observation 
be too vague and general, so that the attention is not 
suitably excited and applied, — this question must be 
divided and subdivided into others more particular, 
and this process must be continued until we reach a 
question which affords the requisite conditions. We 
should, therefore, determine as closely as possible the 
object itself, and the phases in which we wish to ob- 
serve it, separate from it all foreign or adventitious 
parts, resolve every question into its constituent ele- 
ments, enunciate each of these as specially as possible, 
and never couch it in vague and general expressions. 
But here we must at the same time take care, that the 
object be not so tom and mangled, that the attention 
feels no longer any attraction to the several parts, or 
that the several parts can no longer be viewed in their 
natural connection. So much it is possible to say in 
general, touching the Manner in which observation 
ought to be carried on ; what may further be added 
under this head, depends upon the particular nature 
of the objects to be observed.”® 

a E^ser, Loyik, § 149. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


163 


“ In this maimer, then, must we proceed, until all lect. 
has been accomplished which the problem, to be an- 
swered by the observation, pointed out. When the 
observation is concluded, an accurate record or nota- 
tion of what has been observed is of use, in order to 
enable us to supply what is found wanting in our sub- 
sequent observation. If we have accumulated a con- 
siderable apparatus of results, in relation to the object 
we observe, it is proper to take a survey of these : 
from what is found defective, new questions must be 
evolved ; and an answer to these sought out through 
new observations. When the inquiry has attained 
its issue, a tabular view of all the observations made 
upon the subject is convenient, to afford a conspectus 
of the whole, and as an aid to the memory. But how. Third, - 
(and this is the Third Precognition), individual ob-bJ'°w“^ 
servations are to be built up into a systematic whole, 
is to be sought for partly from the nature of science in JJdu*^to 
general, partly from the nature of the particular em- 
pirical science for the constitution of which the ob- 
servation is applied. Nor is what is thus sought 
diflScult to find. It is at once evident, that a syn- 
thetic arrangement is least applicable in the empirical 
sciences. For, anterior to observation, the object is 
absolutely unknown ; and it is only through observa- 
tion that it becomes a matter of science. We can, 
therefore, only go to work in a problematic or inter- 
rogative manner, and it is impossible to commence by 
assertory propositions, of which we afterwards lead 
the demonstration. We must, therefore, determine 
the object on all sides, in so far as observation is com- 
petent to this ; we must analyse every question into 
its subordinate questions, and each of these must find 
its answer in observation. The systematic order is 
thus given naturally and of itself ; and in this pro- 


Digitized by Google 


164 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XX.XII. 


p»r. cvn. 

Hypothetis. 
— wh»t 


Explin- 

tion. 

H vpotbcsij, 
— lU end. 


cedure it is impossible that it should not be given. 
But for a comprehensive and all-sided system of em- 
pirical knowledge, it is not sufficient to possess the 
whole data of observation, to have collected these to- 
gether, and to have arranged them according to some 
external princijde ; it is, likewise, requisite that we 
have a thorough-going principle of explanation, even 
though this explanation be impossible in the way of 
observation, and a power of judging of the data, ac- 
cording to universal laws, although these universal 
laws may not be discovered by experience alone. 
These two ends are accomplished by different means. 
The former we compass by the aid of Hypothesis, the 
latter, by the aid of Induction and Analogy.”® Of 
these in detail. In regard to Hy]wthesis, I give you 
the following paragraph. 

H evil. When a phenomenon is presented, 
which can be explained by no principle afforded 
through Experience, we feel discontented and un- 
easy; and there arises an effort to discover some 
cause which may, at least provisorily, account 
for the outstanding phaenomenon : and this cause 
is finally recognised as valid and true, if, through 
it, the given phaenomenon is found to obtain a 
full and perfect explanation. The judgment in 
which a phaenomenon is referred to such a pro- 
blematic cause, is called an Hypothesis P 

H)q)otheses have thus no other end than to satisfy 
the desire of the mind to reduce the objects of its 

B Eaacr, LoyiT, § ISO. — Ed. luret on MelajJii/tirt, toI. i. p. 168 

JS liner, Lo^', § 151. Cf. 1m- et tr<j. — Ed. 


Digitized by Googic 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


105 


knowledge to unity and system ; and they do this in lect. 
recalling them, ad interim, to some principle, through ^ 1 
which the mind is enabled to comprehend them. From 
this view of their nature, it is manifest how far they 
are permissible, and how far they are even useful and 
expedient ; throwing altogether out of account the 
possibility, that what is at first assumed as hypothet- 
ical, may, subsequently, be proved true. 

When our experience has revealed to us a certain 
correspondence among a number of objects, we are 
determined, by an original principle of our nature, to 
suppose the existence of a more extensive correspond- 
ence than our observation has already proved, or may 
ever be able to establish. This tendency to generalise 
our knowledge by the judgment, — that where much 
has been found accordant, all will be found accordant, 

— is not properly a conclusion deduced from premises, 
but an original principle of our nature, which we may 
call that of Logical, or perhaps better, that of Philo- 
sophical, Presumption. This Presumption is of two 
kinds ; it is either Induction or Analogy, which, though 
usually confounded, are, however, to be carefully dis- 
tinguished. I shall commence the consideration of 
these by the following paragraph. 

If CVIII. If we have imifonnly observed, that Pir.cviii. 
a number of objects of the same class (genus or 
species) possess in common a certain attribute, 
we are disposed to conclude that this attribute is 
possessed by all the objects of that class. This 
conclusion is properly called an Inference of 
Induction. Again, if we have observed that two 
or more things agree in several internal and 


Digitized by Google 



1G6 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXII. 


Explica^ 

tion. 

Indactioii 
ftcd Atuv- 
logy, — thoii 
agreement 
and differ* 
cnee. 


essential characters, we are disposed to conclude 
that they agree, likewise, in aU other essential 
characters, that is, that they are constituents of 
the same class (genus or species). This conclu- 
sion is properly called an Inference of Analogy. 
The principle by which, in either case, we are 
disposed to extend our inferences beyond the 
limits of our experience, is a natural or ultimate 
principle of intelligence ; and may be called the 
principle of Logical, or, more properly, of Philo- 
sophical, Presumption.’^ 

“ The reasoning by Induction and the reasoning by 
Analogy have this in common, that they both conclude < 
from something observed to something not observed ; 
from something within to something beyond the sphere 
of actual experience. They differ, however, in this, 
that, in Induction, that which is observed and from 
which the inference is drawn to that which is not ob- 
served, is a unity in plurality : whereas, in Analogy, 
it is a plurality in unity. In other words, in Induc- 
tion, we look to the one in the many ; in Analogy we 
look to the many in the one : and while in both we 
conclude to the unity in totality, we do this, in Induc- 
tion, from the recognised unity in plurality, in Analogy, 
from the recognised plurality in unity. Thus, as induc- 
tion rests upon the principle, that what belongs, (or does 
not belong), to many things of the same kind, belongs, 

(or does not belong), to all things of the same kind ; 
so analogy rests upon the principle, — that things which 
have many observed attributes in common, have other 


a Cf. Esser, Lnijik, §§ 140, 152. Sytitma Logicumt §§ 672, 573. Nun- 
Knjg, Loyik^ §§ 166, 167, 168. — Ed. ncsiuF, De ConstUutione Artis Dia- 
\Vfo\l^Ph\l.RationaliSf%Ald. Reuach, lectiaXt p. 126.] 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


167 


not observed attributes in common likewise.”® It is lect. 

hardly necessary to remark that we are now speaking 1 

of Induction and Analogy, not as principles of Pure 
Logic, and as necessitated by the fundamental laws 
of thought, but of these as means of acquiring know'- 
ledge, and as legitimated by the conditions of objective 
reality. In Pure Logic, Analogy has no place, and 
only that induction is admitted, in which all the 
several parts are supposed to legitimate the inference 
to the whole. Applied Induction, on the contrary, 
rests on the constancy, — the uniformity, of nature, 
and on the instinctive expectation we have of this 
stability. This constitutes what has been called the 
principle of Logical Prestimption, though perhaps it 
might, with greater propriety, be called the principle 
of Philosophical Prestimption. We shall now con- 
sider these severally ; and, first, of Induction. 

An Induction is the enumeration of the parts, in indacti™, 
order to legitimate a judgment in regard to the” 
whole.® Now, the parts may either be individuals or 
particulars strictly so called. I say strictly so called, 
for you are aware that the term particular is very 
commonly employed, not only to denote the species, as 
contained imder a genus, but, likewise, to denote the 
individual, as contained imder a species. Using, how- 
ever, the two terms in their proper significations, I 
say, if the parts are individual or singular things, the 
induction is then cdXiedi Iiidividual ; whereas if the or two 
parts be species or subaltern genera, the induction 
then obtains the name ol Spedcd. An example 
the Individual Induction is given, were we to argue 

a Esser, Logik, § 152. — Ed. AnUmm, p. 86.) Boonni, 1836. Zaba- 

0 [Cf. Abu All (Avicmna) Viri re\iti, Optra Logica,De Nalura Logtixe, 

Docti, Dt Logica Poema, L 190. (In i. c. 18, p. 45.] 

SchmSlderB, Doeumenta Phiiotophuje 


Digitized by Google 



168 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.CT. 

XXXII. 


Two con* 

ditioDB of 

lej^tinuUo 

luduc* 

lion,— 

Fini. 


thus, — Mercui-y, Venus, the Earth, Mars, dec., are 
bodies in themselves opaque, and irhich borroiv their 
light from the sun. But Mercury, Venus, <£c., are 
planets. Therefore, all planets are opaque, and bor- 
row their light from the sun. An example of the 
special is given, were we argue as follows, — Quadru- 
peds, birds, fishes, the amphibia, dec., all have a 
nervous system. But quadrupeds, birds, <&c., are 
animals. Therefore all animals, (though it is not yet 
detected in some), have a nervous system. Now, here 
it is manifest that Special rests upon Individual in- 
duction, and that, in the last result, all induction is 
individual. For we can assert nothing concerning 
species, unless what we assert of them has been pre- 
viously observed in their constituent singulars.o 
For a legitimate Induction there are requisite at 
least two conditions. In the first place, it is necessary. 
That the partial (and this word I use as including both 
the terms individual and patiicular), — I say, it is ne- 
cessary that the partial judgments out of which the 
total or general judgment is inferred, be all of the 
same quality. For if one even of the partial judg- 
ments had an opposite quality, the whole induction 
would be subverted. Hence it is that we refute uni- 
versal judgments founded on an imperfect induction, 
by bringing what is called an instance {instantia), 
that is, by adducing a thing belonging to the same 
class or notion, in reference to which the opposite 
holds true. For example, the general assertion. All 
dogs bark, is refuted by the instance of the dogs of 
Labrador or California (I forget which), — these do not 
bark. In like manner, the general assertion. No qua- 
druped is oviparous, is refuted by the instance of the 
a Kruj;, IjOtjxky § 167. Anm, — K d. /5 Ewer, Logik^ § 152. — Ed. 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECrrUEES ON LOGIC. 


1G9 


Ornithorhijnchus Paradoxus. But that the universal 

judgment must have the same quality as the partial, 

is self-evident ; for this judgment is simply the asser- 
tion of something to be true of all which is true of 
many. 

The second condition required is. That a competent Second, 
number of the partial objects from which the induc- 
tion departs should have been observed, for otherwise 
the comprehension of other objects under the total 
judgment would be rash.“ What is the number of 
such objects, which amounts to a competent induc- 
tion, it is not possible to say in general. In some 
cases, the observation of a very few particular or indi- 
vidual examples is sufficient to warrant an assertion in 
regard to the whole class ; in others, the total judgment 
is hardly competent, until our observation has gone 
through each of its constituent parts. This distinc- 
tion is founded on the difference of essential and un- 
essential characters. If the character be essential to 
the several objeets, a comparatively limited observa- 
tion is necessary to legitimate our general conclusion. 

For example, it would require a far less induction to 
prove that aU animals breathe, than to prove that the 
mammalia, and the mammalia alone, have lateral 
lobes to the cerebellum. For the one is seen to be a 
function necessary to animal life ; the other, as far as 
our present knowledge reaches, appears only as an 
arbitrary concomitant. The difference of essential 
and accidental is, however, one itself founded on in- 
duction, and varies aecording to the greater or less 
perfection to which this has been carried. In the pro- 
gress of science, the lateral lobes of the cerebellum 
may appear to future physiologists as necessary a 

a Esssr, Loyil-, § 152.— Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



170 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIL 


Sunuzuuy 
of tho 
doctrine of 
Induction. 


Analogy,— 

wliat. 


condition of the function of suckling their young, as 
the organs of breathing appear to us of circulation 
and of life. 

To sum up the Doctrine of Induction, — “ This is 
more certain, 1°, In proportion to the number and 
diversity of the objects observed ; — 2°, In proportion 
to the accuracy with which the observation and com- 
parison have been conducted ; — 3°, In proportion as 
the agreement of the objects is clear and precise ; — 
and, 4°, In proportion as it has been thoroughly ex- 
plored, whether there exist exceptions or not.”“ 

Almost all induction is, however, necessarily imper- 
fect ; and Logic can inculcate nothing more import- 
ant on the investigators of nature than that sobriety 
of mind, which regards all its past observations only 
as hypothetically true, only as relatively complete, 
and which, consequently, holds the mind open to 
every new observation, which may correct and limit its 
former judgments. 

So much for Induction ; now for Analogy. Ana- 
logy, in general, means proportion, or a similarity of 
relations. Thus, to judge analogically or according to 
analogy, is to judge things by the similarity of their 
relations. Thus when we judge that as two is to 
four, so is eight to sixteen, we judge that they are 
analogically identical ; that is, though the sums in 
other respects are different, they agree in this, that 
as two is the half of four, so eight is the half of 
sixteen. 

In common language, however, this propriety of 
the terra is not preserved. For hy analogy is not 
always meant merely hy proportion but frequently 
hy comparison — hy relation, or simply hy similarity. 

a Eokt, Logik, § 1S2. — Ed. 


Digitized by Coogl 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


171 


In so far as Analogy constitutes a particular kind of lect. 

o*' ^ , XXXII 

reasoning from the individual or particidar to the : 

universal, it signifies an inference from the partial 
similarity of two or more things to their complete or 
total similarity. For example, — This disease coi're- 
sponds in many symptoms with those we have observed 
in typhus fevers ; it ivill, therefore, correspond in all, 
thai is, it is a typhus fever °- 

Like Induction, Analogy has two essential requi- hh t»o 
sites. In the first place, it is necessary that of two condi- 
or more things a certain number of attributes should 
have been observed, in order to ground the inference 
that they also agree in those other attributes, which 
it has not yet been ascertained that they possess. It 
is evident that in proportion to the number of points 
observed, in which the things compared together coin- 
cide, in the same proportion can it be with safety as- 
sumed, that there exists a common principle in these 
things, on which depends the similarity in the points 
known as in the points unknown. 

In the second place, it is required that the predi- 3«»nd. 
cates already observed should neither be all negative 
nor all contingent ; but that some at least should be 
positive and necessary. Mere negative characters 
denote only what the thing is not ; and contingent 
characters need not be present in the thing at all. In 
regard to negative attributes, the inference, that two 
things, to which a number of qualities do not belong, 
and which are, consequently, similar to each other only 
in a negative point of view, — that these things are, 
therefore, absolutely and positively similar, is highly 
improbable. But that the judgment in reference to 

a Cf. Kru^, § 168. Anm.-» Scbrndldcrs, Aroittm, 

Ed. [Condillac, VArt de Rauonncry p. 36.) Whately, RJutoric, p. 74.) 

L. iv. ch. 8, p. 159. Avicenna, (in 


Digitized by Google 



172 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXII. 


Summary 
of the 
doctrioe of 
Analogy. 


Induction 
and Ana- 
logy com- 
pared to- 
gether. 


the compared things (say A and X) must be of the 
same quality {i.e. either both affirmative or both nega- 
tive), is self-evident. For if it be said A is B, X is 
not B, A is not C, X is C ; their harmony or simi- 
larity is subverted, and we should rather be war- 
ranted in arguing their discord and dissimilarity iu 
other points. And here it is to be noticed that Ana- 
logy differs from Induction in this, that it is not 
limited to one quality, but that it admits of a mix- 
ture of both. 

In regard to contingent attributes, it is equally 
manifest that the analogy cannot proceed exclusively 
upon them. For, if two things coincide in certain 
accidental attributes (for example, two men in respect 
of stature, age, and dress), the supposition that there 
is a common principle, and a general similarity 
founded thereon, is very unlikely. 

To conclude : Analogy is certain in proportion, 
1°, To the number of congruent observations ; 2°, To 
the number of congruent characters observed ; 3°, To 
the importance of these characters and their essenti- 
ality to the objects ; and, 4°, To the certainty that the 
characters really belong to the objects, and that a 
partial correspondence exists.® Like Induction, Ana- 
logy can only pretend at best to a high degree of 
probability ; it may have a high degree of certainty, 
but it never reaches to necessity. 

Comparing these two j)rocesses together : — “ The 
Analogical is distinguished from the Inductive in this 
— that Induction regards a single predicate in many 
subjects as the attribute Z in A, in B, in C, in D, 
in E, in F, &c. ; and as these many belong to one 
class, say Q ; it is inferred that Z will, likewise, be 

a Esser, Loyii’, § 152. Cf. Krug, Logilc, § 168. Anm. — E d. 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


173 


met with in the other things belonging to this class, lect. 

o o o XXXII 

that is, in all Qs. On the other hand. Analogy re- L 

gards many attributes in one subject (say m, n, o, p, 
in A) ; and as these many are in part found in 
another subject (say m, and «, in B), it is concluded 
that, in that second thing, there will also be found the 
other attributes (say o and p). Through Induction 
w'e, therefore, endeavour to prove that one character 
belongs, (or does not belong), to all the things of a 
certain class, because it belongs, (or does not belong), to 
many things of that class. Through Analogy, on the 
other hand, we seek to prove that all the characters 
of a thing belong, (or do not belong), to another or 
several others, because many of these characters be- 
long to this other or these others. In the one it is 
proclaimed , — One in many, therefore one in all . — In 
the other it is proclaimed , — Many in one, therefore all 
in one.”’' 

“ By these processes of Induction and Analogy, as induction 
observed, we are unable to attain absolute certainty jiojtydonoi 
— a great probability is all that we can reach, andiutoccr-"^ 
this for the simple reason, that it is impossible,**'”*^’ 
imder any condition, to infer the unobserved from 
the observed, — the whole from any proportion of the 
parts, — in the way of any rational necessity. Even 
from the requisites of Induction and Analogy, it is 
manifest that they bear the stamp of uncertainty ; 
inasmuch as they are unable to determine how many 
objects or how many characters must be observed, in 
order to draw the conclusion that the case is the same 
with all the other objects, or with all the other char- 
acters. It is possible only in one way to raise Induc- 
tion and Analogy from mere probability to complete 

a Knig, § 168. Aum. — E d, 


Digitized by Coogle 


174 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIL 


certainty, — viz. to demonstrate that the principles 
which lie at the root of these processes, and which 
we have already stated, are either necessary laws of 
thought, or necessary laws of nature. To demonstrate 
that they are necessary laws of thought is impossible ; 
for Logic not only does not allow inference from 
many to all, but expressly rejects it. Again, to de- 
monstrate that they are necessary laws of nature is 
equally impossible. This has indeed been attempted, 
from the uniformity of nature, but in vain. For it is 
incompetent to evince the necessity of the inference of 
Induction and Analogy from the fact denominated 
the kiw of nature ; seeing that this law itself can only 
be discovered by the way of Induction and Analogy. 
In this attempted demonstration there is thus the 
most glaring pclitio princiim. The result which has 
been previously given remains, therefore, intact : — 
Induction and Analogy guarantee no perfect cer- 
tainty, but only a high degree of probability, while all 
probability rests at best upon Induction and Analogy, 
and nothing else.”“ 


a Baser, Zojrti*, § 152 . — Ed. [On 
history and doctrine of the Logic of 
l*robabilitieH, see Leibnitz, Nouveaux 
L. iv. ch. xv. p. 425, ed. Haspe. 
Wolf, PhiL Rat. § ft 9cq. Plainer, 
Phil, Aphjrismcnf § 701 (old edit.) § 
594 (now edit.) Zedlcr, Zrj:»i*on, r. 
Wahracheinlich. Walch, Lerr/Xwi, Und. 
Lambert, Organon^ ii p. 318 

€t 9fq. Kcusch, Syatema Logicum, § 
653 ei tcq. Hollmann, LogicUf § 215 


et ieq. Hoffbauer, A w/onj 7 ^rflnrfe rfer 
IjfgiJc, § 422 et »tq. Bolzano, Logik, 
vol. ii. § 161, vuL iii, § 317. Bachmann, 
§ 229 ct $eq. Fries, Logik^ § 
96 et $tq. Prevost, Ettai$ de PhU4>- 
eophiCt ii. L. L part iii. p. 56. Kant, 
Logiky Einleitnug x. Jacob, Grun~ 
dritt dtr AUgcmcinen Logiky § 858, 
p. 131 ei scq.y 1800, Halle. Metz, 
Jnxtitutiones Logxctty § 230 ct *cq., 
171, 1796.] 


Digitized by 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


175 


LECTURE XXXIII. 

MODIFIED METHODOLOGY. 

SECTION I. — OF T H E ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE. 

I. EXPERIENCE. — R FOREIGN : — ORAL TESTIMONY 
— ITS CREDIBILITY. 

Having, in our last Lecture, terminated the Doctrine lect. 
of Empirical Knowledge, considered as obtained Im- 
mediately — that is, through the exercise of our own 
powers of Observation, — we are now to enter on the 
doctrine of Empirical Knowledge, considered as ob- 
tained Mediately — that is, through the Experience of 
Other Men. The following paragraph will afford you 
a general notion of the nature and kinds of this 
knowledge : — 

IT CIX. A matter of Observation or Empiri- Par. cix. 
cal Knowledge can only be obtained Mediately, 
that is, by one individual from another, through 
an enouncement declaring it to be true. This 
enouncement is called, in the most extensive sense 
of the word, a Witnessing or Testimony, {testimo- 
nium) ; and the person by whom it is made is, 
in the same sense, called a Witness, or Testifier, 

{testis). The object of the Testimony is called 


Digitized by Google 



176 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIII. 


Explica- 

tion. 


the Fact, (Jactum); and its validity constitutes 
what is styled Historical Credibility, [credihilitas 
historica). To estimate this credibility, it is re- 
quisite to consider — 1°, The Subjective Trust- 
worthiness of the Witnesses, (Jides testium), and 
2°, The Objective Probability of the Fact itself. 
The former is founded partly on the Sincerity, 
and partly on the Competence, of the Witness. 
The latter depends on the Absolute and Relative 
Possibility of the Fact itself. Testimony is either 
Immediate or Mediate. Immediate, where the 
fact reported is the object of a Personal Expe- 
rience ; Mediate, where the fact reported is the 
object of a Foreign Experience.® 

“It is manifest that Foreign Experience, or the ex- 
perience of other men, is astricted to the same laws, 
and its certainty measured by the same criteria, as the 
experience we carry through ourselves. But the expe- 
rience of the individual is limited, when compared 
with the experience of the species ; and if men did 
not possess the means of communicating to each 
other the results of their several observations, — were 
they unable to co-operate in accumulating a stock 
of knowledge, and in carrying on the progress of dis- 
covery, — they would never have risen above the very 
lowest steps in the acquisition of science. But to this 
mutual communication they are competent ; and each 
individual is thus able to appropriate to his own 
benefit the experience of his fellow-men, and to confer 
on them in return the advantages which his own ob- 
servations may supply. But it is evident that this reci- 

o Krug, Loijik, § 172 — Ed. [Cf. Scheibler, Topicn, c. 31.] 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOOIC. 


177 


procal communication of their respective experiences lf.ct. 

f ^ XXXIIl 

among men, can only be eflfected inasmuch as one is _ ^ ! 

able to inform another of what he has himself ob- 
served, and that the vehicle of this information can 
only be some enouncement in conventional signs of 
one character or another. The enouncement of what 
has been observed is, as stated in the paragraph, 
called a witnessing, — a hearing witness, — a testimony, 

&c., these terms being employed in their wider accep- 
tation ; and he by whom this declaration is made, 
and on whose veracity it rests, is called a witness, 
voucher, or testijier (testis).’”' The term testimotiy, 1 
may notice, is sometimes, by an abusive metonym, 
employed for ivitncss ; and the word evidence is often 
ambiguously used for testimony, and for the bearer of 
testimony, — the witness. 

“ Such an enouncement, — such a testimony, is, how- Tht pro^r 
ever, necessary for others, only when the experience rirtfinony. 
which it communicates is beyond the compass of their 
own observation. Hence it follows, that matters of 
reasoning are not proper objects of testimony, since 
matters of reasoning, as such, neither can rest nor 
ought to rest on the observations of others ; for a 
proof of their certainty is equally competent to all, 
and may by all be obtained in the manner in which it 
was originally obtained by those who may bear wit- 
ness to their truth. And hence it further follows, that 
matters of experience alone are proper objects of tes- 
timony ; and of matters of experience themselves, such 
only as are beyond the sphere of our personal expe- 
rience. Testimony, in the strictest sense of the term, 
therefore, is the communication of an experience, or, 

a Eiaor, Logit, § ] J3.— Eu. 

VOL. II. M 


Digitized by Google 



178 


LECTDKES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. what amounts to the same thiim, the report of an 

XXXIIl. ^ ^ 

— 1 observed phaenomcnon, made to those whose own 

experience or observation has not reached so far. 

The Fact “The object of testimony, as stated in the para- 
graph, is called the fact ; the validity of a testimony 
Hirtoricai is called historical credibility. The testimony is either 

credibility. . . 

immediate or mediate, immediate, when the witness 
has himself observed the fact to which he testifies ; 
mediate, when the witness has not himself had experi- 
ence of this fact, but has received it on the testimony 
of others. The former, the immediate witness, is 
DM commonly styled an eye-witness {testis oculatus) ; and 
Ear-wit- the latter, the mediate witness, an ear-witness {testis 
auritns). The snperiority of immediate to mediate 
testimony is expressed by Plautus, ‘ Pluris est oculatus 
testis unus, quam auriti decem.’“ These denominations, 
eye and ear witness, are, however, as synoyms of im- 
mediate and mediate tvitness, not always either appli- 
cable or correct. The person on whose testimony a 
^ mediately reported, is called the guarantee, or 
ho on whose authority it rests ; and the guarantee 
himself may be again either an immediate or a medi- 
ate witness. In the latter case he Is called a second- 
hand or intermediate witness ; and his testimony is 
commonly styled hearsay evidence. Further, Testi- 
cU3iicnt whether immediate or mediate, is either partial 

Contniaic-’ or comjyletc ; either consistent or contradictory. These 
distinctions require no comment. Finally, testimony 
is either direct or indirect ; direct, when the witness 
has no motive but that of making known the fact ; 
indirect, when he is actuated to this by other ends.”^ 

a 7Vucw/fT?/tw, II, vi. 8. Cf. Knig, $ Et^cr, Loffik, % 153. — Ed. 

Lugikf ^\72. Anm. — E d. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


179 


The only question in reference to Testimony is that lect. 
which regards its Credibility ; and the question con- -.--I'/', 
ceming the credibility of the witness may be compre- S" ''.IbJJt: 
hended under that touching the Credibility of Testi- 
mony. The order I shall follow in the subsequent 
observations is this, — I shall, in the first place, con- 
aider the Credibility of Testimony in general ; and, in 
the second, consider the Credibility of Testimony in its 
particular forms of Immediate and Mediate. 

First, then, in regard to the Credibility of Testi- 
mony in general ; — When we inquire whether a cer- 
tain testimony is, or is not, deserving of credit, there 
are two things to be considered : 1°, The Object of 
the Testimony, that is, the fact or facts for the truth 
of which the Testimony vouches ; and, 2°, The Subject 
of the Testimony, that is, the person or persons by 
whom the testimony is borne. The question, therefore, 
concerning the Credibility of Testimony, thus natu- 
rally subdivides itself into two. Of these questions, 
the first asks, — What are the conditions of the 
credibility of a testimony by reference to what is 
testified, that is, in relation to the Object of the testi- 
mony ? The second asks, — What are the conditions 
of the credibility of a testimony by reference to him 
who testifies, that is, in relation to the Subject of the 
testimony 1 “ Of these in theii- order. 

On the first question. — “ In regard to the matter i. 
testified, that is, in regard to the object of the testi- TMi[mo|^ 
mony ; it is, first of all, a requisite condition, that r.^rho 
what is reported to be true should be possible, both tht^Twii. 
absolutely, or as an object of the Elaborative Faculty, m YUiuU) 
and relatively, or as an object of the Presentative * 


a Cf. E«4i*er, Loffik, § 154. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


180 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


xx^ii — Perception, External or Internal. A thing 

— ^ ^ is possible absolutely, or in itself, when it can be con- 
stnied to thought, that is, when it is not inconsistent 
with the logical laws of thinking ; a thing is relatively 
possible as an object of Perception, External or Inter- 
nal, when it can affect Sense or Self-consciousness, 
and, through such affection, determine its apprehen- 
sion by one or other of these faculties. A testimony 
is, therefore, to be unconditionally rejected, if the fact 
which it reports be either in itself impossible, or im- 
possible as an object of the Presentative Faculties, 
impossibility of a thing, as an object of these 
^hyiical faculties, must be decided cither upon physical, or 
biii^J!" upon metaphysical, principles. A thing is physically 
impossible as an object of sense, when the existence 
itself, or its perception by us, is, by the laws of the 
material world, impossible. It is metaphysically im- 
possible, when the object itself, or its perception, is pos- 
sible neither through a natural, nor through a super- 
natural, agency. But, to establish the physical impos- 
sibility of a thing, it is not sufficient that its existence 
cannot be explained by the ordinary laws of nature, 
or even that its existence should appear repugnant 
with these laws ; it is requisite that an universal and 
immutable law of nature should have been demon- 


strated to exist, and that this law would be subverted 
if the fact in question were admitted to be physically 
possible. In like manner, to constitute the metaphy- 
sical impossibility of a thing, it is hy no means enough 
to show that it is not explicable on natural laws, or even 
that any natural law stands opposed to it ; it is further 
requisite to prove that the intervention even of super- 
natural agency is incompetent to its production, that 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


181 


its existence would involve the violation of some neces- lect. 

. . XXXIII 

sary principle of reason. 1 

“ To establish the credibility of a testimony, in so R«i»iiye 
far as this is regulated by the nature of its object, rfTn*’db>'^rt. 
there is, besides the proof of the absolute possibility 
of this object, required also a proof of its relative 
possibility ; that is, there must not only be no contra- 
diction between its necessary attributes, — the attri- 
butes by which it must be thought, — but no contra- 
diction between the attributes actually assigned to it 
by the testimony. A testimony, therefore, which, qua 
testimony, is self-contradictory, can lay no claim to 
credibility ; for what is self-contradictory is logically 
suicidal. And here the only question is, — Does the 
testimony, qua testimony, contradict itself 1 for if the 
repugnancy arise from an opinion of the ^vutness, apart 
from which the testimony as such would still stand 
undisproved, in that case the testimony is not at once 
to be repudiated as false. For example, it would be 
wrong to reject a testimony to the existence of a 
thing, because the witness had to his evidence of its 
observed reality annexed some conjecture in regard to 
its origin or cause. For the latter might well be 
shown to be absurd, and yet the former would re- 
main unshaken. It is, therefore, always to be ob- 
served, — that it is only the self-contradietion of a 
testimony, qua testimony, that is, the self-contradic- 
tion of the fact itself, which is peremptorily and irre- 
vocably subversive of its credibility. 

“ We now proceed to the second question ; that is, v, The 
to consider in general the Credibility of a Testimony 
by reference to its Subject, that is, in relation to the 
Personal Trustworthiness of the Witness. The trust- wortbineft 


Digitized by Google 


182 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIII. 


of the 
WiincM. 
Thii con- 
nisti of two 
clemcnUt — 
a. Honesty 
or Veracity. 


worthiness of a witness consists of two elements or 
conditions. In the first place, he must be willing, in 
the second place, he must be able, to report the truth. 
The first of these elements is the Honesty, — the Sin- 
cerity, — the Veracity ; the second is the Competency 
of the witness. Both are equally necessary, and if 
one or other be deficient, the testimony becomes alto- 
gether null. These constituents, likewise, do not infer 
each other ; for it frequently happens that where the 
honesty is greatest the competency is least, and where 
the competency is greatest the honesty is least. But 
when the veracity of a witness is established, there is 
established also a presumption of his competency ; for 
an honest man vdll not bear evidence to a point in re- 
gard to which his recollection is not precise, or to the 
observation of which he had not accorded the re- 
quisite attention. In truth, when a fact depends 
on the testimony of a single witness, the competency 
of that witness is solely guaranteed by his honesty. 
In regard to the honesty of a witness, — this, though 
often admitting of the highest probability, never ad- 
mits of absolute certainty ; for, though, in many cases, 
we may know enough of the general character of the 
witness to rely with perfect confidence on his veracity, 
in no case can we look into the heart, and observe 
the influence which motives have actually had upon 
his volitions. We are, however, compelled, in many 
of the most important concerns of our existence, to 
depend on the testimony, and, consequently, to confide 
in the sincerity, of others. But from the moral con- 
stitution of human nature, we are warranted in pre- 
suming on the honesty of a witness ; and this pre- 
.sumption is enhanced in proportion as the following 
circumstances concur in its confirmation. In the 


Digitized by Coogle 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


183 


firet place, a witness is to be presumed veracious in lect. 
this case, in proportion as his love of truth is already 
established from others. In the second place, a wit-^'^,™;<,r 
ness is to be presumed veracious, in proportion as he 
has fewer and weaker motives to falsify his testimony. 

In the third place, a witness is to be presumed vera- 
cious, in proportion to the likelihood of contradiction 
which his testimony would encounter, if he deviated 
from the truth. So much for the Sincerity, Honesty, 
or Veracity of a witness. 

“ In regard to the Competency or Ability of a wit- u conyio. 
ness, — this, in general, depends on the supposition, that 
he has had it in his power correctly to observe the 
fact to which he testifies, and correctly to report it. 

The presumption in favour of the competence of acircam- 
witness rises, in proportion as the following conditions ^cTthe 
are fulfilled : — In the first place, he must be presumed tim of'Ln 
competent in reference to the case in hand, in proper- enSe.1! 
tion as his general ability to observe and to commu- 
nicate his observation has been established in other 


cases. In the second place, the competency of a wit- 
ness must be presumed, in proportion as in the par- 
ticular case a lower and commoner amount of ability 
is requisite rightly to observe, and rightly to report 
the observation. In the third place, the competency 
of a witness is to be pres\imed, in proportion as it is 
not to be presumed that his observation was made or 
communicated at a time when he was unable correctly 
to make or correctly to communicate it. So much 
for the Competency of a witness. 

“ Now, when both the good will and the ability. The ereai- 
that is, when both the Veracity and Competence, of a Temmonv 

, * ... not invali- 

witness have been sufficiently established, the credi- a.iod i«- 
bility of his testimony is not to be invalidated be-factt«ti- 


Digitized by Coogle 


184 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIII, 


fled ii one 
out of the 
ordinary 
course of 
experience. 


Summary 
regarding 
the Credi- 
bility of 
Toetimony 
in general. 


cause the fact which it goes to prove is one out of the 
ordinary course of experience.” “ Thus it would be 
false to assert, with Hume, that miracles, that is, sus- 
pensions of the ordinary laws of nature, are incap- 
able of proof, because contradicted by what we have 
been able to observe. “ On the contrary, where the 
trustworthiness of a witness or witnesses is unim- 
peachable, the very circumstance that the object is 
one in itself unusual and marvellous, adds greater 
weight to the testimony ; for this very circumstance 
would itself induce men of veracity and intelligence 
to accord a more attentive scrutiny to the fact, and 
secure from them a more accurate report of their ob- 
servation. 

“ The result of what has now been stated in regard 
to the credibility of Testimony in general, is ; — That 
a testimony is entitled to credit, when the requisite 
conditions, both on the part of the object and on the 
part of the subject, have been fulfilled. On the part 
of the object these are fulfilled, w’hen the object is 
absolutely possible, as an object of the higher faculty 
of experience, — the Understanding, — the Elaborative 
Faculty, and relatively possible, as an object of the 
lower or subsidiary faculties of experience, — Sense, and 
Self-consciousness. In this case, the testimony, qua 
testimony, does not contradict itself. On the part of 
the subject, the requisite conditions are fulfilled, when 
the trustworthiness, that is, the veracity and compe- 
tency of the witness, is beyond reasonable doubt. In 
regard to the veracity of the witness, — this cannot be 
reasonably doubted, when there is no positive ground 
on which to discredit the sincerity of the witness, and 
when the only ground of doubt lies in the mere gen- 

a Eii.-4^r, § 154. — Kn. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 18.') 

eral possibility of deception. And in reference to the lect. 

•' ^ ^ ^ xxxiir. 

competency of a witness, — this is exposed to no rea- — 1-^ — 1 

sonable objection, when the ability of the witness to 
observe and to communicate the fact in testimony can- 
not be disallowed. Having, therefore, concluded the 
consideration of testimony in general, we proceed to 
treat of it in special, that is, in so far as it is viewed 
either as Immediate or as Mediate.” “ Of these in their 
order. 

The special consideration of Testimony, when that ii. Tc»ti- 
testimony is Immediate. — “An immediate testimony, »pm!»i. « 
or testimony at first hand, is one in which the fact «mi Mc^di. 
reported is an object of the proper or personal expe- i-. imme- 
rience of the reporter. Now it is manifest, that an mOTv.^"" 
immediate witness is in general better entitled to cre- 
dit than a witness at second hand ; and his testimony 
rises in probability, in proportion as the requisites, 
already specified, both on the part of its object and on 
the part of its subject, are fulfilled. An immediate 
testimony is, therefore, entitled to credit, — 1°, In pro- 
portion to the greater ability with which the observ- Conaition* 
ation has been made; 2°, In proportion to the less baity. 
impediment in the way of the observation being per- 
fectly accomplished ; 3°, In proportion as what was 
observed could be fuUy and accurately remembered ; 
and, 4°, In proportion as the facts observed and re- 
membered have been communicated by intelligible 
and unambiguous signs. 

“Now, whether all these conditions of a higher whether 
credibility be fulfilled in the case of any immediate condiu™! 
testimony, — this cannot be directly and at once as- iTthe nZ 
certained ; it can only be inferred, with greater or mediftte 
less certainty, from the qualities of the witness ; and, cannot*^’ 

directly 

a Eager, l/Offik, § 164. — Kd. iwccruiiuNl, 


Digitized by Google 


18G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIII. 


When testi- 
mony at- 
tains the 
highest 
degree of 
probability. 


consequently, the validity of a testimony can only be 
accurately estimated from a critical knowledge of the 
personal character of the witness, as given in his in- 
tellectual and moral qualities, and in the circum- 
stances of his life, which have concurred to modify 
and determine these. The veracity of a mtness either 
is, or is not, exempt from doubt ; and, in the latter case, 
it may not only lie open to doubt, but even be ex- 
posed to suspicion. If the sincerity of the witness be 
indubitable, a direct testimony is always preferable to 
an indirect ; for a direct testimony being made with 
the sole intent of establishing the certainty of the fact 
in question, the competency of the witness is less ex- 
posed to objection. If, on the contrary, the sincerity 
of the witness be not beyond a doubt, and, still more, 
if it be actually suspected, in that case an indirect 
testimony is of higher cogency than a direct ; for 
the indirect testimony being given with another view 
than merely to establish the fact in question, the in- 
tention of the witness to falsify the truth of the fact 
has not so strong a presumption in its favour. If both 
the sincerity and the competency of the witness are 
altogether indubitable, it is then of no importance 
whether the truth of the fact be vouched for by a 
single witness, or by a plurality of witnesses. On the 
other hand, if the sincerity and competency of the 
witness be at aU doubtful, the credibility of a testi- 
mony will be greater, the greater the number of the 
witnesses by whom the fact is corroborated. But here 
it is to be considered, that when there are a plurality 
of testimonies to the same fact, these testimonies are 
either consistent or inconsistent. If the testimonies 
be consistent, and the sincerity and competency of all 
the witnesses complete, in that case the testimony 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


187 


attains the highest degree of probability of which any 
testimony is capable. Again, if the witnesses be in- 
consistent, — on this hypothesis two cases are pos- 
sible ; for either their discrepancy is negative, or it 
is positive. A negative discrepancy arises, where one 
witness passes over in silence what another witness 
positively avers. A positive discrepancy arises, where 
one witness explicitly affirms something, which some- 
thing another witness explicitly denies. When the 
difference of testimonies is merely negative, we may 
suppose various causes of the silence ; and, therefore, 
the positive averment of one witness to a fact is not 
disproved by the mere circumstance, that the same 
fact is omitted by another. But if it be made out, 
that the witness who omits mention of the fact, could 
not have been ignorant of that fact had it taken place, 
and, at the same time, that he could not have passed 
it over without violating every probability of human 
action, — in this case, the silence of the one witness 
manifestly derogates from the credibility of the other 
witness, and in certain circumstances may annihilate 
it altogether. AVhere, again, the difference is positive, 
the discrepancy is of greater importance, because, 
(though there are certainly exceptions to the rule), 
an overt contradiction is, in general and in itself, of 
stronger cogency than a mere non-confirmation by 
simple silence. Now the positive discrepancy of tes- 
timonies either admits of conciliation, or it does not. 
In the former case, the credibility of the several testi- 
monies stands intact ; and the discrepancy among the 
witnesses is to be accounted for by such circumstances 
as explain, without invalidating, the testimony con- 
sidered in itself. In the latter case, one testimony 
manifestly detracts from the credibility of another ; 


LECT. 

XXXIII. 


NepUire 
ami Positive 
Discre- 
pancY. 


Digitized by Google 



188 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIII. 


Medi&U) 

Tettimonv. 


for of incompatible testimonies, while both cannot be 
true, the one must be fake, when reciprocally contra- 
dictory, or they may both be false, when reciprocally 
contrary. In this case, the whole question resolves 
itself into one of the greater or less trustworthiness of 
the opposing witnesses. Is the trustworthiness of the 
counter- witnesses equally great 1 In that case, neither 
of the conflictive testimonies is to be admitted. Again, 
is the trustworthiness of the witnesses not upon a par’ 
In that case, the testimony of the witness whose trust- 
worthiness is the greater, obtains the preference, — and 
this more especially if the credibility of the other wit- 
nesses is suspected.” “ 

So much for the Credibility of Testimony, considered 
in Special, in so far as that testimony is Immediate or 
at First Hand ; and I now, in the second place, pass on 
to consider, likewise in special, the Credibility of Testi- 
mony, in so far as that testimony is Mediate, or at 
Second Hand. 

“ A ^Mediate Testimony is one where the fact is an 
object not of Personal, but of Foreign Experience. 
Touching the credibility of a mediate testimony, this 
supposes that the report of the immediate, and that 
the report of the mediate, witness are both trust- 
worthy. Whether the report of the immediate witness 
be trustworthy, — this we are either of ourselves able to 
determine, viz., from our personal acquaintance with 
his veracity and competence ; or we are unable of 
ourselves to do this, in which case the credibility of 
the immediate must be taken upon the authority of 
the mediate witness. Here, however, it is necessary 
for U.S to be aware, that the mediate witness is pos- 

a E».ser, Xojr/i-, § 165 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


189 


sessed of the ability requisite to estimate the credi- lect. 

* ^ * XXXIII 

bility of the immediate witness, and of the honesty to ^ 

commimicate the tnith without retrenchment or falsi- 
fication. But if the trustworthiness both of the 
mediate and of the immediate witness be sufficiently 
established, it is of no consequence, in regard to the 
credibility of a testimony, whether it be at first hand 
or at second. Nay, the testimony of a mediate may 
even tend to confirm the testimony of an immediate 
witness, when his own competence fairly to appreciate 
the report of the immediate witness is indubitable. 

If, however, the credibility of the immediate witness be 
unimpeachable, but not so the credibility of the medi- 
ate, in that case the mediate testimony, in respect of its 
authority, is inferior to the immediate, and this in the 
same proportion as the credibility of the second hand 
witness is inferior to that of the witness at first hand. 
Further, mediate witnesses are either Proximate or Mediae 
Remote ; and, in both cases, either Independent or De- are either 
pendent. The trustworthiness of proximate witnesses or Rcmot«, 
is, in general, greater than the trustworthiness of re- indepen- 
mote ; and the credibility of independent witnesses i^”p«ndcni. 
greater than the credibility of dependent. The re- 
mote witness is unworthy of belief, when the inter- 
mediate links arc wanting between him and the 
original witness ; and the dependent witness deserves 
no credit, when that on which his evidence depends 
is recognised as false or unestablished. Mediate tes- 
timonies are, likewise, either direct or indirect ; and, 
likewise, when more than one, either reciprocally con- 
gruent or conflictive. In both cases the credibility of 
the witnesses is to be determined in the same manner 
as if the testimonies were immediate. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LE(X 

XXXIII. 


Rumour, — 

what. 

Tradition. 


lao 


“ Tile testimony of a plurality of mediate witnesses, 
where there is no recognised immediate witness, is 
called a rumour, if the witnesses be contemporaneous; 
and a trculitiou, if the witnesses be chronologically suc- 
cessive. These are both less entitled to credit, in pro- 
portion as in either case a fiction or falsification of the 
fact is comparatively ea.sy, and, consequently, com- 
paratively probable.” “ 

a Lotjikf § 1S6. — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


J91 


LECTURE XXXIV. 

MODIFIED METHODOLOGY. 


SECTION I. OF THE ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE. 

I. EXPERIENCE. — B. FOREIGN: — RECORDED TESTIMONY 
AND WRITINGS IN GENERAL. 

II. SPECULATION. 


In our last Lecture, we were engaged in the considera- 
tion of Testimony, and the Principles by which its Cre- 

Ti • 1 • • 1 1 C>Hici«m of 

dibility 13 eoverneil, — on the supposition always that Recorded 

-11 1 Teelimony, 

we possess the veritable report of the witness whose wid of 

. . r 1 11 • • Writinps 

testimony it prolesses to be ; and on the supposition in general, 
that we ai’e at no loss to understand its moaning and 
purport. But questions may arise in regard to these 
points, and, therefore, there is a further critical process 
requisite, in order to establish the Authenticity, — the 
Integrity, and the Signification, of the documents in 
which the testimony is conveyed. This leads us to the 
important subject, — the Criticism of Recorded Testi- 
mony, and of Writings in general. I shall comprise the 
heads of the following observations on this subject in 
the ensuing paragraph. 

If CX. The examination and judgment of par. cx. 
Writings professing to contain the testimony of an"d‘in™- 
certain witnesses, and of Writings in General pro- 


Digitized by Google 



192 


LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIV. 


fessing to be the woi-k of certain authors, is of 
two parts. For the inquiry regards either, 1°, 
The Authenticity of the document, that is, 
whether it be, in whole or in part, the product of 
its ostensible author ; for ancient writings in 
particular arc frequently supposititious or inter- 
polated ; or 2°, It regards the Cleaning of the 
words of which it is composed, for these, espe- 
cially when in languages now dead, are frequently 
obscure. The former of these problems is re- 
solved by the A ii of Criticism, {Critica), in the 
stricter sense of the term ; the latter by the Art 
of Interpretation, {Exegetica or Hcnneneutica). 
Criticism is of two kinds. If it be occupied with 
the criteria of the authenticity of a writing in its 
totality, or in its principal parts, it is called the 
Higher, and sometimes the Internal, Criticism. 
If, again, it consider only the integrity of particu- 
lar words and phrases, it is called the Lower, and 
sometimes the External, Criticism. The former 
of these may perhaps be best styled the Criticism 
of Authenticity ; — the latter, the Criticism of In- 
tegrity. 

The problem which Interpretation has to solve 
is, — To discover and expound the meaning of a 
writer, from the words in which his thoughts are 
expressed. It departs from the principle, that 
however manifold be the possible meanings of 
the expressions, the sense of the writer is one. 
Interpretation, by reference to its sources or sub- 
sidia, has been divided into the Grammatical, the 
Historical, and the Philosophical, Exegesis.'^ 


a Cf. Krug lAyilc, § 1(7 rt fcif. — Kicsewetter, Loijik, p. ii. § 186 el tcj. 
Eu. [Snull, Logik, p. ii. § 6 p. 185. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


193 


“Testimonies, especially when the ostensible wit- lect. 

^ XXXIV 

nesses themselves can no longer be interrogated, may 1. 

be subjected to an e.xamination under various forms ; 
and this examination is in fact indispensable, seeing 
not only that a false testimony may be substituted for 
a true, and a testimony true upon the whole may yet be 
falsified in its parts, — a practice which prevailed to a 
great extent in ancient times ; while at the same time 
the meaning of the testimony, by reason either of the 
foreign character of the language in which it is ex- 
pressed, or of the foreign character of thought in which 
it is conceived, may be obscure and undetermined. 

The examination of a testimony is twofold, inasmuch The exa- 

.... .. of 

as it IS either an examination oi its Authenticity and » icUmony 

T • • • r • r • mi • twofoUl, — 

lutegnty, or an examination of its JMeaning. lhisofit» Au. 
twofold process of examination is applicable to testi- imcg- 
moniea of every kind, but it becomes indispensable iuMcimmg. 
when the testimony has been recorded in writing, and 
when this, from its antiquity, has come down to us 
only in transcripts, indefinitely removed from the ori- 
ginal, and when the witnesses are men differing 
greatly from ourselves in language, manners, customs 
and associations of thought. The solution of the CriiicUm. 
problem, — By what laws are the authenticity or 
spuriousness, the integrity or corruption, of a writing 
to be determined, — constitutes the Art of Criticism, in 
its stricter signification {Critica) ; and the solution of intcrpreu- 
the problem, — By what law is the sense or meaning 
of writing to be determined, — constitutes the Art of In- 
terpretation or Exposition {Ilermeneutica, Exegetica). 

In theory. Criticism ought to precede Interpretation, 
for the question, — Who has spoken, naturally arises 
before the question, — How what has been spoken is to 
be understood. But in practice, criticism and inter- 

VOL. II. N 


Digitized by Google 



194 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. pretation cannot be separated ; for in application they 
proceed hand in hand.” “ 

i.Critici»m. “First, then, of Criticism, and the question that pre- 
sents itself in the threshold is, — What are its Defini- 
tion and Divisions 1 Under Criticism is to be under- 
stood the complement of logical rules, by which the 
authenticity or spuriousness, the integrity or interpo- 
lation, of a writing is to be judged. The problems 
luprob- which it proposes to answer are — 1°, Does a writing 
really proceed from the author to whom it is ascribed ; 
and, 2°, Is a writing, as we possess it, in all its parts 
the same as it came from the hands of its author. 
The system of fundamental rules, which are supposed 
in judging of the authenticity and integrity of every 
writing, constitutes what is called the Doctrine of 
unir^ Universal Criticism; and the system of particular 
rules, by which tlie authenticity and integrity of 
writings of a certain kind are judged, constitutes the 
8p«i.i doctrine of what is called Special Criticism. It is 
manifest, from the nature of Logic, that the doctrine 
Universal of Universal Criticism is alone within its sphere. Now 
ibMwuhin Universal Criticism is conversant either with the 
authenticity or spuriousness of a writing considered 
as a whole, or with the integrity or interpolation of 
lu Di»i. certain parts. In the former case it is called Higher, 
in the latter Loiver, Criticism ; but these denomina- 
tions are inappropriate. The one criticism has also 
been styled the Internal, the other the External ; but 
these appellations are, likewise, exceptionable ; and, 
perhaps, it would be preferable to call the former the 
Criticism of the Authenticity, the latter, the Criticism 
of the Integrity, of a work. I shall consider these in 
particular, and, first, of the Criticism of Authenticity. 

a Esser, LoQtk, § 157. — Eo. 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTUKES ON LOGIC. 


195 


“A proof of the authenticity of a writing, more 

especially of an ancient writing, can be rested only 1 

upon two grounds, — an Internal and an External, — Jf Aui^'n™ 
and on these either apart or in combination. By in- 
temal grounds, we mean those indications of authen- 
ticity which the writing itself affords. By external 
grounds, we denote the testimony borne by other 
works of a corresponding antiquity, to the authen- 
ticity of the writing in question. 

“ In regard to the Internal Grounds ; — it is evident, ». intcmj 
Without entering upon details, that these cannot of thck or 

, , , ^ , , T ihcmiwlvm 

themselves, that is, apart from the external grounds, «yt 
afiford evidence capable of establishing beyond a doubt c-»ubii>ii 

, , ^ llic authen- 

the authenticity of an ancient writing ; for we can ticitj- of a 
easily conceive that an able and learned forger may 
accommodate his fabrications both to all the general 
circumstances of time, place, people, and language, 
under which it is supposed to have been written, and 
even to all the particular circumstances of the style, 
habit of thought, personal relations, &c. of the author 
by whom it professes to have been written, so that 
everything may militate for, and nothing militate 
against, its authenticity. 

“ But if our criticism from the internal grounds But omni- 
alone be, on the one hand, impotent to establish, it is, STsprov^ 
on the other, omnipotent to disprove. For it is sufli- 
cient to show that a writing is in essential parts, that 
is, parts which cannot be separated from the whole, 
in opposition to the known manners, institutions, 
usages, &c., of that people with which it would, and 
must, have been in harmony, were it the product of 
the writer whose name it bears ; that, on the contrary, 
it bears upon its face indications of another country 
or of a later age ; and, finally, that it is at variance 


Digitized by Google 



19G 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. with the personal circumstances, the turn of mind, 

— ^ 1- and the pitch of intellect, of its pretended author. 

And here it is to be noticed, that these grounds are 
only relatively internal ; for we become aware of 
them originally only through the testimony of others, 
that is, through external grounds.” “ 
b. External In regard to the External Grounds ; — they, as I 

Clrouiida. ® . a . « 

said, consist in the testimony, direct or indirect, given 
to the authenticity of the writing in question by other 
works of a competent antiquity. This testimony may 
be contained either in other and admitted writings of 
the supposed author himself ; or in those of contem- 
porary writers ; or in those of writers approximat- 
ing in antiquity. This testimony may also be given 
either directly, by attribution of the disputed writing 
by title to the author ; or indirectly, by quoting as 
his, certain passages which are to be found in it. On 
this subject it is needless to go into detail, and it is 
hardly necessary to observe, that the proof of the 
authenticity is most complete when it proceeds upon 
the internal and external grounds together. I, there- 
fore, pass on to the Criticism of Integrity. ^ 

2 . oiticium “ When the authenticity of an ancient work has 
been established on external grounds, and been con- 
firmed on internal, the Integrity of this writing is 
not therewith proved ; for it is very possible, and in 
ancient writings indeed very probable, that particular 
passages are either interpolated or corrupted. The 
authenticity of particular passages is to be judged of 
preeisely by the same laws, which regulate our criti- 
cism of the authenticity of the whole work. The proof 
most pertinent to the authenticity of particular pas- 

a Esaer, Logikf § 158-160. — Ed. 3 See Easer, LoqUc^ §§ 161, 162. — Ed. 


Digitized by Googic 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


197 


sages is drawn — 1°, From their acknowledgment by lect. 
the author himself in other, and these unsuspected, — 1 

works ; 2°, From the attribution of them to the author 
by other writers of competent information ; and, 3°, 

From the evidence of the most ancient MSS. On the 
other hand, a passage is to be obelized as spurious, — 

1°, When foimd to be repugnant to the general relations 
of time and place, and to the personal relations of the 
author ; 2°, When wanting in the more ancient codices, 
and extant only in the more modem. A passage is 
suspicious, when any motive for its interpolation is 
manifest, even should we be unable to establish it as 
spurious. The differences which different copies of a 
writing exhibit in the particular passages, are called 
various readings {variw lectiones or lectioncs vari- 
antes). Now, as of various readings one only can be 
the tme, while they may all very easily be false, the 
problem which the criticism of Integrity proposes to 
solve is, — How is the genuine reading to be made out, 

— and herein consists what is technically called the 
Recension, more properly the Emendation, of the text. 

“ The Emendation of an ancient author may be of Emend»tion 
two kinds ; the one of which may be called the His- “ of two ’ 
twical, the other the Conjectural. The former of these Hi«toric»r 
founds upon historical data for its proof ; the latter, jcctur»”i. 
again, proceeds on grounds which lie beyond the sphere 
of historical fact, and this for the very reason that his- 
torical fact is found incompetent to the restoration of 
the text to its original integrity. The historical emen- 
dation necessarily precedes the conjectural, because the 
object itself of emendation is wholly of an historical 
character, and because it is not permitted to attempt 
any other than an emendation on historical grounds, 


Digitized by Google 


198 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LF.cT. until, from these very grounds themselves, it be shown 
— 1 that the restitution of the text to its original integrity 
ui«toric.i cannot be historically accomplished. Historical Emen- 
dation is again of two kinds, according as its judgment 
Exteniai procced.s on external or on internal grounds. It founds 
“'**• upon external grounds, when the reasons for the truth 
or falsehood of a reading are derived from testimony ; 
it founds upon internal grounds, when the reasons for 
the truth or falsehood of a reading are derived from 
the writing itself. Historical emendation has thus a 
twofold function to perform, (and in its application to 
practice, these must always be performed in conjunc- 
tion), viz., it has carefully to seek out and accurately 
to weigh both the external and internal reasons in sup- 
port of the reading in dispute. Of external grounds 
the principal consists in the confirmation afforded by 
MSS., by printed editions which have immediately 
emanated from MSS., by ancient translations, and by 
passages quoted in ancient authors. . The internal 
grounds are all derived either from the form, or from 
the contents, of the work itself. In reference to the 
form, — a reading is probable, in proportion as it cor- 
responds to the general character of the language pre- 
valent at the epoch w'hen the work was written, and 
to the peculiar character of the language by which the 
author himself was distinguished. In reference to the 
contents, — a reading is probable, when it harmonises 
with the context, that is, when it concurs with the 
other words of the particular passage in which it 
stands, in affording a meaning reasonable in itself, and 
conformable w'ith the author’s opinions, reasonings, 
and general character of thought.”" 

o Es-scr, 8 163 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


199 


It frequently happens, however, that, notwithstand- lect. 

• ^ ^ XXXIV 

ing the uniformity of MSS. and other external sub- 1 

sidia, a reading cannot be recognised as genuine. In 
this case, it must be scientifically shown from the 
rules of criticism itself, that this lection is cormpt. 

If the demonstration thus attempted be satisfactory, 
and if all external subsidia have been trietl in vain, 
the critic is permitted to consider in what manner the 
corrupted passage can be restored to its integrity. 

And here the conjectural or divinatory emendation 
comes into play ; a process in which the power and 
eflBciency of criticism and the genius of the critic are 
principally manifested.”" 

So much for C’riticism, in its applications both to 
the Authenticity and to the Integrity of Writings. 

We have now to consider the general rules by which 
Interpretation, that is, the scientific process of ex- 
pounding the Meaning of an author, is regulated. 

“ By the Art of Interpretation, called likewise techni- ii. int«r- 
cally Hermeneutic or Exegetic, is meant the comple- 
ment of logical laws, by which the sense of an ancient 
writing is to be evolved. Hermeneutic is either Gen- GenemiMid 
eral or Special. General, when it contains those laws 
which apply to the interpretation of any writing 
whatever ; Special, when it comprises those laws by 
which writings of a particular kind are to be ex- 
pounded. The former of these alone is of logical 
concernment. The problem proposed for the Art of 
Interpretation to solve, is, — How are we to proceed 
in order to discover from the words of a writing that 
sole meaning which the author intended them to 
convey ? In the interpretation of a work, it is not, 

o Easer, Logih^ § 166, — Ed. [/’ar* QenuensU, Ar$ Lc$ico-Critica, L iv. 
rAaatana, i. 359-365, 2d ed. 1701. c, vi. rf K 7 .] 


Digitized by Google 



200 


LECTOBES ON I/KJIC. 


LFXT. 

XXXIV. 


Source* of 
Intcrjiruta* 
tiun. 


therefore, enough to show in what signification its 
words may be understood ; for it is required that we 
show in what signification they must. To the execu- 
tion of this task two conditions are absolutely neces- 
sary ; 1°, That the interpreter should be thoroughly 
acquainted with the language itself in general, and 
with the language of the writer in particular ; and 2°, 
That the interpreter should be familiar with the sub- 
jects of which the writing treats. But these two 
requisites, though indispensable, are not of themselves 
suflicient. It is also of importance that the expo- 
sitor should have a competent acquaintance with the 
author’s personal circumstances and character of 
thought, and with the history and spirit of the age 
and country in which he lived. In regard to the inter- 
pretation itself ; — it is to be again observed, that as a 
writer could employ expressions only in a single sense, 
so the result of the exposition ought to be not merely 
to show what meaning may possibly attach to the 
doubtful terms, but what meaning necessarily must. 
When, therefore, it appears that a passage is of doubt- 
ful import, the best preparative for a final determin- 
ation of its meaning is, in the first place, to ascertain 
in how many different significations it may be con- 
strued, and then, by a process of exclusion, to arrive 
at the one veritable meaning. When, however, the 
obscurity cannot be removed, in that case it is the 
duty of the expositor, before abandoning his task, to 
evince that an interpretation of the passage is, with- 
out change, absolutely or relatively impossible. 

“ As to the sources from whence the Interpretation 
is to be drawn, — these are three in all, — viz., 1°, The 
Tractus literarum, the words themselves, as they ap- 
pear in MSS. ; 2°, The context, that is, the passage 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


201 


in immediate connection with the doubtful term : 3°, lect. 

Parallel or analogous passages in the same, or in other, — ! 1 

writings.” “ How the interpretation drawn from these 
sources is to be apphed, I shall not attempt to detail ; 
but pass on to a more generally useful and interesting 
subject. 

So much for Experience or Observation, the first sp«uiiaion 

Second 

mean of scientific discovery, that, viz., by which we of 

-I I 1 . 1 . t Knowledge. 

apprehend what is presented as contingent phaeno- 
mena, and by whose processes of Induction and 
Analogy we carry up individual into general facts. 

We have now to consider the other Mean of scientific 
discovery, that, viz, by which, from the phamomena 
presented as contingent, we separate what is really 
necessary, and thus attain to the knowledge, not of 
merely generalised facts, but of universal laws. This 
mean may, for distinction’s sake, be called Specvlor 
tion, and its general nature I comprehend in the fol- 
lowing paragraph. 

CXI. When the mind does not rest con- p«r. cxi. 
tented with observing and classifying the objects 
of its experience, but, by a reflective analysis, KnowWgc. 
sunders the concrete wholes presented to its 
cognition, throws out of account all that, as con- 
tingent, it can think away from, and concen- 
trates its attention exclusively on those elements 
which, as necessary conditions of its own acts, it 
cannot but think : — by this process it obtains the 
knowledge of a certain order of facts, — facts of 
Self-consciousness, which, as essential to all Ex- 
perience, are not the result of any ; constituting 

o Esser, Lwjik, § 167. — Ed. [Cf. Snell, Logit, p. ii. § 6, p. 200.] 


Digitized by Google 


202 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXIV. 


Kxplicft- 

tioD. 


iu truth the Laws by which the possibility of our 
cognitive functions is determined. This process, 
by which we thus attain to a discriminative 
knowledge of the Necessar^j, Native, and, as they 
are also called, the Noetic, Pure, a liriori, or 
Transcendental, Elements of Thought, may be 
styled Speculative Analysis, Analytic Sj)ccula- 
tion, or Speculation simply, and is carefully to be 
distinguished from Induction, with which it is 
not unusually confounded. 

“ The empirical knowledge of which we have 
hitherto been speaking, does not, however varied and 
extensive it may be, suffice to satisfy the thinking 
mind as such ; for our empirical knowledge itself 
points at certain higher cognitions from which it may 
obtain completion, and which are of a very different 
character from that by which the mere empirical cog- 
nitions themselves are distinguished. The cognitions 
are styled, among other names, by those of noetic, 
pure, or rational, and they are such as cannot, though 
manifested in experience, be derived from experience ; 
for, as the conditions under which experience is pos- 
sible, they must be viewed as necessary constituents 
of the nature of the thinking principle itself. Philo- 
sophers have indeed been found to deny the reality of 
such cognitions native to the mind ; and to confine 
the whole sphere of human knowledge to the limits of 
experience. But in this case philosophers have over- 
looked the important circumstance, that the acts, that 
is, the apprehension and judgment, of experience, are 
themselves impossible, except under the supposition of 
certain potential cognitions previously e.xistent in the 
thinking subject, and which become actual on occa- 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


203 


sion of an object being presented to the external or lect. 

• j o t ^ ^ XXXIV 

internal sense. As an example of a noetic cognition, 1 

the following propositions may suffice : — An object 
and all its attributes are convertible ; — All that is 
has its sufficient cause. The principal distinctions of principal 
Empirical and Rational Knowledges, or rather Em- of'Emjiri-' 
pirical and Noetic Cognitions, are the following : — l°,Noo11*cCog- 
Empirical cognitions originate exclusively in experi- 
ence, whereas noetic cognitions are virtually at least 
before or above all experience, — all experience being 
only possible through them. 2°, Empirical cognitions 
come piecemeal and successively into existence, and 
may again gradually fade and disappear ; whereas 
noetic cognitions, like Pallas armed and immortal from 
the head of Jupiter, spring at once into existence, com- 
plete and indestructible. 3°, Empirical cognitions find 
only an application to those objects from which they 
were originally abstracted, and, according as things ob- 
tain a different form, they also may become differently 
fashioned ; noetic cognitions, on the contrary, bear 
the character impressed on them of necessity, uni- 
versality, sameness. ^Yhether a cognition be empirical 
or noetic, can only be determined by considering 
whether it can or cannot be presented in a sensible 
perception ; — whether it do or do not stand forward 
clear, distinct, and indestructible, bearing the stamp 
of necessity and absolute universality. The noetic 
cognitions can be detected only by a critical analysis 
of the mental phaenomena proposed for the purpose of 
their discovery;”® and this analysis may, as I have 
said, be styled Speculation, for want of a more appro- 
priate appellation. 

a Esser, Lofflk, § 171. — Ed. 


Digitized by Googlc 



20i 


LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


LECTURE XXXV. 

MODIFIED METHODOLOGY. 

SECTION I. — OF THE ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE. 

III. CO.MMUNICATION OF KNOWLEDGE. — A. INSTRUCTION 

ORAL AND WRITTEN. — B. CONFERENCE 

DIALOGUE AND DISPUTATION. 

LECT. I NOW go on to the last Mean of Acquiring and Per- 
fecting our knowledge ; and commence with the fol- 
lowing paragraph : — 

t CXI I. An important mean for the Acqui- 
sition and Perfecting of Knowledge is the Com- 
munication of Thought. Considered in general, 
the Communication of thought is either One-sided, 
or Mutual. The former is called Instruction 
{institutio), the latter Conference (collociUio) ; 
but these, though in theory distinct, are in prac- 
tice easily combined. Instruction is again either 
Oral or W?nUen ; and Conference, as it is inter- 
locutory and famibar, or controversial and solemn, 
may be divided into Dialogue {colloquium, dia- 
loqus), and Disputation ( disputatio, cmcertatio)- 
The Communication of thought in all its forms 
is a means of intellectual improvement, not only 



Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


205 


to him who receives, but to him who bestows, lect. 
information ; in both relations, therefore, it ought — 
to be considered, and not, as is usually done, in 
the latter only.” 

In illustrating this paragraph, I shall commence Expiic*. 
with the last sentence, and, before treating in detail 
of Instruction and Conference, as means of extending 
the limits of our knowledge by new acquisitions de- 
rived from the communication of others, I shall en- ni* Com- 
deavour to show, that the Communication of thought of Thought 
is itself an important mean towards the perfecting of tant mean 
knowledge in the mind of the communicator himself. perfecting 
In this view, the communication of knowledge is like loilgo in tho 
the attribute of mercy, twice blessed, — “ blessed to communica* 
him that gives and to him that takes ; ” in teaching 
others we in fact teach ourselves. 

This view of the reflex effect of the communication 
of thought on the mind, whether under the form of 
Instruction or of Conference, is one of high importance, 
but it is one w'hich has, in modem times, unfortimately 
been almost wholly overlooked. To illustrate it in 
all its bearings would require a volume, — at present 
I can only contribute a few hints towards its expo- 
sition. 

Man is, by an original tendency of his nature, de- M»nn»to. 
termined to communicate to others what occupies his m!!fcd”t^ 
thoughts, and by this communication he obtains atTcST”*"*^ 
clearer understanding of the subject of his cogitations 
than he could otherwise have compassed. This fact riii. r^t 
did not escape the acuteness of Plato. In the Prota- 
goras , — “ It has been well,” says Plato (and he has 

a Cl. Krug, Lagik, § 181 et uq. — En. 


Digitized by Google 



206 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


Ariitollo. 

Tfaemlfttius. 

Lucilitis. 

Peniut. 

Cicero. 

Seneca. 


sundry passages to the point), — “ It has been well, I 
think, observed by Homer — 

‘ Through mutual intercourse and mutual aid, 

Great deeds arc done and great discoveries made ; 

The wise new wisdom on the wise bestow, 

Whilst the lone thinker's thoughts come slight and slow.’ a 

For in company we, aU of us, are more alert, in deed 
and word and thought. And if a man excogitate 
aught hy himself, forthwith he goes about to find some 
one to whom he may reveal it, and from who'm he may 
obtain encouragement, aye and until his discoveiy he 
completed.”^ The same doctrine is maintained by 
Aristotle, and illustrated by the same quotation ; 
(to which, indeed, is to be referred the adage, — “ Unus 
homo, nullus homo.”) — “We rejoice,” says Themistius, 
“ in hunting truth in company, as in hunting game.”* 
Lucilius, — “ Scire est nescire, nisi id me scire alius 
scierit ; ' — paraphrased in the compacter, though far 
inferior, verse of Persius, — “ Scire tuum nihil est, nisi 
te scire hoc sciat alter.’’^"— Cicero’s Cato testifies to 
the same truth : — “ Non facile est invenire, qui quod 
sciat ipse, non tradat alteri.” ’’ And Seneca : — “ Sic 
cum hac exceptione detur sapientia, ut illam inclusam 
teneam nec enunciem, rejiciam. Nullius boni, sine 
socio, jucunda possessio est.” * 

Condita tabescit, vulgata scientia crescit.** i 


a Altered from Pope*8 Ilonur, Book 
X. 266. 

3 Proia^., p. 348. Compare Ltc- 
turcs on Mtlaphyrici, L p. 376. 

7 EtK. Nic., viii. 1, 

8 OroC, xxi. Exploratoraut Philo- 
9ophiu, OratioHfSfp. 254, ed. Harduin, 
Pane, 1684 .— Ed. 

« Fragm.f 25, in the Bipont edition 
of PersiiiA and JuTenal, p. 176 . — Ed. 


i I. 27.— Ed. 

Cato apud Cicero, Dc Pin.^ iii. 
c. 20, § 66. 

6 Seneca, Ep., vi. 

t Quoted also in Di*cu^tioM,p. 778. 
This lino appears to have been taken 
from a small volume, entitled. Car- 
minum Prorerbialium Loci Commiiww, 
p. 17, Lend. 1583 ; but the author is 
not named. — Ed. 


Digitized by Coogle 


LECTUBES ON LOGIC. 


207 


“ In hoc gaudeo aliquid discere, ut doceam : nec me lect. 
ulla res delectabit, licet eximia ait et salutaris, quam — ^ — I 
mihi uni, scitiirus sim.”“ “ Ita non solum ad discen- 
dum propensi sumus, verum etiam ad docendum.”'^ 

The modes in which the Communication of thought Mode >¦> 

. T- /»• 1*1 which Com- 

IS conducive to the perfecting of thought itself, are muniauion 

. , . 1 ^ ^ . T i. conducive 

two ; for the mind may be determined to more ex- u< ti>o Hy 
alted energy by the sympathy of society, and by the Thought 
stimulus of opposition ; or it may be necessitated 
to more distinct, accurate, and orderly tliinking, as 
this is the condition of distinct, accurate, and orderly 
communication. Of these the former requires the 
presence of others during the act of thought, and is, 
therefore, only manifested in oral instruction or in 
conference ; whereas the latter is operative both in 
our oral aud in our written communications. Of these 
in their order. 

In the first place, then, the influence of man on i. By reri- 
man in reciprocally determining a higher energy of tcnnini'ng 
the faculties, is a phoenomenon siifiiciently manifest. ci!'o‘^"r 
By nature a social being, man has powers which are 
relative to, and, consequently, find their development 
in, the company of his fellows ; and this is more par- 
ticularly shown in the energies of the cognitive facul- 
ties. “ As iron sharpeneth iron,” says Solomon, “ so a 
man sharpeneth the understanding of his friend.”'*' 

This, as I have said, is effected both by fellow-feeling 
and by opposition. We see the efiects of fellow-feel- 
ing, in the necessity of an audience to call forth the 
exertions of the orator. Eloquence requires numbers ; 
and oratory has only flourished where the condition 


aSeoeca, vi. — E d. rued Tersion ie, rountenarur of hU 

^ Cicero, Z)e ill. 20 . — Ed. friend. Compare Leeturee on Meta- 

y Proverbif xxtU. 17. The auiho< phytiea, vol. L p. 876 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



208 


LECTUHES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


b. Throu);h 
Oppotition. 

Plutarch. 


Scaliger, 
J. C. 


2. By im- 
potio); the 
Decossity of 
obtainiug a 
fuller con- 
MriousneM 
of knov* 
ledge for 
ounelres. 


of large audiences has been supplied. But opposition 
is perhaps still more powei’ful than mere sympathy in 
calling out the resources of tlie intellect. 

In the mental as in the material world, action and 
reaction are ever equal ; and Plutarch® well ob- 
serves, that as motion would cease were contention 
to be taken out of the physical universe, so pro- 
gress in improvement would cease were contention 
taken out of the moral ; rroXe/xos andvraip narqpf 

“ It is maintained,” says the subtle Scaliger, “ by 
Vives, that we profit more by silent meditation than 
by dispute. This is not true. For as fire is elicited 
by the collision of stones, so truth is elicited by the 
collision of minds. I myself (he adds) frequently 
meditate by myself long and intently ; but in vain ; 
unless I find an antagonist, there is no hope of a 
successful issue. By a master we are more excited 
than by a book ; but an antagonist, whether by 
his pertinacity or his wisdom, is to me a double 
master.”'*' 

But, in the second place, the necessity of communi- 
cating a piece of knowledge to others, imposes upon 
us the necessity of obtaining a fuller consciousness of 
that knowledge for ourselves. This result is to a cer- 
tain extent secured by the very process of clothing our 
cogitations in words. For speech is an analytic pro- 
cess ; and to express our tlioughts in language, it is 
requisite to evolve them from the implicit into the 
explicit, from the confused into the distinct, in order 
to bestow on each part of the organic totality of a 
thought its precise and appropriate symbol. But to 

a Vi(<t AyftUai, O^xro, 1699, voL L Philos., L p. 158 . — Ed. 
p. 698 . — Ed. y Ej-ereit, i. 420. [For a criticism 

$ Heraclitus. Cf. Plutarch, Pe Is. of Scaliger’s remark as regards Vives, 
ei Osir., p. 370. Brandis^ Gesch. cUr see Discumons, p. 773 . — £d.] 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


209 


do this is in fact only to accomplish the first step leot. 
towards the perfecting of our cognitions or thoughts. 

But the communication of thought, in its higher ap- influence of 
plications, imposes on us far more than this ; and in lio^Md 
so doing it reacts with a still more beneficial influence inpcrfi'ctinR 
on our habits of thinking. Suppose that we are not 
merely to express our thoughts as they spontaneously 
arise ; suppose that we are not merely extemporane- 
ously to speak, but deliberately to write, and that 
what we are to communicate is not a simple and easy, 
but a complex and difficult, matter. In this case, no 
man will ever fully understand his subject who has 
not studied it with the view of communication, while 
the power of communicating a subject is the only 
competent criterion of his fully understanding it. 

“When a man,” says Godwin, “writes a book of method- Godwin 
ical investigation, he does not write because he under- 
stands the subject, but he imderstands the subject 
because he has written. He was an uninstructed tyro, 
exposed to a thousand foolish and miserable mistakes, 
when he began his work, compared w'ith the degree of 
proficiency to which he has attained when he has 
finished it. He who is now an eminent philosopher, 
or a sublime poet, was formerly neither the one nor 
the other. Many a man has been overtaken by a pre- 
mature death, and left nothing behind him but com- 
positions worthy of ridicule and contempt, who, if he 
had lived, would perhaps have risen to the highest 
literary eminence. If we could examine the school 
exercises of men who have afterwards done honour to 
mankind, we should often find them inferior to those 
of their ordinary competitors. If we could dive into 
the portfolios of their early youth, we should meet 

VOL. II. 0 


Digitized by Google 



210 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


Aristotle. 


Plato. 

Seneca. 

Clement of 
Alexandria. 

Dionjaios 

Cato. 


with abundant matter for laughter at their senseless 
incongruities, and for contemptuous astonishment.”® 

“ The one exclusive sign,” says Aristotle, “ that a 
man is thoroughly cognisant of anything is that he is 
able to teach it ; and Ovid, — 

“ QuoJque parum novit nemo docero potest.” 

In this reactive effect of the communication of 
knowledge in determining the perfection of the know- 
ledge communicated, originated the scholastic maxim 
Doce ut discus, — a maxim which has unfortunately 
been too much overlooked in the schemes of modem 
education. In former ages, teach that you may leam 
always constituted one at least of the great means of 
intellectual cultivation. “ To teach,” says Plato, “ is 
the way for a man to learn most and best.”* “ Hom- 
ines dum docent discunt,” says Seneca.' “In teach- 
ing,” says Clement of Alexandria,^ “the instructor often 
learns more than his pupils.” “ Disce sed a doctis ; 
indoctos ipse doceto,” is the precept of Dionysius Cato ; ’ 
and the two following were maxims of authority in 
the discipline of the middle ages. The first — 

“ MulU rogare, rogata tenere, retenta docere, 

Haec tria, discipulum faciont superare magistrura.” 9 

The second — 

Discerc ai quaeria doceas ; sic ipae docei’is ; 

Nam studio tali tibi proficis atque aodali.’^ 


a Enquii^f part i., iv. pp. 23, 
24, ed. 1797 .— Ed. 

/3 Metaphyi.f i. 1. Quoted in Dit^ 
cu9$ion$y p. 765 . — Ed. 

y TViViVi, ii 348 . — Ed. 

8 Pseudo* Plato, 989.— 

Ed. 

f £’/>!#/., 7 . — Ed. 

f Stromata^ lib. i. p. 275, c<l. Sylb., 

rttfiavB6i¥fi irXf'ioVf Kal Ktytov 
a\f¥aKp<WTai voAA<briT ror? iwoKovovtrtv 


auroD.— “E d. 

V IV, 29.-ED. 

6 [Creuius, p. 681.] [Oabrielis 
NautUri f^yntagma dt Stiuiio Lihtrali. 
Included in the Cnn$Hia el Afelhodi 
Aure<e Btudiorum oyAime imtituendo' 
r«w, collected by Th. Creniua, Rotter- 
dam, 1692. The lines are quoted as 
from an anonymous author. — E d.J 
t Given without atithor’s name, in 
theCVirmtn«OT Prw'erf/ialum l/oci CVm- 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


211 


This tnith is also well enforced by the great Vives. 
“ Doctrina est traditio corum quae quis novit ei qui 
non novit. Disciplina est illius traditionis acceptio ; 
nisi quod mens accipientis impletur, dantis vero non 
exhauritur, — imo communicatione augetur emditio, 
sicut ignis, motu atque agitatione. Excitatur enim 
ingenium, et discurrit per ea quae ad prsesons nego- 
tium pertinent : ita invenit atque excudit multa, et 
quae in mentem non veniebant cessanti, docenti, aut 
disserehti occurrunt, calore acuente vigorem ingenii. 
Idcirco, nihil est ad magnam eruditionem perinde 
conducens, ut docere.” “ The celebrated logician, Dr 
Robert Sanderson, used to say: “I learn much from 
my master, more from ray equals, and most of all 
from my disciples.”*® 

But I have occupied perhaps too much time on the 
influence of the communication of knowledge on those 
by whom it is made ; and shall now pass on to the 
consideration of its influence on those to whom it is 
addressed. And in treating of communication in 
this respect, I shall, in the first place, consider it 
as One-sidetl, and, in the second, as Reciprocal or 
Bilateral. 

The Unilateral Communication of knowledge, or 
Instruction, is of two kinds, for it is either Oral or 
Written ; but as both these species of instruction pro- 
pose the same end, they are both, to a certain extent, 
subject to the same laws. 

Oral and Written Instruction have each their pecu- 
liar advantages. 

In the first place, instruction by the living voice 


LECT. 

XXXV. 

Vive«. 


SandenoD. 


Influence 
of the com- 
manication 
of Know* 
on 

those to 
whom it is 
addresacd. 


1. Initnir- 
tion, — Oral 
and Writ- 
ten. 


Oral in- 


munet, Lond. 1583, p. 17. See abore, ^ {Ream)n and Judgement, or Special 
p. 206, note ». — Ed. Rtmarki of the Life of the Renotpned 

® ilnima, p. 89. A>r 5ander»ort, p. 10, London; 1663.] 


Digitized by Coogle 



212 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


struction, 

— iu ad* 

vantages. 

a. More 

natural, 

thereforo 

more im> 

presaiTo. 

Theopbrat* 

tuf. 


Y onnger 
Pliny. 


Valerius 

Maziinus. 


St Jerome. 


b. Less per- 
maoent, 
therefore 
more at- 
tended to. 


c. Hearing 
a social act. 


has this advantage over that of books, that, as more 
natural, it is more impressive. Hearing rouses the 
attention and keeps it alive far more efiFectually than 
reading. To this we have the testimony of the most 
competent observers. “ Hearing,” says Theophrastus,” 
“ is of aU the senses the most pathetic,” that is, it is 
the sense most intimately associated with sentiment 
and passion. “ Multo magis,” says the younger 
Pliny, “ multo magis viva vox afficit. Nam, licet 
acriora sunt qum legas, altius tamen in animo sedent 
quffi pronuntiatio, vultus, habitus, gestus etiam dicen- 
tis adfigit.”^ 

“ Plus prodest,” says Valerius Maximus, “ docentem 
audire, quam in libris studere ; quia vehementior fit 
impressio in mentibus audientium, ex visu doctoris et 
auditu, quam ex studio et libro.”'*' 

And St Jerome — “ Habet nescio quid latentis ener- 
gise viva vox : et in aures discipuli de doctoris ore 
transfusa, fortius sonat.” * 

A second reason why our Attention (and Memory 
is always in the ratio of Attention) to things spoken 
is greater than to things read, is that what is written 
we regard as a permanent possession to which we can 
always recur at pleasure ; whereas we are conscious 
that the “ winged words ” are lost to us for ever, if we 
do not catch them as they fly. As Pliny hath it : — 
“ Legendi semper est occasio ; audiendi non semper.” ' 

A third cause of the superior cflBcacy of oral in- 


a OtiK ^ ari^ws ^ olfuu irpoca- 
Kovffat ircpl rrji LrovtrrtJc^X) al<r$^f<r*oeSt 
tjv 6 Bt6^patrros waByjTiKetrdrritf tlvcu 
^7}<rl waeut'. Plutarch, De A tniitione, 
tub ini/. — E d. 

B u. 3 . — Ed. 

y [Thomoa Hibemicue, p. 830.] 
[The above poasage ia quoted as from 


Valerius, lib. viil, in the Floret of 
Thomas Hibemicua, and in the An- 
Owlfgia of Langius, under the article 
Doctrina. It is not, however, to be 
found in that author. — Ed.] 

8 Epist.^ ciii. OperOf Antv. 1579, 
tom. iii. p. 337 . — Ed. 

« Eititt., u. 8 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


21.3 


stmction is that man is a social animal. He is thus 
naturally disposed to find pleasure in society, and in 
the performance of the actions performed by those 
with whom he consorts. But reading is a solitary, 
hearing is a social, act. In reading, we are not deter- 
mined to attend by any fellow-feeling with others 
attending ; whereas in hearing, our attention is not 
only engaged by oiur sympathy with the speaker, but 
by our sympathy with the otlier attentive auditors 
around us. 

Such are the causes which concur in rendering 
Oral Instruction more effectual than Written. “ M. 
Varillas,” says Menage, (and Varillas was one of the 
most learned of modern historians, — and Menage one 
of the most learned of modern scholars), “ M. Varillas 
himself told me one day, that of every ten things 
he knew, he had learned nine of them in conversation. 
I myself might say nearly the same thing.”* 

On the other hand, Reading, though only a substi- 
tute for Oral Instruction, has likewise advantages 
peculiar to itself. In the first place, it is more easily 
accessible. In the second, it is more comprehensive 
in its sphere of operation. In the third, it is not 
transitory with the voice, but may again and again 
be taken up and considered, so that the object of the 
instruction may thus more fully be examined and 
brought to proof. It is thus manifest, that oral and 
written instruction severally supply and severally sup- 
port each other ; and that, where this is competent, 
they ought always to be employed in conjunction. 
Oral instruction is, however, in the earlier stages 
of education, of principal importance ; and written 
ought, therefore, at first only to be brought in as a 

a MtnagiawXf tom. W. p. Ill, cd. 1715, — Ed. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


Mcoam 

quotea. 


Reftding, — 
iu advan* 
Ugc*. 

a. Moro 
easily 
acccMible. 

b. Moro 
comprohcn* 
sivc. 

c. Moro 
pcnnanont. 


Digitized by Coogle 



214 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


IV.CXIII. 
Written 
Instruction) 
and its em- 
ployment 
as a means 
of inlcilec' 
(ual im- 
proTement. 


subsidiary. A neglect of the oral instruction, and an 
exclusive employment of the written, — the way in 
which those who are self-taught (the autodidacti) 
obtain their education, — for the most part betrays its 
one-sided influence by a contracted cultivation of the 
intellect, with a deficiency in the power of communi- 
cating knowledge to others. 

Oral instruction necessarily supposes a speaker and 
a hearer ; and written instruetion a writer and a 
reader. In these, the capacity of the speaker and of 
the writer must equally fulfil certain common requi- 
sites. In the first place, they should be fully masters 
of the subject with which their instruction is conver- 
sant ; and in the second, they should be able and 
willing to communicate to others the knowledge which 
they themselves possess. But in reference to these 
several species of instruction, there are various special 
rules that ought to be attended to by those who would 
reap the advantages they severally afford. I shall 
commence with Written Instruction, and comprise the 
niles by which it ought to be regulated, in the follow- 
ing paragraph. 

If CXIII. In regard to Written Instmction, 
and its profitable employment as a means of in- 
tellectual improvement, there are certain rules 
which ought to be observed, and which together 
constitute the Proper Method of Beading. These 
may be reduced to three classes, as they regard, 
1°, The Quantity, 2°, The Quality, of what is to be 
read, or 3°, The fMode of reading what is to be read. 

I. As concerns the Quantity of what is to be 
read, there is a single rule, — Read much, but 
not many works (niultum non multa). 


Digitized by Google 


LECTUUES ON LOGIC. 215 

II. As concerns the Quality of what is to be 
read, — there may be given five rules. 1°, Select 
the works of principal importance, estimated l)y 
relation to the several sciences themselves, or to 
your particular aim in reading, or to your iudi- 
vidual disposition and wants. 2°, Read not the 
more detailed works upon a science, until you 
have obtained a rudimentary knowledge of it in 
general. 3°, Make yourselves familiar with a 
science in its actual or prescut state, before you 
proceed to study it in its chronological develop- 
ment. 4“ To avoid erroneous and exclusive 
views, read and compare together the more im- 
portant works of every sect and party. 5°, To 
avoid a one-sided development of mind, combine 
with the study of works which cultivate the 
Understanding, the study of works which culti- 
vate the Taste. 

III. As concerns the l\Iode or Manner of read- 
ing itself, there are four principal rules. 1°, 
Read that you may accurately remember, but 
still more, that you may fully understand. 2°, 
Strive to compass the general tenor of a work, 
before you attempt to judge of it in detail. S", 
Accommodate the intensity of the reading to the 
importance of the work. Some books are, there- 
fore, to be only dipped into; others are to be run 
over rapidly ; and others to be studied long and 
sedulously. 4°, Regulate on the same principle 
the extracts which you make from the works you 
read.® 


a Cf. Krug, Logit, § 180. — Ed. Scheidler, Grundriu dtr Hodegttik, § 
[Fla;hab«r, Logit, p. 188, ed. 1818. S3 p. 196; 1832. Maginu r. 


LEtT 

XXXV. 


Digitized by Google 


216 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


Ezplic»> 

tion. 

I. Quantity 
to b« read. 
Rule. 


Boloroon. 

Quintiliao. 

Younger 

Pliny. 

Seneca. 

Lather 

(luoted. 


Sanderson. 


Lord Bur- 
leigh. 


I. In reference to the head of Quantity, the single 
rule is — Read much, ljut not many works. Though 
this golden rule has risen in importance, since the 
world, by the art of printing, has been overwhelmed 
by the multitude of books, it was still fully recog- 
nised by the great thinkers of antiquity. It is even 
hinted by Solomon, when he complains that “ of mak- 
ing many books there is no end.”® By Quintilian, by 
the younger Pliny, and by Seneca, the maxim, “ mul- 
tum legendum esse, non multa,” is laid down as the 
great rule of study.^ “ All,” says Luther in his Table 
Talk,'*' “ who would study with advantage in any art 
whatsoever, ought to betake themselves to the reading 
of some sure and certain books oftentimes over ; for 
to read many books produceth confusion, rather than 
learning, like as those who dwell everywhere, are not 
anywhere at home.” He alludes here to the saying of 
Seneca, “ Nusquam est qui ubique est.”^ “ And like as 
in society, we use not daily the community of all our 
acquaintances, but of some few selected friends, even 
so likewise ought we to accustom ourselves to the best 
books, and to make the same familiar unto us, that is, 
to have them, as we use to say, at our fingers’ ends.” 
The great logician, Bisliop Sanderson, to whom I for- 
merly referred, as his friend and biographer Isaac Wal- 
ton informs us, said “ that he declined reading many 
books ; but what he did read were well chosen, and 
read so often that he became very familiar with them. 
They were principally three, — Aristotle's Rhetoric, 
Aquinas’s Secimda Sccundce, and Cicero, particularly 
his Offices.”* The great Lord Burleigh, we are told 

a Eccla, xii. 12 . — Kd. y No. Dcccxuv. Of Ltarntd Men. 

^ Quintilian, x. 1, 69. Pliny, Ep.f — Ed. 
vii. 9. Senecsk, Df Tranquill. AnimijC. 6 EpisL, 

9. EpUt.^ 2, 45.— Ed. « See Walton’s Zir« of Donne, 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


217 


by his biographer, carried Cicero De Offi-ciis, with 
Aristotle’s Rhetoric, always in his bosom ; those being 
complete pieces, “ that would make both a scholar and 
an honest man.” “ Our age,” says Herder, “ is the 
reading age ; ” and he adds, “ it would have been 
better, in my opinion, for the world and for science, 
if, instead of the multitude of books which now over- 
lay us, we possessed only a few works good and ster- 
ling, and which, as few, would, therefore, be more 
diligently and profoundly studied.” “ I might quote 
to you many other testimonies to the same effect ; 
but testimonies are useless in support of so manifest 
a truth. 

For what purpose, — with what intent, do we read ? 
We read not for the sake of reading, but we read to 
the end that we may think. Reading is valuable 
only as it may supply to us the materials which 
the mind itself elaborates. As it is not the largest 
quantity of any kind of food, taken into the stomach, 
that conduces to health, but such a quantity of such 
a kind as can be best digested ; so it is not the 
greatest complement of any kind of information that 
improves the mind, but such a quantity of such a 
kind as determines the intellect to most vigorous 
energy. The only profitable reading is that in which 
we are compelled to think, and think intensely ; 
whereas that reading which serves only to dissipate 
and divert our thought, is either positively hurtful, 
or useful only as an occasional relaxation from severe 
exertion. But the amount of vigorous thinking is 
usually in the inverse ratio of multifarious reading. 
Multifarious reading is agreeable; but, as a habit, it 

iro/^on. Hooker^ Herbert^ and Sander- a Briefe iiher dot Stud, der Theol. 
* 0 * 1 , vol. ii., p. 287| Zouch, York, B. xUx., Werke, xiv. 267, ed, 1829. — 
1817.— Eo. Ed. 


LECr. 

XXXV. 


Herder. 


End of 
Reading. 


Digitized by Google 



218 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


II. Quality 
uf what ii 
to be read. 
First Rule* 


Second 

Rule* 


is, in its way, as destructive to the mental as dram- 
drinking is to the bodily health. 

II. In reference to the Quality of what is to be read, 
the First of the five rules is, — ‘ Select the works of prin- 
cipal importance, in accommodation either to the seve- 
ral sciences themselves, to your particular aim in read- 
ing, or to your individual disposition and wants.’ This 
rule is too manifestly true to require any illustration 
of its truth. No one will deny that for the accom- 
plishment of an end, you ought to employ the means 
best calculated for its accomplishment. This is all 
that the rule inculcates. But while there is no difii- 
culty about the expediency of obeying the rule, there 
is often considerable diflBculty in obeying it. To know 
what books ought to be read in order to learn a science, 
is in fact frequently obtained only after the science has 
been already learned. On this point no general advice 
can be given. We have, on all of the sciences, works 
which profess to supply the advice which the student 
here requires. But in general, I must say, they are of 
small assistance in pointing out what books we should 
select, however useful they may be in showing us what 
books exist upon a science. In this respect, the British 
student also labours under peculiar disadvantages. 
The libraries in this country are, one and all of them, 
wretchedly imperfect ; and there are few departments 
of science, in which they are not destitute even of the 
works of primary necessity, — works which, from their 
high price, but more frequently from the difficulty of 
procuring them, are beyond the reach of ordinary 
readers. 

Under the head of Quality the Second Rule is, — 

‘ Read not the more detailed works upon a science, 
until you have obtained a rudimentary knowledge of 


Digitized by Googli 



LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


219 


it in general.’ The expediency of this rule is suffici- 
ently apparent. It is altogether impossible to read 
with advantage an extensive work on any branch of 
knowledge, if we are not previously aware of its general 
bearing, and of the relations in which its several parts 
stand to each other. In this case, the mind is over- 
powereel and oppressed by the mass of details pre- 
sented to it, — details, the significance and subordina- 
tion of which it is as yet unable to recognise. A con- 
spectus, — a survey of the science as a whole, ought, 
therefore, to precede the study of it in its parts ; we 
should be aware of its distribution, before we attend 
to what is distributed, — we should possess the empty 
frame-work, before we collect the materials with which 
it is to be filled. Hence the utility of an encyclo- 
paedical knowledge of the sciences in general, prelimi- 
nary to a study of the several sciences in particular ; 
that is, a summary knowledge of their objects, their 
extent, their connection with each other. By this 
means the student is enabled to steer his way on the 
wide ocean of science. By this means he always knows 
whereabouts he is, and becomes aware of the point 
towards which his author is leading him. 

In entering upon the study of such authors as Plato, 
Aristotle, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz, Locke, Kant, 
&c., it is, therefore, proper that we first obtain a pre- 
paratory acquaintance with the scojie, both of their 
philosophy in general, and of the particular work on 
which we are about to enter. In the case of writers 
of such ability this is not difficult to do ; as there are 
abundance of subsidiary works, affording the prelimi- 
nary knowledge of which we are in quest. But in the 
case of treatises where similar assistance is not at hand, 
we may often, in some degree, prepare ourselves for a 


u:cT. 

x.xxv. 


Digitized by Google 



220 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


Gibbon 

quoted* 


Third 

Rule. 


regular perusal, by examining the table of contents, 
and taking a cursory inspection of its several depart- 
ments. In this respect and also in others, the follow- 
ing advice of Gibbon to young students is highly de- 
serving of attention. “ After a rapid glance (I trans- 
late from the original French) — after a rapid glance 
on the subject and distribution of a new book, I sus- 
pend the reading of it, which I only resume after 
having myself examined the subject in all its relations, 
— after having called up in my solitary walks all that 
1 have read, thought, or learned in regard to the sub- 
ject of the whole book, or of some chapter in particu- 
lar. I thus place myself in a condition to estimate 
what the author may add to my general stock of know- 
ledge ; and I am thus sometimes favourably disposed 
by the accordance, sometimes armed by the opposition, 
of our views.” “ 

The Third Eule under the head of Quality is — 

‘ Make yourselves familiar with a science in its present 
state, before you proceed to study it in its chronologi- 
cal development.’ The propriety of this procedure is 
likewise manifest. Unless we be acquainted with a 
science in its more advanced state, it is impossible to 
distinguish between what is more or less important, 
and, consequently, impossible to determine what is or 
is not worthy of attention in the doctrines of its earlier 
cultivators. We shall thus also be over^vhelmed by 
the infinitude of details successively presented to us ; 
all will be confusion and darkness, where all ought to 
be order and light. It is thus improper to study 
philosophy historically, or in its past progress, be- 


a The substance of the above pas- Si, 56 ; e<l. 1837. The French origi- 
sage is given in English, in Gibbon’s nal is quote<i by Scheidler, HixlrgttiLf 
Uemoirt of my Life and Wrilinyi, pp. § 55, p. 204 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


LECTUEES ON LOGIC. 


221 


fore we have studied it statistically, or in its actual 
results. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


The Fourth Rule under the same head is — ‘To Foarth 
avoid erroneous and exclusive views, read and com- 
pare together the more important works of every party.’ 

In proportion as different opinions may be entertained 
in regard to the objects of a science, the more neces- 
sary is it that we should weigh with care and imparti- 
ality the reasons on which these different opinions rest. 

Such a science, in particular, is philosophy, and such 
sciences, in general, are those which proceed out of 
philosophy. In the philosophical sciences, we ought, 
therefore, to be especially on our guard against that 
partiality which considers only the arguments in favour 
of particular opinions. It is true that in the writings 
of one party we find adduced the reasons of the oppo- 
site party ; but frequently so distorted, so mutilated, 
so enervated, that their refutation occasions little 
effort. AVe must, therefore, study the arguments on 
both sides, if we would avoid those one-sided and con- 
tracted views which are the result of party-spirit. 

The precept of the Apostle, “ Test all things, hold fast 
by that which is good,” is a precept which is applicable 
equally in philosophy as in theology, but a precept 
that has not been more frequently neglected in the 
one study than in the other. 

The Fifth Rule under the head of Quality is — ‘ To Fifth RuI». 
avoid a one-sided development of mind, combine with 
the study of works which cultivate the Understanding, 
the study of works which cultivate the Taste.’ The 
propriety of this rule requires no elucidation ; I, there- 
fore, pass on to the third head — viz. the Manner of m. M»T-n« 
reading itself ; under which the First Rule is — ‘ Read Fim*1t!i“?.' 


Digitized by Google 


222 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


Second 

Rule. 


'riiird Rule 


Ltcilo c«r- 

Moria. 
Lixtio sta‘ 
Uiria. 


that you may accurately remember^ but still more 
that you may fully understand.’ 

This also requires no comment. Reading should 
not be a learning by rote, but an act of reflective think- 
ing. Memory is only a subsidiary faculty, — is valuable 
merely as supplying the materials on which the under- 
standing is to operate. We read, therefore, principally, 
not to remember facts but to understand relations. 
To commit, therefore, to memory what we read, before 
we elaborate it into an intellectual possession, is not 
only useless but detrimental ; for the habit of laying 
up in memory what has not been digested by the 
understanding, is at once the cause and the effect of 
mental weakness. 

The Second Rule under this head is — ‘Strive to 
compass the general tenor of a work, before you at- 
tempt to judge of it in detail.’ Nothing can be more 
absurd than the attempt to judge a part, before com- 
prehending the whole ; but unfortunately nothing is 
more common, especially among professional critics, — 
reviewers. This proceeding is, however, as frequently 
the effect of wilful misrepresentation, as of uninten- 
tional error. 

The Third Rule under this head is — ‘ Accommodate 
the intensity of the reading to the importance of the 
work. Some books are, therefore, to be only dipped 
into ; others are to be run over rapidly ; and others 
to be studied long and sedulously.’ All books are not 
to be read with the same attention ; and, accordingly, 
an ancient distinction was taken of reading into lectio 
cursoria and lectio stutaria. The former of these we 
have adopted in English, cursory reading being a 
familiar and correct translation of lectio cursoria. 
But lectio stutaria cannot be so well rendered by the 


Digitized by Google 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


22.3 


expression of stationary reading. “ Read not,” says lect. 
Bacon in his Fiftieth Essay — “ read not to contradict 
and confute, nor to believe and take for granted, nor 
to find talk and discourse, but to weigh and consider. 

Some books are to be tasted, others are to be swallowed, 
and some few to be chewed and digested ; that is, 
some books are to be read only in parts ; others to be 
read, but not curiously ; and some few to be read 
wholly and with diligence and attention. Some Iwoks 
also may be reatl by deputy, and extracts made of 
them by others ; but that would be only in the less 
important arguments, and the meaner sort of books ; 
else distilled books are, like common distilled waters, 
fleshy things.” “ One kind of books,” says the great 
historian, Johann von Miiller,® “ I read with great Joh»nnToii 
rapidity, for in these there is much dross to throw 
asidcf and little gold to be found ; some, however, there 
are all gold and diamonds, and he who, for example, 
in Tacitus can read more than twenty pages in four 
hours, certainly does not understand him.” 

Rapidity in reading depends, however, greatly on 
our acquaintance with the subject of discussion. At 
first, upon a science we can only read with profit few 
books, and laboriously. By degrees, however, our 
knowledge of the matters treated expands, the reason- 
ings appear more manifest, — we advance more easily, 
until at length we are able, without overlooking any- 
thing of importance, to read with a velocity which 
appears almost incredible for those who are only 
commencing the study. 

The Fourth Rule under this head is — ‘ Regulate on Fourth 
the same principle the extracts which you make from 
the works you read.’ 

a Werte, iv. 177. Cf. xtu. 253. p. 204 . — Ed. 

Quoted by Scheidler, Uodtgttik, § 55, 


Digitized by Google 



224 


LECTURES ON LOGIC. 


LECT. So mucli for tlie Unilateral Communication of 

XXXV, 

1 thought, as a mean of knowledge. We now proceed 

to the Mutual Communication of thought, — Confer- 
ence. 

Conference, This is either mere Conversation, — mere Dialogue, 
or Formal Dispute, and at present we consider Loth 
of these exclusively, only as means of knowledge, — 
only as means for the communication of truth. 

1. Di«iogne. The employment of Dialogue as such a mean, re- 

quires great skill and dexterity ; for presence of mind, 
confidence, tact, and pliability are necessary for this, 
and these are only obtained by exercise, independently 
of natural talent. This was the method which Socra- 
tes almost exclusively employed in the communication 
of knowledge ; and he called it his art of intellectual 
midwifery, because in its application truth is not given 
over by the master to the disciple, but the master, by 
skilful questioning, only helps the disciple to deliver 
himself of the truth explicitly, which his mind had 
before held implicitly. This method is not, however, 
applicable to all kinds of knowledge, but only to those 
which the human intellect is able to evolve out of it- 
self, that is, only to the cognitions of Pure Reason. 

2. ni.pau- Disputation is of two principal kinds, inasmuch as 
.ud’writ- it is oral or written ; and in both cases, the controversy 

may be conducted either by the rules of strict logical 
disputation, or left to the freedom of debate. With- 
out entering on details, it may be sufficient to state, in 
Aoidemicai regard to Logical Disputation, that it is here essential 
d.ipuut.ou. point in question, — the status controversicB , — 

the thesis, should, in the first place, be accurately de- 
termined, in order to prevent all logomachy, or mere 
verbal wrangling. This being done, that disputant 


Digitized by Google 



LECTUilES ON LOGIC. 


225 


who denies the thesis, and who is called the ojyponent, 
may either call upon the disputant who affirms the 
thesis, and who is called the defendant, to allege an 
argument in its support, or he may at once himself 
produce his counter-argument. To avoid, however, all 
misunderstanding, the opponent should also advance 
an antithesis, that is, a proposition conflictive with the 
thesis, and when this has been denied by the defend- 
ant the process of argumentation commences. This 
proceeds in regular syllogisms, and is governed by 
dehnite rules, which are all so calculated that the dis- 
cussion is not allowed to wander from the point at 
issue, and each disputant is compelled, in reference to 
every syllogism of his adversary, either to admit, or 
to deny, or to distinguish.® These rules you will find 
in most of the older systems of Logic ; in particular 
I may refer you to them as detailed in Heerebord’s 
Praxis Logica, to be found at the end of his edition 
of the Synopsis of Burgersdicius. The practice of 
disputation was long and justly regarded as the most 
important of academical exercises ; though liable to 
abuse, the good which it certainly ensures greatly sur- 
passes the evil which it may accidentally occasion. 

a CL Krug, Logik, § 186. Anm. 2. Scbeidler, Ilodegetik, § 45, p. 188. — Eo. 


VOL. II. 


P 


LECT. 

XXXV. 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


I. 

THK CHARACTER AND COMPREHENSION OF LOGIC. 

—A FRAGMENT. 

(Sec above, Volume T., page 4.) 

In the commencement of a course of academical instruction, there 
are usually two primary questions which obtrude themselves; 
and with the answer to these questions I projwse to occupy the 
present Lecture. 

The first of these questions is, — What is the character and 
comprehension of the subject to be taught ? The second, — What 
is the mode of teaching it ? In regard to the former of these, the 
question, — What is to be taught, — in the present instance is as- 
suredly not superfluous. The subject of our course is indeed pro- 
fessedly Logic ; but as under that nibric it has been too often the 
practice, in our Scottish Universities, to comprehend almost every 
thing except the .science which that name properly denotes, it is 
evident that the mere intimation of a course of Lectures on Logic 
does not of itself definitely mark out what the professor is to 
teach, and what the student may rely on learning. 

I shall, therefore, proceed to give you a general notion of what 
Logic is, and of the relation in which it stands to the other 
sciences, for Logic, — Logic properly so called, — is the all-import- 
ant science in which it is at once my duty and my desire fully 
and faithfully to instruct you. 

The very general, — I may call it the very vague, — conception 
which I can at present attempt to shadow out of the scope and na- 
ture of Logic, is of course not intended to anticipate what is here- 
after to be articulately stated in regard to the peculiar character 
of this science. 


Digitized by Coogle 


230 


APPENDIX. 


All science, all knowledge, is divided into two great branches ; 
for it is either, 1°, Conversant about Objects Known, or, 2°, Con- 
versant about the Manner of knowing them, in other words, about 
the laws or conditions under which such objects are cognisable. 
The former of these is Direct Science, or Science simply; the 
latter. Reflex Science, — the Science of Science, or the Method of 
Science. 

Now of these categories or great branches of knowledge. Simple 
Science, or Science directly conversant about Objects, is again 
divided into two branches ; for it is either conversant about the 
phsenomena of the internal world, as revealed to us in conscious- 
ness, or about the phsenomena of the external world, as made 
known to us by sense. The former of these constitutes the 
Science of Mind, the latter the Science of Matter ; and each is 
again divided and subdivided into those numerous branches, which 
together make up nearly the whole cycle of human knowledge 

The other category, — the Science of Science, or the Method- 
ology of Science, — falls likewise into two branches, according as the 
conditions which it considers are the laws which determine the 
possibility of the mind, or subject of science, knowing, or the 
laws which determine the possibility of the existence, or ob- 
ject of science, being known ; Science, I repeat, considered as 
reflected upon its own conditions, is twofold, for it either con- 
siders the laws under which the human mind can know, or the 
laws under which what is proposed by the human mind to know, 
can be known. Of these two sciences of science, the former, — 
that which treats of those conditions of knowledge which lie in 
the nature of thought itself, — is Logic, properly so called ; the 
latter, — that which treats of those conditions of knowledge which 
lie in the nature, not of thought itself, but of that which we 
think about, — this has as yet obtained no recognised appellation, 
no name by which it is universally and familiarly known. Vari- 
ous denominations have indeed l)ecn given to it in its several parts 
or in its special relations ; thus it has been called Heuretic, in so 
far as it expounds the rules of Invention or Discovery, Architec- 
tonic, in so far as it treats of the method of building up our ob- 
servations into system ; but hitherto it has obtained, as a whole, 
no adequate and distinctive title. The consequence, or perhaps 
the cause, of this want of a peculiar name to mark out the second 


Digitized I , Google 


APPENDIX. 


231 


science of science, as distinguished from the first, is that the two 
have frequently been mixed up together, and that the name of 
Logic has been stretched so as to comprehend the confused assem- 
blage of their doctrines. Of these two sciences of the conditions 
of knowledge, — the one owes its systematic development prin- 
cipally to Aristotle, the other to Bacon ; though neither of 
these philosophers has precisely marked or rigidly observed the 
limits which separate them from each other ; and from the cir- 
cumstance, that the latter gave to his great Treatise the name of 
Organum, — the name which has in later times been applied to 
designate the complement of the Logical Treatises of the former 
— from this circumstance, I say, it has often been supposed, that 
the aim of Bacon was to build up a Logic of his own upon the 
ruins of the Aristotelic. Nothing, however, can be more errone- 
ous, either as to Bacon’s views, or as to the relation in which the 
two sciences mutually stand. These are not only not inconsistent, 
they are in fact, as correlative, each necessary to, each dependent 
on, the other ; and although they constitute two several doctrines, 
which must be treated in the first instance each by and for itself, 
they are, however, in the last resort only two phases, — two mem- 
bers, of one great doctrine of method, which considers, in the 
counter relations of thought to the object, and of the object to 
thought, the universal conditions by which the possibility of hu- 
man knowledge is regulated and defined. 

But allowing the term Logic to be extended so as to denote the 
genus of which these opposite doctrines of Method are the species, 
it will, however, be necessary to add a difference by which these 
special Logics may be distinguished from each other, and from the 
generic science of which they are the constituents. The doctrine, 
therefore, which expounds the laws by which our scientific pro- 
cedure should be governed, in so far as these lie in the forms of 
thought, or in the conditions of the mind itself, which is the sub- 
ject in which knowledge inheres, — this science may be called For- 
mal, or Subjective, or Abstract, or Pure Logic. The science, again, 
which expounds the laws by which our scientific procedure should 
be governed, in so far as these lie in the contents, materials, or ob- 
jects, about which knowledge is conversant, — this science may be 
called Material, or Objective, or Concrete, or Applied Logic. 

Now it is Logic, taken in its most unexclusive acceptation 


Digitized by Coogle 



232 


APPENDIX. 


which will constitute the object of our consideration in the follow- 
ing course. Of the two branches into which it falls, Formal Logic, 
or Logic Proper, demands the principal share of our attention, and 
this for various reasons. In the first place, considered in reference 
to the quantity of their contents. Formal Logic is a far more com- 
prehensive and complex science than Material. For, to speak first 
of the latter : — if we abstract from the specialities of particular 
objects and sciences, and consider only the rules which ought to 
govern our procedure in reference to the object-matter of the sci- 
ences in genera], — and this is all that a universal Logic can pro- 
pose, — these rules are few in number, and their applications simple 
and evident A Material or Objective Logic, except in special 
subordination to the circumstances of particular sciences, is, there- 
fore, of very narrow limits, and all that it can tell us is soon told_ 
Of the former, on the other hand, the reverse is true. For though 
the highest law’s of thought be few in number, and though Logic 
proj)er be only an articulate exposition of the universal necessity 
of these, still the steps through which this exposition must be ac- 
complished, are both many and multifonn. 

In the second place, the doctrines of Material Logic are not 
only far fewer and simpler than those of Formal Logic, they are 
also less independent ; for the principles of the latter, once estab- 
lished, those of the other are either implicitly confirmed, or the 
foundation laid on which they can be easily rested. 

In the third place, the study of Formal Logic is a more improv- 
ing exercise ; for, as exclusively conversant with the laws of thought, 
it necessitates a turning back of the intellect upon itself, which is 
a less easy, and, therefore, a more invigorating, energy, than the 
mere contemplation of the objects directly presented to our observa- 
tion. 

In the fourth place, the doctrines of Formal Logic are possessed 
of an intrin.sic and necessary evidence, they shine out by their 
native light, and do not require any jiroof or corroboration beyond 
that which con.sciousnc.ss it.self sujjplics. They do not, therefore, 
require, as a preliminary condition, any apparatus of acquired 
knowledge. Formal Logic is, therefore, better fitted than Material, 
for the purposes of academical instniction ; for the latter, primarily 
conver-sant with the conditions of the external world, is in itself a 
less invigorating exercise, as determining the mind to a feebler and 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


233 


more ordinary exertion, and, at the same time, cannot adequately 
be understood without the previous po.ssession of such a comple- 
ment of information, as it would be unreasonable to count upon in 
the case of those who are only commencing their philosophical 
studies. 


IL 

GENUS OF LOGIC. 

(See above, VoL I., p. 9.) 

I. — SCIENCE. 

A. Affirmative. 

Stoici, (v. Alexander Aphrod. In Topica, Prooem. ; Diogenes 
Laertius, Vita Zenonis, L. viL, § 42). “Plato et Platonic! et 
Academici omnes,” (v. Camerarius, Selectee Dxsput. Philos. Pars. 
L, qu, 3, p. 30). 


(a)— SPECULATIVE SCTENCE. 

Toletus, In Un. Ai'ist. Log., De Dial, in Communi, Qu. ii., iv. 
Suarez, Disj). Metaph., Disp. L § iv. 26 ; Disp. xliv. § xiii. 54. 
“Communiter Thomistas, ut Capreolus, Sotus, Masiu.s, Flandra, 
Soncinas, Javellus : Omnes fere Scotistm cum Scoto, ut Valera, 
Antonius Andreas, &c.” (v. Ildephonsus de Penafiel, Logica; Dis- 
putationes, Disp. i. qu. 4. Curaus, p. 79.) For Aquinas, Durandus, 
Niphus, Canariensis, see Antonius Ruvio, Com. in Arist. Dialect., 
Prooem. qu. 5. For Bacchonus, JaveUus, Averroes, see Conimbri- 
censes, In A i-ist. Dial. Prooem. Q. iv. art 5. Lalemandet, Cur- 
sua Phil., Logica, Disp. iii. part iii. Derodon, Logica Restit., De 
Genere, p. 45. Camerarius, Disp. Phil., Pars i., qu. 3, 4. (That Lo- 
gica docens a true science). For Pseudo- Augustinus, Avicenna, 
Alpharabius, see Clonimbricenses, Cojn. in Arist. Dial Prooem. Qu. 
iv. art. 3. For Boethius, Mercado, Vera Cruce, Montanesius, see 
Masius, Com. in Porph. et in Universam Aristotelis Logicam, 
Sect i., Prooem. qu. v. et seq. Poncius, De Nat. Log., Disp. ii., 
concl. 2. For Rapinmus, Petronius, Faber, see Camerarius, Sel. 
Disp. Phil, Pars i., qu. 4, p. 44. 


Digitized by Goo gle 


234 


APPENDIX. 


(6) — PRACTICAL SCIENCE. 

Conimbricense.s, In Universam Aristotelia Dialecticam 
Prooem. Qu. iv., art 5. Fonseca, In MetapL L. iL c. 3, qu. 
1, § 7. For Venetus, Albcrtus Magnus, Jandunus, see Ruvio, 
1. c. Schuler, Pkilosophta nova Methodo Explicata. Pars Prior, 
L. V. ex. i., p. 306. (1603). D’Abra de Raconis, Summa Totius 
PhiloBophice, Log. Prcel., c. i. Isendoom, Cursus Logicus, L. 
i., c. 2, qu. 7. Biel, In Sentent, L. ii. Prol. Occam, Summa 
Totius Logicw, D. xxxix. qu. 6. For Aurcolus, Bern. Mirandulanus 
see Conimbricenses, 1. c. For Mathisiu.s, Murcia, Vasquez, Eckius, 
see Canierariu.s, Set. Disp. Phil. Pars. L, qa 4, p. 44. Ildephon- 
sus do PenaRel, Log. Lisp. D. i. qu. 4, sect. 2. Oviedo, Cursus 
Philosophicus, Log., Contr. Prooem. il 5. Arriaga, Cursus Philo- 
sophiais, Di.sp. iiL § 4. 


(c) — SPECULATIVE AND PRACTICAL. 

Hurtado de Mendoza, Log. Disp. D. ii. § 2. 

B. Negative. 

For almost all the Greek commentators, see Zabarclla, Opera 
Logica, De Kat. Log., L. L c. 5, and Sniiglecius, Logica, D. ii qu. 5. 
See abo Rdephonsus de Penafiel, Disp. Log. D. i. qu. 1, § 1, p. 67. 


II. — ART. 


Scheibler, Opera Logica, Pars. i. c. 1, p. 49. J. C. Scaliger, 
Exercitationes, Exerc. i. 3. G. J. Vossius, De Natura Artium, 
L. iv., a 2, § 4. Balforeus, In Org. Q. v. § 6, Prooem., p. 31. 
Burgersdicius, Institutiones Logicw. Lib. i c. 1. Pacius, Comm, 
in Org. p. 1. Sanderson, Log. Artis Compendium, L. i. c. 1, p. 1, 
Of. p. 192. Aldrich, Artis Log. Compendium. L L c. 1, p. 1. 
Hildenius, Quwstiones et Commentaria in Organon, p. 579 (1585.) 
Goclenius, Prohlemata Logica et Philosophica. Pars, i qu. 3. 
Ramus, Dialectica. L. L c. 1. Augustinus, De Ordine, iL c. 15. 
Cicero, De Claris Oratordms, c. 41. De Oratore, L. ii., c. 38. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


235 


Lovanienscs, Qo/m. in Arist. Dial. Prasf. p. 3. Rodolphus Afpicola, 
De Dialecticm Inventione, L. iL p. 255. Monlorius, (Bapt.), 
Comm, in Anal. Pr. Prsef. Nunnesius, De Constiiut. Dial, p. 43. 
Downam, (Ramist), Comm, in Ram. Dial., L. i. c. 1, p. 3. Paraeus, 
Ars Logica, p. 1, 1670. For Horatius Coruachinus, Ant. Bemardus 
Mirandulanus, Flamminius Nobilius, see Camerarius, Sel. Disp. 
Phil. Pars. L q. 3, p. 30. 


m— SCIENCE AND AKT. 

Lalemandet, Log., Disp. iii. Part iii. el. 4. (Logica ulens, an 
art ; Logica docens, a speculative science.) Tartaretus, In P. 
Hispanum, f. 2, (Practical Science and Art.) P. Hispanus, Copu- 
lata Omn. Tractat. Pet. Hisp. Parv. Logical. T. i. f. 10, 1490. 
Philosophia Vetue et Nova in Regia Burgundia olim Pertractata, 
Logica, T. I., pp. 58, 59. 4th ed. London, 1685. Tosca, Comp. 
Phil. Log., Tr. i. 1. iv. c. 4, p. 208, (Practical Science and Art). 
Purchot, Instit. Phil., T. I. Prooem. p. 36. Eugenius, Aoyuct), pp. 
140, 141. Dupleix, Lojri'^ue, p. 37. Facdolati, RiidimentaLogicce, 
p. 5. Schmier, Philosophia Quadripartita, (v. Hcumannus, Acta 
Philosoph., iiL p. 67.) Aquinas (in Caramuel, Phil. Realis et 
Rationalis, Disp. ii. p. 3). 

IV. — NEITHER SCIENCE NOR ART, BUT INSTRUMENT, ORGAN, OR 
HABIT, OR INSTRUMENTAL DISCIPLINE. 

Philoponus, In An. Prior., initio. For Animonius, (Prcef. in 
Prced), Alexander, (In Topica, i. c. 4 ; Metaph. ii. t. 1 5). 
Simplicius, (Prcef. in Prced.), Zabarella, (De Natura Logicce, L. 
i. c. 10.), Ziinara, (In Tabula v. Ahsurdum.), Averroes, see 
Smiglecius, Logica, Disp. ii. qu. 6, p. 89. Aegidius, In A n. Post. 
L. i qu. 1. For Maguesius, Niger (Petrus), Villalpandeus, see 
Ruvio, In Arist Dial., prooem. qu. 2. F. Crellius, I sagoge Lo- 
gica, L. i c. 1. p. 5. P. Vallius, Logica, T. I. prooem. c. L et alibi. 
Bartholinus, Janitores Logici, II. pp. 25 and 76. Bertius, Logica 
Peripatetica, pp. 6, 10. Themistius, An. Post. i. c. 24. Aquinas, 
Opuscula, 70, qu. De Divisione Sciential Speculativce, — sod alibi 
scientiam vocat. (See Conimbricenses, In Arist Dial, T. I. qu. 


Digitized by Coogle 


236 


APPENDIX. 


iv. art. 5, p. 42). Balduinus, In Qua’sito an Logica sit Scientia. 
Scaynus, Paraphrasis in Organon. PraC p. 9. 


V. — THAT, LOOSELY TAKING THE TER.MS, LOGIC IS EITHER ART, 
OR SCIENCE, OR BOTH. 

Zabarclla, Opera Logica, De Nat. Log., Lie. viii. D’Abra 
de Roconis, Sunima Tot. Phil. Pnel. Log., L. iii, c. 1, p. 8, od. 
Colon., (Practical Science). Balforeiis, In Organon, Q. v. §§ 1,6, 
pp. 20, 32. (Art). Derodon, Logica Restit. De Procem. Log., 

?. 49, (Speculative Science). Crclliu.s, Isagoge, pp. 1, 4. Bertius, 
Logica Peripatetica, pp. 11, 13. Aldrich, Art. Log. Comp.., L. ii. 

?. 8, T. i. (Art). Sanderson, Log. Art. Comp. Append. Pr., c. 2, 

?. 192. (Art). Conimbricen.ses, In Arid. Dial.,T. I., p. 33. (Practi- 
cal Science). Philosophia Jiurgundia, T. I. pp. ,56, 59. Eu.stachius, 
Summa Philosophia', Dialectica, Qwest. Prorem., i. p. 4. Nuii- 
nc.sius, De Constit. Dial., If. 43, 68. Scheibler, Opera Logica, 
pp. 48, 49. Scaynus, Par. in Org., pp. 11, 12. Caincrarius, Sel. 
Ditp. Phil., Par.s. i. qu. 3, pp. 31 , 38 (Speculative Science). B. 
Pereira, De Commun. Princip. Omn. Rer. Natural., L. i. De Phil. 

?. 18, p. 60, 1618. 

VI. — THAT AT ONCE SCIENCE (PART OF PHILOSOPHY) AND 
INSTRUMENT OF PHILOSOPHY. 

Boethius, Pru-/. in Porphyr. (a Victorino Tran.sl.) Opera, p. 48. 
Eustachius, Summa Philosophiw, p. 8, (Scientia organica et prac- 
tica.) For Simplicius, Alexander, Philoponus, &c., see Camerarius, 
Sel. Disp. Phil., p. 30. Pacius, Com. in Arist. Org., p. 4. 


VII. — THAT QUESTION, WHETHER LOGIC PART OF PHILOSOPHY 
OR NOT, AN IDLE QUESTION. 

Pacius, Com. in Arist. Org., p. 4. Avicenna, (in Conimbri- 
censes. In Arist. Dial, Qu. iv. art. 4, T. I. p. 38.) 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


237 


vnr. — THAT QUESTION OF WHETHER ART, SCIENCE, &C., IDLE 
— ONLY VEIUUL. 

Buffior, Cours des Sciences, Seconds Logique, § 4'21, p. 887. 

Eugenius, *H AoycKrj, p. 140, has the following : — 

“ From what has been said, therefore, it clearly appears of what 
character are the diversities of Logic, and what its nature. For 
one logic is Natural, another Acquired. And of the Natural, 
there is one sort according to Faculty, another according to Dis- 
position. And of the Acquired, there is again a kind according to 
Art, and a kind according to Science. And the Native Logic, 
according to Faculty, is the rational faculty itself with which every 
human individual is endowed, through which all are qualified for 
the knowledge and discrimination of truth, and which, in propor- 
tion as a man employs the less, the less is he removed from irra- 
tionality. But the Native Logic, according to DisfHJsition, is the 
same faculty by which some, when they reason, are wont to exert 
their cogitations with care and attention, confusedly, indeed, and 
imcritically, stiU, however, in pursuit of the truth. The Acquired, 
according to Art, is the correct and corrected knowledge of the 
Rules, through which the intellectual energies are, without fault 
or failure, accomplished. But the Acquired, according to Science, 
is the exact and perfect knowledge both of the energies themselves, 
and also of the causes through which, and through which exclu- 
sively, they are capable of being directed towards the truth.” 


( Native, according to j 
Logic. < 

( Acquired, acconling to | 

“ And thus Disposition adds to Faculty consuetude and a 
promptness to energise. Art, again, adds to Disposition a refine- 
ment and accuracy of Energy. Finally, Science adds to Art the 
consciousness of cause, and the power of rendering a reason in the 


Digitized by Google 



238 


APPENDIX. 


case of all the Rule.s. And the natural logician may bo able, in his 
random reason, to apprehend that, so to speak, one thing has de- 
termined another, although the nature of this determination may 
be beyond his ken. But he whose disposition is exercised by re- 
flection and imitation, being able easily to connect thought with 
thought, is cognisant of the several steps of the reasoning process, 
howbeit this otherwise may be confused and disjointed. But he 
who is disciplined in the art, knows exactly that, in an act of infer- 
ence, there arc required three terms, and that these also should be 
thus or thus connected. Finally, the scientific logician under- 
stands the reason, — why three terms enter into every syllogism, — 
why there are neither more nor fewer, — and why they behove to 
be combined in this, and in no other fashion. 

“ Wherefore to us the inquiry appears ridiculous, which is fre- 
quently, even to nausea, clamorously agitated concerning Logic — 
Whether it should be regarded as an Art or as a Science." 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


239 


III. 

DIVISIONS, VAKIETIES, AND CONTENTS OF 
LOGIC. 

(See above, Vol, 1., p. 68.) 

V. Timpler, Logica Sydema, L. i. c. 
L qua*st 2, 3, Isendoorn, 
Centuria, i. Eff. 55. Crelliua, 
hagofjf^ Pars Prior, L. L c. i p. 12. 
Noliliiw, Logica HttfogHitOy Proujui. 
p. 13. 

Philoponus, In, An. Pr., f. 4. Al- 
stediua, Encydopadia^ pp. 29 and 
406. T. Aristotle, J/e/apA, L. vii. 
text, 23. 


I. Looica,/ 


^ DocenK, 

Xwplr Tpcfypdroty^ 

Ctcns, 

yvp¥Offl^ 

irpayfAdrw^, 


( Doctrinalifl ) [Objec- J v. Timpler, Syd. Log,, Appendix, j». 
II. Looica, < Syntematica j tiva], > 877. N oldiiw, Z»or/. Proa*m,, 

/ Habituxdis,[Subjectiva], 1 P- 13* 


( Pars Communis, Gone- 
ralw. 

Pars Propria, Speciali.4, 


r adopted in different significations by 
I Timpler, Syd. Log.^ q. 19, p. 55. 

I * The<iph. Gale, Logira^ pp. 6, 246, 

ft »eq. (1681.) CreUins. Jtiagoge., P. 
L L. 1. c. 1, p. 3. Alstedius, AVicy- 
doffi,, pp. 29 and 406. 


IV, Looica, 


Pura, 
Applies ta, 


N.B. — Averroos, (Paciua, Com. p.2). 
has Logica appropriata seu ]>articula- 
ris,and I^Ogica coramuniss=UniveT«al, 
Abstract Logic. 


V. Looica, 


Abstracta, 

Concrcta. 


VI. IxKliCA, 


Pars Communis, 

i Apodictica, 
Dialectica, 
Sophistica, 


V. Timpler, Byd. Log., p. 42. Iticn- 
doom, Kfata, Cent. L Etf. 56. 


i 


Digitiz^Dy Google 



240 


APPENDIX. 


E,bp9TtK-fl vel TOWtlC^f 
Invcntio. 

VII. Locjica, / KptriK^. 

I Judicioni. 

I Dii}(>oeitio. 


^v, Timpler, Zojr.jp. 44. CrcUiiiii, 
Iftagogc, pjx 10, 1 1 , and Isendoom, 
Cent. i. Eff., 61. Adopted 
by Agricola, Dt Jnv. Dial., L. i. 
p. IV>. Melanchthon, Krot, Dial., 
p. 10. Ramus, Schol. Dialect., L. 
L c. i, and L. ii. c. L p. 361 H 
aeq. SjHinccr, Log., j). 11. Dow* 
nam. In Rami Dial., L. i. c. 2, )). 
14. Perionius, De Dialfctica, L. i. 
j). 6,(1544). \oH»hi&,DeKat. Arti- 
mn<five Logica, L. iv. c. ix. p. 217. 


i Pars de Proixisitio. ) 

> V, Timplcr, Syjfi. Log., p. 40. 
Pars dc Judicio. ) 


IX. Looica, 


Doctrina Dividcndi 
Doctrina DeOniendi 
' Doctrina Argumcntaudi. 


X. Looica,/ 


V, Timpler, Sygt. Log. p. 61. Isou- 
doom, Kffata, Cent L Eff., 67. 
Boethius, (Augustin, Fonseca, &c.) 


Simplicis Apprebensi* 
onis. 

Judicii. 

Ratiocinationis. 

Ko^tica, {melitu Noema- 
Synthetica. tica.) 

Dianoetica. 


V. Timpler, Syd. Log., 62. Isen* 
doom, Effata, Cent. i. Eff., 68. 
^Iscndoom, Ourtms Logicuft, p. 31, and 
Effala, Cent. i. § 69. Koldius, Log. 
Rec., p. 9. Aquinas. 


J 


XI. Logica, 


(i 


Ideas (notions). | L'Ari de Peio*cr, Part i. CIotcus, 

2. Judgment. \ Logica, adopts this division, but 

3. Reasoning. [ makes Method third. Reasoning 

4. Method. I fourth. 


( 1. Doctrineof Elements. \ 

XII. Logica, < > Kant, Logik; Krog, Logik. 

( 2. Doctrine of MethocL ) 

1st, Calleil Analytic by Metz, IndU. Log. Twesten, Die Logik, 
iiutbcsomlrre die Analytik, p. lii. Esscr, Logik. Part i 
2d, Called Systematic or Architectonic by Bachmann, Logik, 
Part ii. 

Called Synthetic by Esscr (who includee tmder it also Applie<l 
Logic), Logik, Part ii 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


241 


XIII. LooiCiC 
partes, 


Thematica — de material 

operatioai Logics I Mark Duncan, huttihUioneg Logictr, 
Bubjocta, > Proleg. c. iii. § 2, p. 22. Burgersdi- 

Organica — de instru- I cius, Imtit. Lofj,^ L. i. c. i p. 5. 
mentis sciendi. I 


Communis, 

Generalis 


XrV. Looica,( 


Specialis. 


Genetica. 


Analytica. 


'1. De onlinibus rerum gcneralibus 
et attributis commimissimis. 

2. Do Vocibus ct Oratione. 

3. De Ideis simplicibus et appre* 

hensioue stmplici dirigenda. 

4. De Judicio et Propositione. 

5. De DiscursiL 

6. De Dispositione sen Methodo. 


I Genesis stricta. 

I Genesis didactica. 


I Genesis 
sen 

Invontio 

, , . ( Hermeneutica. 

I An ysis j Analytica and Critica. 

I In ordine ad mentem — Logica 
stricte dicta. 

In ordine ad alios-> Interpretativa 
vcl ITcrmcncutica genetica. 

( Hermeneutica analytica. 

Analytica stricta vel in specie. ^ 


Theophilus 
Gale {Lofjica^ 
1681), follows, 
(besides Kec- 
kermann and 
Burgcrwlyk), 
principally 
Claul>erg and 
VAri dt Pen- 
«er of Port 
Royal. 


XV. IX)OICA, 


Theoretica pars. \ 

Practica para— (this in- [ -Wolf, PhUc. Rationalu, Pan. u 
eluding the Metho.1- / 
ology and Applied I 
Logic of Kant.) J 


( On Adrastean order, 4c. of the books of the Organon, ride 
XVI. < Ramus, Schola Dial., L ii, c. 8., p. 354. Piccartus, In 

( Organum, Prolegomena, p. 1 et eeq. 


XVI.* L 001 C.C 
partes. 


1. n.pl rfli npeierrti lyrolas, or-^ 

wpoKliy^tus. 

2. n.pl 

3. n.pl Kpiatut. 

4. n.pl tuueotas. 

5. n.pl fie069ov. 


Eugenius Diaconua, Aoyiitit, 
p. 144. 


VOL. II. 


Q 


Digitized by Google 



242 


APPENDIX. 


XVII. Logica, 


X'VIII. Logica, 


XIX. Logica, 


XX. Logica, 


XXL Logica, 


XXII. Logica, 


XXIII. Logica 
dc 


XXIV. Logic.® 
jartes de 


1. Emendatricc. 

2. luventrico. 

3. Giudicatrice. 

4. Kagionatrico. 

5. Ordiuatrice. 


\ Genovesi A divwion different in some 
resjiects 18 given in tiin Latin Logic, 
Proleg. § 61, i>. 22. Tlie fourth 
j»art of the diviiiion in the Latin 
Logic is omitted in the Italian, 
or rather reduced to the second, 
and the fifth divided into two. 


VetuH, 1 

1 Poi'pki/rii Inatf. 

. Prnrtl. . . . 

1 IiiftrjtrH. . . 

1 Isendoom, Eff(Ua, Ocnt.i. Eff. 
f 52. 

ixova, 

fAtmlgt.Pr. , , 
1 Annigt. Pod . . 
1 'J’op 

[ Elench. . . . 

1 Keawin of termn. Facias, Cam- 
1 iiieiit. in Ory., In Porph. Isag. 

j P- 3. 


2Tox«*oAff7oc^. 

( Apodictica. 
2uAA<ryi<m(c^. J Topica. 

Sophistica. 


Isendoom, Kfata, Cent. i. 
Eff. 6G. (From John Ho»- 
pinion, De ConiroversiU 
Dioledicis.) 




7,vXX<rfiffTiK^. 


Analj^ica 

Dialectica 


{ 

{ 


Prior. ] 
Posterior. 
Topiea. 
So]>histica. 


VosHius, De Natura 
A riium give dt Lo~ 
I ^ica, L. iv, c. ix. p. 
220 . 


Analytica 


Dialectica 


( jjrodixmius de Intcri»retatione. 

< universe de SyUogismo, 

V. sjteciatim de Domon.stratione. 

/ prodromus de Categoriis. 

/ de Syll. verisimili. 

( de Syll. sophistico sive pirastico. 


Vosaiiis, De 
NiUnra Ar- 
tium^ p. 220. 


\ Dialectica. 
j Analytica. 


\ Aristotle, in lAertius v. Vossius, De 
> Nat. A rt. give De ZogFtVo, L. iv. c. ix. 
) §11, p. 219. 


Rebus (jua? significantur. I 
Vocibua <iua.‘ significant. . 


Stoicorum, see Vossius, De Nat. A rL 
give De Logica, L. iv. c. ix. § 7, 

p.218. 


I Loquendo. | 

Elocjuendo, i Varro, vide Vossins, De. Nat. Art., 

j Proloipiendo. | L. iv, c. ix. g 8, p. 219. 

I Probxjuionim sumina. I 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


243 


{ Tlpbt tSptffty. 
tlphs KpifflK 
n^Jj xpn<'‘<'- 


^ Aristotle (!) in Loertiim, L. v. 
> § 28, p. 284. Alcx.%ti(ler AphnxL 
) in nota Alilohramlini. 


LoKica, 


NoT|TlK^|, Ap])rchensiva. 
KpifTtfiot vel Kpiriictt, 
Judicativa. 

AiaXfirriirti, Atgumcnta- 
tiva. 


Coramuel Ix)l>kowitz, liationtiliH 
H Hfftliti L(M/ira 

sell Phil. Rat. Disp. ii. p. 3. 


Logical 

IHUtCK, 


/ Dirisio. \ 

/ Detinitio. > v. C'rellius, Imijaje, Pare, prior, c. L p. 1 0. 
( Argiunentatio. ) 


( A]KxUctica. 
Logics ) Uialectica. 
1*“"^ ( Sophistica. 

Logics ( Analytica. 

partes, ( Topica. 


I V. Crellius, Imiingr, Pars, prior, c. L p. 10. 
I Isendoom, Effata., Cent. L Eff. 54. 

I CrcUius, Im^joge, Pare, prior, c. i. p. 10. 


Stoicheiology (pure) should contain the doctrine of Syllogism, 
without distinction of Deduction or Induction. Deduction, Induc- 
tion, Definition, Division, from the laws of thought, should come 
under pure Methodology. All are processes, (v. Cmsalpinus, 
QtKe.it Perip. stib init) 

Perhaps, 1“ Formal Logic, (from the laws of thought proper), 
should be distinguished from, 2°, Abstract Logic, (material, but of 
abstract general matter) ; and then, .T, A P.sychological Logic might 
be added as a third part, considering how Reasoning, &c., is affected 
by the constitution of our mind.s. Applied Logic is properly the 
several sciences. 

Or may not Induction and Deduction come under abstract 
Material Logic? 


Digitized by Coogle 



2U 


APPENDIX. 


IV. 

LAWS OF THOUGHT. 
(See Vol. L, p. 84.) 



Tlie laws of Identity and Contradiction, each infers the other, 
but only through the principle of Excluded Middle ; and the prin- 
ciple of Kxcluded Middle only exists through the supposition of 
the two others. Thus, the principles of Identity and Contradiction 
cannot move, — cannot be applied, except through supposing the 
principle of Excluded Middle ; and this last eannot be conceived 
existent, except through the supposition of the two former. They 
are thus co-ordinate but inseparable. Begin with any one, the 
other two follow as corollaries. 

(a) — P rbiary Laws of Thought,— in general. 

See the following authors on : — Dreier, Disput. ad Philoso- 
phitim Pnmam, Disp. v. Aristotle, Anali/t. Post. i. c. 11, ^ 2, 
3, 4, 5, C, 7. Schramm, Philosophia Aristoteiica, p. 3G. Lippius, 
Metapyhsica Magna, L. i. c. L, p. 71 et seq. Stahl, Regulw Philo- 
sophical, Tit. i., reg. i. p. 2 et seq., reg. ii., p. 8 et seq.. Tit. xLx. 
reg. viii., p. 520 et seq. Chauvin, Lexicon Philosophicum, v. 
Metaphysica. Bisterfeld, evolves all out of ens, — ens est. See 
Philosophia Prima, c. ii. p. 24 et seq. Bobrik, System der Logxk, 
§ 70, p. 247 et seq. 

Laws of Thought are of two kinds : — 1°. The laws of the Think- 
able, — Identity, Contradiction, &c. 2°. The laws of Thinking in 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


24.1 


a strict sense — viz. laws of Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning. 
See Scheidler, Psychologic, p. 15, ed. 1833. 

That they belong to Logic : — Ramus Schol. Dial., L. Lx, p. 549. 

Is Affirmation or Negation prior in order of thought ? and thus 
on order and mutual relation of the Laws among themselves, as 
co-ordinate or derived ; (see separate Laws). Fracastorius, Opera, 
De Intellectione, L. L f. 1 25 b., makes negation an act prior to 
affirmation ; therefore principle of Contradiction prior to principle 
of Identity. — Esser, Logik, § 28, p. 57- Sigwart, Handhuch zu 
Vorlesungen iiher die Logik, § 38 et seq. Piccolomineus, De 
Mente Humana, L. iii., c. 4. p. 1301, on question^ — Is affirmative or 
negative prior? Schulz, Pn/y.rfcr Kant. Krit. der reinen Vemunft, 

1. p. 78., 2d ed. Weiss, Lehrbuch der Logik, § 81 rt seq. pp. 
61, 62, 1805. Ca.stillon, Memoires de V Academic de Berlin 
(1803) p. 8, (Contradiction and Identity co-ordinate). A. Andreas, 
Ln Arist. Metaph. iv. Qu. 5, p. 21. (Affirmative prior to nega- 
tive.) Leibnitz, (Euvres Philosophiqttes, Nouv. Essais, L. iv. ch. 

2, § 1, p. 327, ed. Raspe. (Identity prior to Contradiction.) Wolf, 
Ontologia, §§55,288 — (Contradiction 6rst, Identitysecond). Dero- 
don, Metaphysica, c. iii., p. 75 seq. 1669. (Contradiction 6rst, 
Excluded Middle .second. Identity third). Fonseca, In Metaph., 
I. 849. Biunde, Psychologic, Vol. I., part ii. § 151, p. 159. (That 
principle of Contradiction, and principle of Reason and Consequent 
not identical, as Wolf and Reimanis hold.) Nic. Taurellus, Philo- 
sophicc Triumphus, &c., p. 124. Arnheim, 1617. ‘‘Cum simplex 
aliqua sit affirmatio, negatio non item, hanc Ulam sequi concludi- 
mus,” &c. Chauvin, Lexicon Philosophicum, v. Metaphysica. 

By whom introduced into Logic: — Eberstein, {jjher die Bes- 
chaffenheit der Logik und Metaphysik der reinen Peripatetiker, 
p. 21, Halle, 1800), says that Darjes, in 1737, was the first to in- 
troduce Principle of Contradiction into Logic. That Buffier, and 
not Reimarus, first introduced principle of Identity into Logic, 
see Bobrik, Logik, § 70, p. 249. 

(6) — Pkimaby Laws of Thought, — in particular. 

1. Principle of Identity. “ Omne ens est ens.” Held good by An- 


Digitized by Google 



246 


APPENDIX. 


tonius Andreas, In Metaph. iv., qu. 5. (apud Fonsecam, In Metaph. 
I. p. 849 ; melius apud Suarez, Select. Disp. Metaph. Disp. iii. 
sect. iii. n. 4.) Derodon, Metaphysica, c. iii., p. 77. J. Sergeant, 
Method to Science, p. 133—136 and after. (Splits it absurdly.) 
Boethius — “ Nulla propositio est verier ilia in qua idem pra?dicatur 
dc seipso.” (Versor, In P. Hinpani Suimmda.’i Logicales, Tr. 
vii., p. 411 (1st cd. 1487) ; et Buridanus, In Sophism) “Pro- 
positione.s illas oportet esse notissimas per se in quibus idem de se 
ipso pnedicatur, ut ‘ Homo est homo,’ vel quarum prajdicata in 
definitionibus subjectarum includuntur, ut ‘Homo est animal.’” 
Aquinas, Contra Gentiles, L. i. c. 1 0. Opera T. XVIII. p. 7, Venet. 
1786. Prior to princiide of Contradiction — Leibnitz, Nouveaux 
Essais, p. 377. Biiffier, Principes du Raisonnement, II. art 21, p. 
204. Rejected as identical and nugatory by Fonseca, loc. cit. 
Suarez, loc. cit. Wolf, Ontologia, §§ 55, 288, calls it Principium 
Certitudinis, and derives it from Principium Contradictionis. 

2. Principle of Contradiction — a^lotpa Trj^ atrn<f>d.(r€w^. 

Aristotle, Metaph., L. iii. 3 ; x 5. (Fonseca, In Metaph. T. I., p. 
850, L. iv. (iii.) c. 3.) Anal. Post. L. i. c. 1 1 c. 2, § 13. (On Aristotle 
and Plato, see Hansel’s Prolegomena., pp. 283, 284.) Stahl, Re- 
gul<B PhilosophiccB, Tit. i. reg. i. Suarez, Select Disp. Phil., Disp. 
iii. § 3. Timplcr, Metaph. L. i., c, 8 qu. 14. Derodon, Meta- 
phy.nca, p. 75 etc. Lippius, Metaphysica, L. i. c. i., p. 73. Ber- 
nard!, Thcs. Ai-istot, vv. Principium, Contradictio. Leibnitz, 
Oeuvres Philosophiqties, Now. Ess., L. iv. c. 2. Ramus, “ Axioma 
Contradictionis,” Scholce Dial. L, ix c. i., L. iv. c. 2, § 1, p. 548. 
Gul. Xylander, Institutiones Aphoi-istico! Logices Aristot, p. 24, 
(1 577), “ Principium principiorum, hoc est, lex Contradictionis.” 
Philoponus, d^uopa ttjs dirn<j>da-eo)<;, v. In Post. An. f. 30 b. et 
seq. Ammonius, d^ioipa Tiqs ai^K^acrews, In Dc Interpret, f. 
94, Aid. 1503 ; but principium Exclusi Medii, Scheibler, Topica, c. 
1 9. On Definition of Contradictories, v. Scheibler, Ihid. On Two 
Principles of Contradiction, — Negative and Positive, v. Zabarella, 
Opera Logica, In An. Post. i. t. 83, p. 807. 

Conditions of — Aristotle, Metaph., L. iv., c. 6. Bernard!, The- 
saurus Arist, V. Contrad., p. 300. 

Proof attempted by — Clauberg, Ontosophia, § 26, (Degerando, 
Ilistoire de Philosophie, T. II. p. 57), through Excluded Middle. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


247 


3. Principle of Excluded Middle — a^Ctofia BuupeTiKou. 

“ ’A^itofia BuLiperiKov, divisivum, dicitur a Gnscia principium 
contvadictioms affirmatimm ; ‘Oportet de omni re affirmare aut 
negare, Gocleiiius, Zej'fcon PAiZoso^j/ttcHTn. Lat. p. 136. Zaba- 
rella, In. An. Post., L. L, text 8.3, Opera Logica, p. 807. Con- 
imbricenses, In Org., II., 12.>. Lucian, Opera, II. p. 44, (ed. 
Hemsterhuis). Ari.stotlc, Metaph., L. iv. (iii.) c. 7 ; An. Post., L. i. 
2; iL 13, (^Ian.sel’s Prohgomena, p. 283). Joannes PhUoponus, 
(v. Bemardi, Tkes. v. Contrad., p. 300). Piccartus, Isagoge, pp. 290, 
291. Javellu.s, In. Metaph., L. iv. qu. 9. Suarez, Disp. Mdaph., 
Disp. iii., .sect. 3, § a. Stahl, RegnUe Philos., Tit. i. reg. 2. Wolf, 
Ontologia, §§ 27, 29, .56, 71, 498. Fon.scca, In. Metaph., L. iv. 
c. iii. qu. 1. seq., T. I. p. 850. (This principle not first). Tini- 
pler, Metaphysica, L. ii. c. 8, qu. 15. Derodon, Metaph., p. 76 
(Secundum principiura). Lippius, Metaphysica, L. i. c. i., pp. 72, 
75. Chauvin, Lexicon Philosophicum, v. Metaphysica. Scheibler, 
Topica, c. 19. Hurtado de Mendoza, Disp. Metaph., Disp. iii., § 3, 
(Caramuel, Rat. et Real. Phil., § 452, p. 68). 


Whether identical with Principle of Contradiction. 
Affirmative, — 

Javellus, 1. c. Mendoza, Di.<<p. Metaph., D. iii. § 3. Leibnitz, 
Oeuvres Philosophiqnes, Nonv. Ess., L. iv. c. 2, p. 327. 

Negative, — 

Fonseca, Disp. Met. Disp. iv. c. 3, 9. Suarez, Disp. Metaph., 
Disp. iii. § 3. Stahl, Reg. Phil. Tit i. reg. 2. 


Whether a valid and legitimate Law”. 

Fischer, Logik, § 64 et seq. (Negative). — Made first of all prin- 
ciples by Alexander de Ales, Metaph., xiv. text 9 : “ Conceptus 
omnes simplices, ut resolvuntur ad ens, ita omnes conceptus com- 
positi resolvuntur ad hoc principium — De quolibet affirmatio vel 
negatio.” J. Picus Mirandulanus, (after Aristotle), Conclusiones, 
Opera, p. 90. Philoponus, In An Post. L f. 9 b, (Brandis, 
Scholia, p. 199.) To S’ aTtav <f>dvat, 17 airoefnii^ai, 17 to 


Digitized by Google 



248 


APPENDIX. 


dSvvaTov airoSei^iS Xa/i)Sap£i. Ari.stotle, Aji. Post. i. c. 11. § 3. 
’ApTic^acris 8e dvri^etris '^S ovk eort fiera^ Kaff avrqv. 
An. Post. i. c. 2, § 13. Merafu dvTi<f>d(reai^ ovk ^S^crai 
ov64v. Metaph. L. iii. c. 7. ’Ettci dvri.<j>dcreat<; ovSh^ dvd 
pecrov, <j>avepov otl iv roig evapriot^ ecrraL to pera^. 
Physica, L. v. c. 3, § 5. See also Post. An. L. L c. i. § 4, p. 414 ; 
c. 2, § 1.3, p. 417; c. 11. § 3, p. 440, (vide Scheibler, Topica, 
c. 1 9 ; and Mansel’s Prolegomena, p. 283, on Aristotle.) 

4. Principle of Reason and Consequent. 

That can be deduced from Principle of Contradiction. 

Wolf, Ontologia, § 70. Baumgarten, Metaphysik, § 18. 

Jakob, Grundriss der allgemeinen Logik und Kritische Ang- 
fnngsgrilnde der allgemeinen Metaphysik, p. 38, 3d ed., 1794. 
(See Kiesewetter, 1. c.) 

That not to be deduced from Principle of Contradiction. 
Kiesewetter, A llgemeine Logik ; W eitere A useinandersetzung, 
P. I. ad §§ 20, 21, p. 57 et seq. Hume, On Human Nature, Book 
i. part. iii. § 8. Schulze, Logik, § 18, 5th ed., 1831. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


249 


V. 

NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS— GENERAL 
RESULTS— FRAGMENTS. 

(rt) Extract from Prospectus of “ Essay towards a New 
Analytic of Logical Forms.” 

(First published in 1846.“ See above, Vol. L, pp. 144, 244. — Ed.) 


** Now, teltal hat tkt tourrt of ait these evUtf I proceed to relaU, and thall clearly 
eonvihce tkoa-e echo liO-ce an intelUci and a vfili to attend, — that a trivial slip in the ele- 
mentary precepts of a Logical Theory, becomes tlte cause of mightiest errors i>i that Theory 
iUelf ." — Galen. {De Temperamentis, !. i. c. 5.) 


“ This New Analytic is intended to complete and simplify the 
old ; — to place the key.stone in the Ari.stotelic arch. Of Abstract 
Logic, the theory, in particular of Syllogism, (bating some improve- 
ments, and some errors of detail), remains where it was left by the 
genius of the Stagirite ; if it have not receded, still less has it ad- 
vanced. It contains the truth ; but the truth, partially, and not 
always correctly, developed, — in complexity,— even in confusion. 
And why ? Because Aristotle, by an oversight, marvellous certainly 
in him, was prematurely arrested in his analysis ; began his syn- 
thesis before he had fully sifted the elements to be recomposed ; 
and, thus, the .system which, almost spontaneously, would have 
evolved itself into unity and order, he laboriously, and yet imper- 
fectly, constructed by sheer intellectual force, under a load of limi- 
tations and corrections and rules, which, deforming the symmetry. 


a An extract corresponding in part 
with that now given from the Prospectus 
of “Essaj towards a New Analytic of 
Logical Forms,” is republished in the Dit- 
cuMtiemt on Philosophy, p. 650. To this 
extract the Author has prefixed the fol- 
lowing notice regarding the date of his 
doctrine of the Quantification of the Pre- 
dicate : — “ Touching the principle of an 
explicitly Quantified Predicate, I h.id, by 
1833, become convinced of the necessity 
to extend and correct the logical doctrine 
upon this point. In the article on Logic 


(in the Edirdiurgh first published 

in 1833, the theory of Induction there 
maintained proceeds on a thorough 
quantification of the predicate, in affir- 
mative propositions. 

Before 1840, I had, however, become 
convinced that it was necessary to ex- 
tend the principle equally to negatives ; 
for I find, by academical documents, 
thst in that year, at latest, I had pub- 
licly taxight the unexelusive doctrine." 
— Di9CU4tu>ri8, p. 650 . — EId. 


Digitized by Cvn^Als 



250 


APPENDIX. 


has seriously impeded the usefulness, of the science. This imper- 
fection, as I said, it is the purpose of the New Analytic to supply. 

"In the first place, in the Essay there will be shown, that the 
Syllogism proceeds, not as has hitherto, virtually at least, been 
taught, in one, but in the two correlative and counter wholes 
{Metaj)hysical) of Comprehension, and (Logical) of Extension ; 
the major premise in the one whole, being the minor premise in 
in the other, &c. — Thus is relieved, a radical defect and vital in- 
consistency in the present logical system. 

“ In the second place, the self-evident truth, — That we can only 
rationally deal with what we already understand, determines the 
simple logical postulate, — To state e.iplicithj what is thought im- 
pliciihj. From the consistent api)lication of this postulate, on 
which Logic ever insists, but which Logicians have never fairly 
obeyed, it follows ; — that, logically, we ought to take uito account 
the quantity, always understood ui thought, but usually, and for 
manifest reasons, elided in its expression, not only of the subject, 
but also of the predicate, of a judgment. This being done, and 
the necessity of doing it will be proved against Aristotle and his 
repeaters, we obtain inter alia, the ensuing results : — 

"1°. Thsi the pTeindesignate terms oi a proposition, whether 
subject or predicate, are never, on that account, thought as indefi- 
nite (or indeterminate) in quantity. The only indefinite, is parti- 
cular, as opposed to definite, quantity ; and this last, as it is either 
of an extensive maximum undivided, or of an extensive minimum 
indivisible, constitutes quantity universal, (general), and quantity 
singular, (individual). In fact, definite and indefinite arc the only 
quantities of which we ought to hear in Logic ; for it is only as 
indefinite that particular, it is only as definite that individual and 
general, quantities have any (and the same) logical avail 

“ 2°. The revocation of the two Terms of a proposition to their 
true relation ; a proposition being always an equation of its sub- 
ject and its predicate. 

“ 3°. The consequent reduction of theConversion of Propositions 
from three species to one, — that of Simple Conversion. 

“ 4°. The reduction of all the General Laws of Categorical Syllo- 
gisms to a Single Canon. 

“ 5“. The evolution from that one canon of all the Species and 
varieties of Syllogism. 


Digitized by Googlc 


APPENDIX. 


251 


“ 6°. The abrogation of all the Special Laws oj Syllogism. 

“ 7°. A demonstration of the exclusive possibility of Three syllo- 
gidic Figures ; and (on new grounds) the scientific and final aJbo- 
ition of the Fourth. 

“ 8°. A manifestation Figure is an unessential variation in 
syllogistic form ; and the consequent absurdity of Reducing the 
syllogisms of the other figures to the first. 

“ 9°. An enouncement of oneOrganic Principle tor each Figure. 

“ 10°. A determination of the true number of the legitimate 
Moods ; with 

" 11°. Tlieir amplification in number (thirty-six) ; 

“ 12°. Their numerical equality under all the figures ; and, 

“ 13°. Theii- relative equivalence, or virtual identity, throughout 
every schematic difference. 

“ 14°. That, in the second and third figures, the extremes holding 
both the same relation to the middle term, there is not, as in the 
first, an opposition and subordination between a term major and 
a term minor, mutually containing and contained, in the counter 
wholes of Extension and Comprehension. 

“ 15°. Consequently, in the second and third figures, there is no 
determinate major and minor premise, and there are tivo indiffe- 
rent conclusions ; whereas, in the fird the premises are determi- 
nate, and there is a single proximate conclusion. 

“ 16°. That the third, as the figure in which Comjrrehension is 
predominant, is more appropriate to Induction. 

“ 17°. That the second, as the figure in which Extension is pre- 
dominant, is more appropriate to Deduction. 

“ 18°. That the first, as the figure in which CompreAenston and 
Extension are in equilibrium, is common to Induction and Deduc- 
tion, indifierently. 

“ In the third place, a scheme of Symbolical Notation will be 
given, wholly different in principle and perfection from those 
which have been previously proposed ; and showing out, in all 
their old and new applications, the propositional and syllogistic 
forms, with even a mechanical simplicity. 

“ This Essay falls naturally into two parta There will be con- 
tained, — in the first, a systematic exposition of the new doctrine 
itself ; in the second, an historical notice of any occasional atitici- 


Digilized by Google 



252 


APPENDIX. 


pations of its several parts which break out in the writings of pre- 
vious philosophers. 

“ Thus, on the new theory, many valid forms of judgment and 
reasoning, in ordinary use, but which the ancient logic continued 
to ignore, are now opeidy recogni.sed as legitimate ; and many 
relations, which heretofore lay hid, now come forward into the 
light On the one hand, therefore. Logic certainly becomes more 
complex. But on the other, this increa.sed complexity proves only 
to be a higher development The developed Syllogism is, in effect, 
recalled, from multitude and confusion, to order and system. Its 
laws, erewhile many, are now few, — we might say one alone, — but 
thoroughgoing. The exceptions, formerly so perplexing, have 
fallen away ; and the once formidable array of limitary rules has 
vanished. Tlie science now shines out in the true character of 
beauty, — as One at once and Various. Logic tlius accomplishes 
its final destination ; for as ‘ Thrice-greatest Hermes,’ speaking in 
the mind of Plato, has expressed it, — ‘ The end of Philosophy is 
the intuition of Unity.’ " 


(h ) — Logic, — Its Postulate.s. 


(November 1848 — See above, Vol. I., p. 114.) 


I. To state explicitly what is thought implicitly. In other 
words, to determine what is meant before proceeding to deal with 
the meaning. Thus in the proposition Men are animals, we 
should be allowed to determine whether the term men means all 
or some men, — whether the term animals means all or some ani- 
mals ; in short, to quantify both the subject and predicate of the 
propo.sition. This postulate applies both to Propositions and to 
Syllogisms.a 


a See (qtiot«<l by Wallia, Lo>jit.a, 
p. 291) Arifltotlo, An. Prior.f L. L, c. 
33 (Pachw, c. 32, §§ 2, 3, 4, p. 261), 
and RamuH, {from Downam, In P. 
Hami L- ii., c. 9, p. 410); 

What U understood to be supplied j 
L. ii., c. 9. “Siqna[de 


argumenUtioniH conaequontia propter 
crypain) dubitatio fuerit, explenda qii© 
desunt ; omputanda quse superaunt ; et 
pars quaelibet in locum redigenda situ 
[Cf. Ploucquet, Elevienta Philo- 
noyhi<r. ContfmplatirrTi § 29, p. 5. Stut- 
gardi®, 1778. “Secundum sensum lo- 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


253 


II. Throughout the same Proposition, or Immediate (not me- 
diate) Reasoning, to u.se the same words, and combinations of words, 
to express the same thoughta, (that is, in the same Extension and 
Comprehension), and thus identity to be presumed. 

Thus a particular in one (prejacent) proposition of an immediate 
reasoning, though indefinite, should denote the same part in the 
other. This po.stulate applies to inference immediate, e. g. Con- 
version. 

Predesignate in same logical unity, (proposition or syllogism), 
in same sense, both Collective or both Distributive. That one 
term of a proposition or syllogism should not be used distributlvely 
and another collectively. 


III. And, e contra, throughout the same logical unity, (immediate 
reasoning), to denote and presume denoted the same sense (notion or 
judgment) by the same term or terms.^ 

This does not apply to the different propositions of a Mediate 
Inference. 

IV. (or V.) To leave, if nece.ssary, the thought undetermined, as 
subjectively uncertain, but to deal with it only as far as certain or 
determinable. Thus a whole may be truly predicable, though we 
know only the truth of it as a part. Therefore, we ought to be 
able to say some at least when we do not know, and cannot, there- 
fore, say determinately, either that some only or that ail is true. 

(January 1850.) 

III. (or IV.) To be allowed, in an immediate reasoning, to de- 


gicum cum omni tormino jungendum 
est Bignum quantitatis.”— Ed.] 

a That words must be used in the 
same sense. See Aristotle, A nal. Pr., 
L. i.,cc. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, Ac. 

3 If these postulates (II. and III.) 
were not cogent, we could not convert, 
at least not use the converted proposi- 
tion, (unless the I. were cogent, the coH^ 
verUnda would be false). All man im 
(an) animalf is converted into >Som( 
animal it {all) man. But if the some 
aninuU here were not thought in and 
limited to the sense of the convertend, 
it w'ould be false. So in the Hypotheti- 


cal proposition, Jf the Chines are Ma‘ 
hometam, they art («r)me) inJideU ; the 
word infidel, unices thought in a mean- 
ing limited t4) and true of iiahometantf 
is inept. But if it be so limited, we 
can (contrary to the doctrines of the 
logicians) argue bock from the position 
of the conscejuent to the position of the 
antecedent, and from tlie sublation of 
the antecedent to the sublation of the 
consequent, though false. If not granted, 
Logic is a mere childish play with the 
vagueness and ambiguities of language 
[Cf. Titius, Ar$ CogUandi, c. xii., § 26. — 
Ed.] 


Digitized by Google 


254 


APPENDIX. 


note, that another part, other, or some, is used in the conclusion, 
from what was in the antecedent. Inference of Siih-contrariety. 

That the some, if not otherwise qualified, means some only , — 
this by presumption. 

That the Term (Subject, or Predicate) of a Proposition shall be 
converted with its quantity unchanged, i. e. in the same extension. 
This violated, and violation cause of error, and confusion. No per 
accidens, for the real terms compared are the quantified terms, 
and we convert only the terms compared in the prejacent or con- 
vertenda. 

That the same terms, apart from the quantity, t. e. in the same 
comprehension, should be converted. As before stated, such terms 
are new and different. No Contraposition, for contraposition is only 
true in some cases, and even in these it is true accidentally, not by 
conversion, but through contradiction ; i. e. same Comprehension. 

That we may see the truth from the necessary validity of the 
logical process, and not infer the validity of the logical process 
from its accidental truth. Conversion per accidens, and Contra- 
position, being thus accidentally true in some cases only, are logi- 
cally inept, as not true in all. 

To translate out of the complexity, redundance, deficiency, of 
common language into logical simplicity, precision, and integrity.® 

(December 1849). 

As Logic considers the form and not the matter, but as the form 
is only manifested in application to some matter. Logic postulates 
to employ any matter in its examples. 

(January 1850). 

That we may be allowed to translate into logical language the 
rhetorical expressions of ordinary speech. Thus the Exceptive and 
Limitative propositions in which the predicate and subject are pre- 
desigiiated, are to be rendered into logical simplicity. 

a See above, p. 252, note a.— E d. 


Digitized by ^'nogle 


APPENDIX. 


255 


(May 1850). 

As Logic is a formal science, and profes.ses to demonstrate by 
abstract formube, we should know, therefore, nothing of the no- 
tions and their relations except ex facie of the propositions. This 
implies the necessity of overtly quantifying the predicate. 


(c) — Q uantification of Pkedicate, — Lmmediate 
Inference, — Conversion, — Opposition.® 

(See above, Vol. I., pp. 244, 2(i2.) 

We now proceed to what has been usually treated under the 
relation of Pixiposition.s, and previously to the matter of Infer- 
ence altogether ; but which I think it would be more correct to 
consider as a species of Inference, or Reasoning, or Argumenta- 
tion, than as merely a preparatory doctrine. For in so far as these 
relations of Propositions warrant us, one being given, to educe 
from it another, — this is manifestly an inference or reasoning. 
Why it has not always been considered in this light, is evident. 
The inference is immediate ; that is, the conclusion or second pro- 
])usition is necessitated directly and without a medium, by the first. 
Tliere are only two propositions and two notions in this species of 
argumentation ; and the logicians have in general limited reason- 
ing or inference to a mediate eduction of one proposition out of 
the correlation of two others, and have thus always supposed the 
necessity of three terms or collated notions. 

But they have not only been, with few exceptions, unsystematic 
in their procedure, they have all of them, (if I am not myself 
mistaken), been fundamentally erroneous in their relative doctrin e 

There are various Immediate Inferences of one proposition from 
another. Of these some have been wholly overlooked by the lo- 
gicians ; whilst what they teach in regard to those which they do 
consider, appears to me at variance with the truth. 

I shall make no previous enumeration of all the possible species 

• Appendix (c),from p. 255 to p. 274, of Conversion aa given n1>ove, vol. L, p. 
was usually delivered by the author as a 262. — Ed. 

Lecture, supplementary to the doctrine 


Digitized by Googic 



256 


APPENDIX. 


of Immediate Inference ; but shall take them up in this order ; — 
I shall consider, 1°, Those which have been considered by the logi- 
cians ; and, 2°, Those which have not. And in treating of the 
first group, I shall preface what I think the true doctrine by a 
view of that which you will find in logical books. 

The first of these is Conversion. When, in a categorical propo- 
sition, (for to this we now limit our consideration), the Subject and 
Predicate are transposeil, that is, the notion which was previously 
the subject becomes the predicate, and the notion which was pre- 
viously the predicate becomes the subject, the proposition is said 
to be converted.* The proposition given, and its product, are to- 
gether called the judicia conversa, or propositiones conversw, 
which I shall not attempt to render into English. The relation 
itself in which the two judgments stand, is called conversion, re- 
ciprocation, transposition, and sometimes obversion, (conversio, 
reciprocatio, transpositio, obversio.) 

The original or given proposition is called the Converse, or 
Converted, sometimes the Prwjacent, Judgment, {judicium, or 
propositio, conversum, conversa, pra-jacens) ; the other, that into 
wliich the first is converted, is called the Converting, and some- 
times the Subjacent, J udgment, {propositio, or jud. convertens, 
subjacens). It would be better to call the former the Convertend, 
(pr. convertenda), the latter the Converse, {pr. conversa). This 
language I shall use.^ 


a [DefinitionB of conversion in general. 
*AyTi<rrpo<p^ i(rriv i<r<xrrpo^ rit, Phil* 
oponus, (or Ammonius), /« An. Pr., i. 
c. 2, f. 11 b. So Mogentinus, In An. Pr. 
i. c. 2, f. 3 b. Anonymus, De Syllo^ 
ffismo, (. 42 b. npoT<br<ci»j imarpo^^ 
Koirotyict Bvo nponKritcv icaT& Tovt 
Bpovf kvdiraXiy rtdc/icVour, p.*r6. rov <rvy- 
Alexander, In A n. Pr. i. c. 4, 
f. 15 b. See the same iu different wonls, 
by Philopomifl, (Ammonius), In A n. Pr.f 
i. c. 2, f. 11 b,, and copied from him by 
Magentinus, In An. Pr., f. 3 b. Cf. 
Boethius, Optra, Introductio ad Sylh- 
gismot, p. 574. Wegelin, in Grtyorii 
Ancponymi PhU. Syntag. (circa 1260), 
L. V., c, 12. p. 621. NieephoruH Blem- 
midas, Epif’ Log s P- 221,] 

See above, vol. i., p. 262. — Kd. 


[Names for the two propositions in 
Conveiuion. 

I. Name for the two correlative pro* 
positions — Conversa, Twesten, Logik, § 
87, Contraposita, Id. ibid. 

II. Original, or Given Proposition. 

a) 17 9pogyovpIin\, irpoKttp4vy\, kyrurrp*- 

irpkrcuris — Cf. Strigelius, In 
Melancktk. £rot. Dial., L. it, p. 681. 
’AKTUTT/jf^pcrai nparAcrus, Philopon- 
US, (quoted by Wegelin, /. c.) 

b) Conversa (= Convei-tcnda) vulgo. 
Scotus, Qu(T$li<mt8 iM An, Prior., i. 
q. 12. Corvinus, Inxtil. PhU., § 610. 
Kichtcr, De Conversiont, 1740. Halae 
Magdeb. Baumgarten, Logica, § 278. 
Ulrich, /)i#0V,Zqg'. c?*l/c(.,§182,p. 188. 

c) Convertibilis (rare). 

d) Convertens, Micraelius, Lex. Phil. v. 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


257 


Such is the doctrine touching Conversion, taught even to tlie 
j)reseut day. This in my view is beset with errors ; but all these 
errors originate in two, as these two are either the cause or the 
occasion of every other. 

The First cardinal error is, — That the quantities are not con- 
verted with the quantified terms. For the real terms compared in 
the Convertend, and which, of course, ought to reappear without 
change, except of place, in the Converse, are not the naked, but the 
quantified terms. This is evident from the following considerations : 

I The Terms of a Propo.sition are only terms as they are terms 
of relation ; and the relation here is the relation of comparison. 

2’, As the Propositional Terms are teniis of comparison, so they 
are only compared as Quantities, — quantities relative to each other. 
An Affirmative Proposition is simply the declaration of an equation, 
a Negative Proposition is simply the declaration of a non-equation, 
of its terms. To change, therefore, the quantity of either, or of 
both Subject and Predicate, is to change their correlation, — the 
point of comparison ; and to exchange their quantities, if different, 
would be to invert the terminal interdependence, that is, to make 
the less the greater, and the greater the less. 

3°, The Quantity of the Proposition in Conversion remains always 
the .same ; that is, the absolute quantity of the Converse must be 
exactly equal to that of the Convertend. It was only from over- 
looking the quantity of the predicate, (the second error to which we 


Conrtrtio. Twe«t«n, § 87. An- 

tecodenB, Scotus, 1. r. Strigeliua, 1. f. 

e) PncjacenH, Scbeibler, Op^nx Lorfira^ 
Dt Pro|po#iVion/6KJ, Para. Hi. c. x. p. 
479. 

f) Exposita, Aldrich, Cmnp.^ L. i. c. 2. 
Whately, Lorjic, p. 69. Propoaitio ex* 
posita, or exponctu, quite different as 
used by Ix^cians, v. Schegkius, In 
Arist, Org. 162 (and above, voL L, p. 
263.) 

g) ConTertenda, Corrinus, toe. cit Rich* 
ter, toe. cU. 

h) Contraponens, Twesten, Ibid. 

i) Prior, Boethius, De Syllog. Categ. L. 
I. Opera, p. 588. 

k) Principium, Daijes, Via ad Verita- 
tern, g 234. 

III. Product of Conversion. 

VOL. II. 


a) 7] iyrtcrp4^v<ra. See Strigolius, for. 
cit. 

b) Convertens, Subjacens, Scotus, Qua-e' 
tionex. In An, Prn>r, i. 9, 24, f. 276, 

jHiexim. Knig, Lf>giky% 65, p. 20.5, 
and logicians in general. 

c) Converse, Boethius, Opera, Introd. 
ndSyll.fPp. 576 ei etq., 687 et tie*f.; 
Melanchthon, Erotemata, L. ii p. 581, 
and StrigeliuB, ad toe. Micraelius, 
I/fx. PhiL, r. Canrerno. Noldius, 
Logica Recognita, p. 263, says th.at 
the first should more probably be 
called Convertibilis, or Convertenda, 
and the second Convoraa. 

d) Converaum, Twesten, loc. cit. 

e) Contrapositum, Id. ibid. 

f) Concluaio, Darjee, V’lVi ad Veritatem, 
§234. 

R 


Digitized by Coogle 



258 


APPENDIX. 


shall immediately advert), that two propositions, exactly equal in 
quantity, in fact the same proposition, perhaps, transposed, were 
called the one universal, the other particular, by exclusive refer- 
ence to the quantity of the subject. 

4°, Yet was it of no consequence, in a logical point of view, 
which of the notions collated were Subject or Predicate ; and their 
comparison, with the consequent declaration of their mutual incon- 
clusion or exclusion, that is, of affirmation or negation, of no more 
real difference than the assertions, — London is four hundred 
miles distant from Edinburgh, — Edinburgh is four hundred 
miles distant from London. In fact, though logicians have 
been in use to place the subject first, the predicate last, in their 
examples of propositions, this is by no means the case in ordinary 
language, where, indeed, it is frequently even difficult to ascertain 
which is the determining and which the determined notion. Out 
of logical books, the predicate is found almost as frequently before 
as after the subject, and this in all languages. You recollect the 
first words of the First Olympiad of Pindar, "Apiarov p.h> vBop, 
“Best is water and the Vulgate, (I forget how it is rendered in 
our English translation), has, “Magna est veritas, et prsevalebit.” “ 
Alluding to the Bible, let us turn up any Concordance under any 
adjective title, and we shall obtain abundant proof of the fact. As 
the adjective great, magnua, has last occurred, let us refer to 
Cruden under that simple title. Here, in glancing it over, I find — 
“ Great is the wrath of the Lord — Great is the Lord and greatly to be 
praised — Great is our God — Great arc thy works — Great is the Holy 
One of Israel — Great shall be the peace of thy children — Greiit is thy 
faithfulness — Great is Diana of the Ephesians — Great is my boldne.ss 
— Great is my glorying — Great is the mystery of godliness,” &c. 

The line of Juvenal, 

“Noliilitas sola est atque imica \*irtus.” 

is a good instance of the predicate being placed first 

The Second cardinal error of the logicians is, the not considering 
that the Predicate has always a quantity in thought, as much as 
the Subject ; although this quantity be frequently not explicitly 
enounced, as unnecessary in the common employment of language ; 

o III. Efldiax iv. 41 : “ est veri- (I. Esdnw iv. 41), “ Great is truth, ami 

tAfi el pncvalet." In the English version, mighty al)ove all things.” — Er>. 


APPENDIX. 


259 


for the determining notion or predicate being always thought as at 
least adequate to, or co-cxtensive with, the subject or determined 
notion, it is seldom necessar\' to express this, and language tends 
ever to elide what may safely be omitted. But this necessity 
recurs, the moment that, by conversion, the predicate becomes the 
subject of the proposition ; and to omit its formal statement is to 
degrade Logic from the science of the necessities of thought, to an 
idle subsidiary of the ambiguities of speech. An unbiassed con- 
sideration of the subject will, I am confident, convince you that 
this view is correct. 

1°, That the predicate is as extensive as the subject is easily 
shown. Take the proposition, — All animal is man, or, All ani- 
mals are men. This we are conscious is absurd, though we make 
the notion nmn or men as wide as possible ; for it does not mend 
the matter to say, — All animal is all man, or, All animals are 
all men. We feel it to be equally absurd as if we said, — All man 
is all animal, or, All men are all animals. Here we are aware 
that the subject and predicate cannot be made coextensive. If we 
would get rid of the absurdity, we must bring the two notions into 
coextension, by restricting the wider. If we say — Man is animal, 
{Homo est animal), we think, though we do not overtly enounce 
it, All man is animal. And what do we mean here by animal 1 
We do not think, — All, but Sorne, animal. And then we can 
make this indifferently either subject or predicate. We can think, 
— we can say. Some animal is man, that is. Some or All Man ; 
and, e converso, — Man (some or all) is animal, viz. some animal. 

It thus appears that there is a necessity in all cases for thinking 
the predicate, at least, as extensive as the subject. Whether it be 
absolutely, that is, out of relation, more extensive, is generally of 
no consequence ; and hence the common reticence of common 
language, which never expresses more than can be understood, — 
which always, in fact, for the sake of brevity, strains at ellipsis. 

2°, But, in fact, ordinary language quantifies the Predicate so 
often as this determination becomes of the smallest import. This 
it does either directly, by adding all, some, or their equivalent pre- 
designations, to the predicate ; or it accomplishes the same end 
indirectly, in an exceptive or limitative form. 

ft) Directly, — as Peler, John, James, &c., are all the Apostles 
— Mercmry, Venvs, &c., are all the planets. 


Digitized by Google 



2G0 


APPENDIX. 


I>) But this is more frequently accomplished indirectly, by the 
equipollent forms of Limihition or Inclusion, and Exception." 

For example, by the limitative desi;jiiations, alone or only, we 
say, — God alone is good, wliich is equivalent to saying, — God is all 
good, that is, God is all that is good ; Virtue is the only nobi- 
lity, that is, Virtue is all noble, that is, all that is noble.fi The 
symbols of the Catholic and Protestant divisions of Christian- 
ity may afford us a logical illustration of the point. The Ca- 
tholics say, — Faith, Hope, and Charity alone justify ; that i.s, the 
three heavenly virtues together are all justifying, that is, all that 
justifies; omne justificans, justum faciens. The Protestants 
say, — Faith alone justifies ; that is, Faith, which they hold to 
compri.se the other two virtue.s, is all justifying, that is, all that 


a By the logicianfl thm U ca1lG<l simply 
Eirclu/nftnj and the particles, <an/MW, &c., 
particulcf txdiisivcF. This, I think, i» 
inaccurate ; for it is inclusion, limited by 
an exclusion, that is meant. — [See Schei- 
bler, Opera Lotjica^ P. iii., c. vii., tit. 3, 
p. 457 ti srg.] 

^ (February 1850.) On the Iinlirect 
Predesignation of the Predicate by what 
are called the Exdutirt and Exceptive 
jmiticle*. 

Names of the particles. 

Latin, — unus, unietu, untce ; tohm, 
$otam, Molttmmodoy tantnmytantummodo; 
(iuntaxat ; jmecise ; adtrquate. Nihil 
prffteTf — -praferquamf — ni nUi non, 

EngUab, — one, only, alone, exclusively, 
precisely, just, tole, solely, nothing but, 
not except, not beyond. 

I. These particles annexed to the Sub* 
ject predesignate the Predicate univer- 
sally, or to Its whole extent, denying its 
particularity or indefinitude, and defi- 
nitely limiting it to the subject alone. 
As, Afan alonephilosophises, (though not 
all do). 77ie dog alone barks, or, dogs 
alone back, (though some do not). 3/an 
only is rational, or No animal but man is 
rational. Nothing but rational is risibU, 
Of mnterial things there is nothing living 
(5u/) not organised, and nothing organ- 
inetl not living. God alone is to be tcor- 
sltipjictl. God is the single, —sole object 


of ^Forship. Some men only are elect. 

II. Annexe<l to the Predicate, they 
limit the nubject to the predicate, but 
do not define its quantity, or exclude 
from it other subjects. As, Peter only 
plays. The sacraments are only Uro. 
The categories art only ten, John drinks 
only water, 

III. Sometimes the particles sole, 
solely, single, alone, only, &c., are an- 
nexed to the Predicate as a predesigna- 
tion tantamount to all. As, God is the 
single,— one, — alone, — only, — exclusive, 
— adcfjtiatt, object of w orship. 

On the relation of Exclusive proposi- 
tiuDfl to tliose in w hich the predicate is 
predcsignatod, see Titiiis, A rs Cogitandi, 
c. vi. §§ 6fi, 67. Hollman, Pkilosophia 
Eationalis, § 475. Kreil, //awdAwrA der 
Jjogik, § 62. Dcrodon, Logica Restituta, 
Pc Enunciaiione, c. v. p. 669 ct teg. 
Keckerman, Systema Logiar, lib. iii., c. 
n. Opera, t. i. p. 763. 

The doctrine held by the logicians as 
to the cxclusum prcedicatum, cxclasum 
suhjcctum, and cxclusum signum, is er- 
roneous. — See Scheibler, O^jfra Logica, 
P. iii., c. vii., tit. 3, p. 457 et scg. Jac. 
Thomasius, Erotem. Log., c. xxx. p. 67 ct 
scg. (Cf- Fonseca, Fnstit, Dial., L. III. 
c. 23. For a detailed exposition of this 
doctrine by Scheibler, see below, p. 261, 
note a. — Ed.] 


Digitized by Coogic 


APPENDIX. 


261 


justifies ; omne justificans. In either case, if we translate the 
watchwords into logical simplicity, the predicate appears prede- 
sigiiated. 

Of animals man alone is rational; that is, Man is all rational 
animal. What is rational is alone or only risible ; that is, All 
rational is all risible, &a 

I now pass on to the Exceptive Form. To take the motto over- 
head, — “ On earth there is nothing great but man.” What does 
this mean ? It means, Man — is — all earthly great. — Homo — est 
— omne magnum ierestre. And the second clause — “In man 
there is nothing great but mind,” — in like manner gives as its 
logical equipollent — Mind — is — all humanly great, that is, all that 
is great in man. {Mens est omne magnum humanum.)a 

We ought, indeed, as a corollary of the po.stulatc already stated, 
to require to be allowed to translate into equivalent logical terms 


o Vide Schoiblcr, 0/>«m l.ogira,V. iii. 
c, viL pp. 45S, 460, wh*ire his examples, 
^ith the exposition of Uio Logicians, 
may be well contrasted with mine. 

[Scheibler, after refeiring to the 
Parra Logicalia of the schoolmen, a» 
containing a proposed supplement of 
the diKitrinea of Aristotle, pnweeds to 
exjfound tho Proi>ogit'nmM E,r^MmibUea 
of those treatises. Exclusiva enun- 
ciatio est, qua? liabet particulam ex- 
clusivam, ut, Solu* homo est rationalis. 

Porro exclusiva? enun- 

ciationes suiit dupHcU generis. Alia? 
sunt exclusiviD pncdicati: alia? excln- 
siva? Bubjecti ; hoc est, in aliis parti- 
cula exclusiva excludit a subjecto, in 
aliis excludit a pra?dicato, vehiti ha?c 
pro{K>sitio exclusiva est ; Dfu$ tant»m 
eat immortalia. Eatque exclusiva a sub- 
jecto, hoc sensu, Deus tantum, et non 

homo vel lapis, &c Oiiines 

propositioncs excluHivcc ambiguie sunt, 
si Imbeont particulam exclusiram, post 
subjectum propoeitionis, ante vinculum, 
ut erat in pro{xwito exemplo. Caretit 
autem propositiones exclusiva? ilia am- 
biguitate, si vel exclusiva porticula, pon- 
atur ante subjectum propositionis, vel 
etiam sequatiir copulam. Ibi enim 
indicator esso propositio exclusiva sub- 


jecti, ut, aolua Aonw riiacurrit. Hie au- 
tem indicatur, esse propositio exclusiva 
pnodicati, ut, Sacminenta Xori Teata- 
mcnli aunt tantum duo. Prtedicam^ta 
taufum dcrem." 

•Scheibler then procoeds to give the 
following general and special rules of 
Exclusion : — 

** I. Cieneralitcr tenendum est, qtuul 
aliter aiiU exfjonendef excluairce a pretdi^ 
cutt\ et aider excluaira: a aubjirto. 

“ II. ExHuaiva pi'opoaitio non excludit 
concomitantki. 

“III. Omniaexclustra remhitur induaa 
aim^dicety alteram affirmaUim, alteram 
neifatam. Atque hoc eat quod vulgo 
dicitur, qiir>d omnia exclusiva sit hypo- 
thetica. Hy|K>thetica enim propositio 
eat quo? includit duaa alius in virtute, 
vel diaiK>aitione Bua. Veluti haec, 
homo cat rationalia^ lequivalet bis dua- 
bus, Homo eat rationalia, et quod non eat 
homo, non eat rationale. Et in specie, 
Beatia non eat rationalia. Plania non 

eat rationalia Atque 

h« dmc propositiones vocaiitur expon- 
entea, sicut pro^Mysitio exclusiva dicitur 
exj-mihilia. 

“ S{)eciale8 autera rcgulie explicaudi 
exclusivas suut octo: sicut et octo aunt 
genera locutionum exclusivorum. 


Digitized by Coog[e 



262 


APPENDIX. 


the rhetorical enouiicements of common speech. We should not 
do as the logicians have been wont, — introduce and deal with these 
in their grammatical integrity; for tliis would be to swell out and 
deform our science with mere grammatical accidents ; and to such 
fortuitous accresccnces the formidable volume, especially of the 
older Logics, is mainly owing. In fact, a laige proportion of the 
scholastic system is merely gramnmticaL 

3°, The whole doctrine of the non-quantification of the predicate 
is only another example of the passive sequacity of the logicians. 
They follow obediently in the footsteps of their great master. We 
owe this doctrine and its prevalence to the precept and authority 
of Aristotla He prohibits once and again the annexation of the 
imiversal predesignation to the predicate For why, he says, such 
predesignation would render the proposition absurd ; giving as his 
only example and proof of this, the judgment — All man is all 
animal. This, however, is only valid as a refutation of the ridicu- 
lous doctrine, held by no one, that any predicate may be universally 


Propoeiiio exclutiva univtrtalU af‘ 
firmativa, cujus siffnutn non neyaturf ut, 
Tantum omnis homo cum7, exponitur 
sic, Omnii homo curHt, et nihil aliud ab 
homine currit. Vocari solet hacc expomi- 
iio Pater, quia prior ejus pars eet uni* 
Tersalis affirtnaiiva, quod noUt A. Et, 
altera pars est univeraalis negativa, quod 
indicat in posteriori syllaba liters E. 

“ II. Propoiitio jxirtimlariny vel inde- 
finita c{^rmativa, in qiia tignum non 
negatur^ ut Tantum homo currit, exponi* 
tur sic, I/omo cun'it, tl nihil aliud ab 
homine currit. Vocatur hiec expoaitio, 
Nise. 

“ III. Propoiitio exchuira, in qua $ig- 
n«m non negatur,uni\'er»alU neyatira,\it, 
Tantum nu//u4 AomorurnV,cxponitur8ic, 
Nullus homo currit, et quodlibet aliud ab 
homine currit, vocatur, Tenax.’* 

**1V. Exclueira cujut tignum non ne* 
gatur particularU vel inde^nita negativa, 
ut, Tantum homo non currit, exponitur 
eic. Homo non currit, et quodlibet aliud 
ah homine currit, vocatur, Storax. 

“V. Exelueiva, in qua signum negatur, 
q^m<Utra et univertalit, ut, Non tan- 
(urn. omnu homo eurrit, exponitur aic, 


Omnta homo currit, et aliquod aliud ab 
homme currit, vocatur, Canos. 

V”I. /ft qua fignum negatur, existene 
unirerealU (^finnatica, ut, Non tantum 
nnllus homo currit, sic exponitur, aVo/Zna 
homo currit, et aliquid aliud ab homine 
non currit, vocatur. Fecit. 

“ VII. Exclueiva, in qua signum nega- 
tur, exUtent jfarticularis ajirmaiiva, ut, 
Non tantum aliquU homo currit, expoeitur 
aic, AliquU homo currit, aliquid aliud 
ab homine eurrit, vocatur, PiLOS. 

** VIII. Negativa particularU exclu- 
tirev projiosifiones, cujus signum negatur, 
ut, Nun tantum aliquis horAo non currit, 
exponitur aic, A liquU homo non currit, et 
aliquid aliud ab homine non eurrit, voca* 
tur, Nobis. 

** Differentia aiitcm propoaitionia cx* 
cluaivoeetexceptivsocatevidens. Nempo 
oxclusiva prsedicatum vendicat uni sub* 
jecto, aut a subjccto excludit alia pncdi* 
cata, ui, Solus Deus bonusest. Exceptiva 
autem atatuit universale aubjectum, in* 
dicatque aliquid contiueri sub iato uni* 
veraali, de quo non dicatur prsedicalum, 
ut, Omne animal est irrationale, prater 
hominem .** — Ed.] 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


2C3 


quantified ; for, to employ his own example, what absurdity is 
there in saying that some animal is all man f Yet this non- 
sense, (be it spoken with all reverence of the Stagirite), has imposed 
the precept on the systems of Logic down to the present day. 
Nevertheless, it could be shown by a cloud of instances from the 
Aristutelic writings themselves, that this rule is invalid ; nay 
Aristotle's own doctrine of Induction, which is far more correct 
than that usually taught, proceeils upon the silent abolition of the 
erroneous canon. Tlic doctrine of the logicians is, therefore, 
founded on a blunder ; which is only doubled by the usual aver- 
ment that the predicate, in what are technically called reciprocal 
propositions, is taken universally vi materia; and not vi fomuc. 

But, 4°, The non-quantification of the predicate in thought is 
given up by the logicians themselves, but only in certain cases 
where they were forced to admit, and to the amount which they 
could not possibly deny. The predicate, they confess, is quanti- 
fied by particularity in affirmative, by universality in negative, 
propositions. But why the quantification, formal quantification, 
should be thus restricted in thought, they furnish us with no valid 
reason. 

To these two errors I might perhaps add as a third, the confu- 
sion and peq>le.xity ari.sing from the attempt of Aristotle and the 
logicians to deal with indefinite, (or, as I wouhl call them, indesig- 
nate), terms, instead of treating them merely as verbal ellipses, to 
be filled up in the expression before being logically considered ; 
and I might also add as a fourth, the additional complexity and 
l)crplexity introduced into the .science by viewing propositions, 
likewise, as affected by the four or six modalities. But to these 
I shall not advert. 

These are the two principal errors which have involved our 
systems of Logic in confusion, and prevented their evolution in 
simplicity, harmony, and completeness ; — which have condemned 
them to bits and fragments of the science, and for these bits and 
fragments have made a load of rules and exceptions indispensable, to 
avoid falling into frequent and manifest absurdity. It was in 
reference to these two errors chiefly, that I formerly gave you as a 
self-evident Postulate of Logic — “ Explicitly to state what has been 
implicitly thought ; ” in other words, that before dealing logically 
with a proposition, we aie entitled to understand it, that is, to 


Dt-j'-’ed by Google 


2«4 


APPENDIX. 


ascertain and to enounce its meaning. This quantification of the 
predicate of a judgment, Ls, indeed, only the beginning of the appli- 
cation of the Postulate ; but we shall find that at every step it 
enables us to cast away, as useless, a multitude of canons, which 
at once disgust the student, and, if not the causes, are at least the 
signs, of imperfection in the science. 

I venture then to assert, that there is only one species of Con- 
version, and that one thorough-going and self-sufficient. I mean 
Pure, or Simple Conversion. The other species, — all are admitted 
to be neither thorough-going nor self-suflficient, — they are in fact 
only other logical processe.s, accidentally combined with a transpo- 
sition of the subject and pretlicate. The conversio per accidens 
of Boethius, as an Arapliative operation, has no logical existence ; 
it is material and precarious, and has righteously been allowed to 
drop out of science. It is now merely an historical curiosity. As 
a Restrictive operation, in which relation alone it stUl stands in our 
systems, it is either merely fortuitous, or merely possible through 
a logical process quite distinct from Conversion, I mean that of 
Restriction or Subaltcrnation, which will be .soon explained. Con- 
versio per contrapositionem is a change of terras, — a substitution 
of new elements, and only holds through contradiction,* being just 
as good without as with conversion. The Contingent Conversion 


o [See ArUtotle, Tt/jurUy L. ii. c. 
8. Scotus, BanueH, Mendoza, silently 
following each other, have hehl tliat 
contraposition is only mediate, infinita- 
tion, requiring ConnUinttUy &c. Wholly 
wrong. See Arriaga . — Cursus PhUmo- 
jikirM, D. II. B. 4. p. 18. [“ Obsenan- 

dum e.st praxlictas consequentias (per 
contrapositionem) malas c»«4e et inat-fi* 
biles, nisi acco8«erit alia propositio in 
antccetlenti qujc iuiportit oxistciitiam 
Bubjecti consoquentifn. Tunc cnim hnna 
crit coDsequentia, f.j. Chnnis homo e*t 
aihus et non album etf, ergo omne non 
album eM non homo. Alioquin si con- 
etantiam illam non posueris in anteccw 
denti, instabitur illi consequenti® in 
evontu, in quo nihil sit non album, et 
omnis homo sit albus.” Rannes, Instit. 
Min. IHal. L. vl c. 2, p. 530 . — Ed.] 
Uulo for Finite Prejaconta given. 


With the single exception of E n E (A 
a A) the other seven propositions may 
be convei*te<l by Counterposition under 
the following rule, — * Let the terms be 
infinitated and transposed, the predesig* 
nations remaining os before.* 

With the two additional exceptions 
of the two convertible pn»positions, 
Af I, and I f A, the infinitated projK)* 
sitions hold good without the transposi- 
tion of the terms. 

Itule for Infinite Prejacents given. 

With the single excejdion of n I f n I, 
(uE = u = nE being impossible), the 
other six propositions may be converted 
by Counterposition under the following 
rule, — * Let the terms be uuinfinitated 
and transposed, the prodcsiguations re- 
maining as before.’ 

Contraposition is not explicitly evolved 
by Aristotle in Prior Analyticsy but i» 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


2U5 


of the lower Greeks • is not a conversion, — is not a logical process 
at all, and has been worthily ignored by the Latin world. But 
let us now proceed to see that Simple Conversion, as I have 
asserted, is thorough-going and all-suflScient. Let us try it in 
all the eight varieties of categorical propositions. But I shall 
leave this explication to yourselves, and in the examination will 
call for a statement of the simple conversion, as applied to all the 
eight propositional forms. 

It thus appears, that this one method of conversion has every 
advantage over those of the logicians. 1°, It is Natural; 2°, It 


is Imperative ; 3°, It is Simple 
cise ; 6“, It is Thorough-going : 

evolved from hU Ttypia, L. il cc. 1, 8, 
alihi. De Interpretatione, c. 14. Seo 
Conimbricenses, In Ari$t» Dial., An, 
Prior,, \j. I. q. i p. 271. Bannea, Inttit, 
Minoria Dialectictr, L. v, c. 2, p. 532, 
Burgersdicius, Instit. Log. L. i, c. 32. 

First explicitly enounced by Averroea 
according to Molinaeos, {EUmenta Logi' 
ca, L. i. c. 4, p. 54). I cannot find any 
notice of it in Averroea. He ignonw it, 
name and thing. It ia in Anonymua, 
/)< Syllogitmo, f. 42 b., in Nicepborua 
Blemmidaa, Epit. Log., c. xxxi. p. 22*2 ; 
but long before him Boethius has all 
the kinds of Converaion, — Simplcjr, Per 
Accxdcna, et Per Oppoiniionem {Intro- 
durtio ad Syllogiamoii, p. 576)» what he 
calls Per ContnipoaUionem, {Dt Syllo- 
gi$mo Categorico, L. i. 589.) Is he the 
inventor of the name I It seema so. 
Long before Boethius, Apuleiua, (in 
second century), has it as one of the five 
species of Conversion, but gives it no 
name — only descriptive, see De.IIaJtdlud, 
Doct. Plat., L. lii. p. 33. Alexander, In 
An. Pr., i. c, 2, f. 10 a, h.-w it aa of pro- 
positions, not of terms, which is con* 
version absolutely. Vide Philoponua, In 
An. Pr., I. f. 12 a. By them calletl 6.vri- 
ffrpo^^ <rbr imSlaei. So Magentinua, 
In An. Prior., I 2, f. 3 b. 

That Contraposition is not properly 
Conversion — (this being a species of con- 
sequence)— an sequij>t)llence of pn>posi- 
tions, nut a conversion of their terms. 


¦t , It is Direct ; 5 , It is Pre- 
Whereas their processes are — 1°, 

Noldius, Logica Recognita, c. xil. p. 
299. Crakanthorpe, Logiea, L. iii. c. 
10, p. 180. Bannes, Inatit. Min. Dial., 
L. V. c. 2, p. 530. Eustaebius, Summa 
Philoaophice, Logica, P. II. tracL L q. 3, 
p, 104. Herbart, Lehrbuch (Ur Logik, 
p. 78. ScotuB, QatratioMS, In An. Prior., 
L. i. q. 15, f. 258 b. Chauvin, v. Con- 
reraio. Iscndoorn, Cnraua Logiais,\i. 308. 

That Contraposition is useless and 
perplexing. See Ch.auvin, r. Cont^raio, 
Arriaga, Curaua, Philoaophicua, p. 18. 
Titius, A ra Cogitandi, c. viiL § 19 aeq. 
D'Abra dc Raconis, Tut. Phil. Tract., 
Logica, ii. q. 4, p. 315. Bannes, Inatit. 
Min. Dial.,p. 629.] 

a [Blemmidtis.j {Epitome Logica, c. 
31, p. 222. The following extract 

will explain the nature of this con- 
version. *H 8* ir rpordfftfft ytroplvTi 
hyrtarpoqt^y if pir rd^iv r&r Spwr 
^uXdrrci, rhy airrhy rrfpavoa Kar7fyopo{>- 
payoy wol rhy ainhy vwoKaipeyoy * pSvqv 
84 riiv vo(6Trjra parafidWai, Totovoa riiy 
hwtHfKtTtK^y irpinatrty fcaTa^aTocl^v, 
KOToqtariK^jy Kol \4ytrat 

alhri hyrurrpoipif, Mp6tnijt 

r^s ovyurraplyri • otoy, 

rts iy$ptfTot Aovtrat, ns &y$pwwos ov Xot^ 
CTcu ’ 8* oltK hr atyj Kuplaas iiyrt- 

(TTpo^. This so-called contingent con- 
version is in fact nothing more than the 
assertion, repeated by many Latin logi- 
cians, that in contingent matter subcon- 
trary proi>ositioiia are both true. — EI d.] 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


2GG 


Unnatural ; 2°, Precarious; 3°, Complex; 4°, Circuitous ; 5°, Con- 
fused ; 6°, Inadequate ; breaking down in each and all of their 
specie.s. The Greek Logicians, subsequent to Aristotle, have well 
and truly said, aj^torpo<^7j icmv icro(rTpo<jfij ti 5 “omnisconversio 
estaequiversio”* that is, all conversion is a conversion of equal into 
eqiuil ; and had they attended to this principle, they would have 
developed conversion in its true unity and simplicity. They would 
have considered, 1°, That the absolute quantity of the proposi- 
tion, be it convertend or converse, remains always identical ; 2'’, 
That the several quantities of the collated notions remain always 
identical, the whole change being the transposition of the quanti- 
fied notion, which was in the subject place, into the place of pre- 
dicate, and vice versd. 

Aristotle and the logicians were, therefore, WTong ; 1°, In not 
considering the proposition simply as the complement, that is, as 
the equation or non-equation, of two compared notions, but, on the 
contrary, considering it as determined in its quantity by one of 
the.se notions more than by the other. 2°, They were wrong, in 
according too great an importance to tlie notions considered as pro- 
positional tenns, that is, as subject and predicate, independently 
of the import of these notions in themselves. 3°, They were 
wrong, in according too preponderant a weight to one of these 
terms over the other ; but differently iu difterent parts of the 
system. For they were wrong, in the doctrine of Judgment, in 
allowing the quantity of the proposition to be determined exclu- 
sively by the quantity of the subject term ; whereas they were 
wrong, its we sh<iU see, in the doctrine of Reasoning, in considering 
a syllogism as exclusively relative to the quantity of the predicate 
(extension). So much for the theory of Conversion. Before con- 
cluding, I have, however, to observe, as a correction of the preva- 
lent ambiguity and vacillation, that the two propositions of the 
process together might be called the convertent or converting, (pro- 
¦positiones convertentes) ; and whilst of these the original proposi- 
tion is named the convertend {propositio convertenda), its product 
would obtain the title of converse, converted, {propositio conversa)A 

The other species of Immediate Inference will not detain us 
long. Of these, there are two noticed by the logicians. 

a Sec above, p. 2 j(>. — E o. 3 See above, vol. i. p. 2G2 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


2(J7 


The first of these, IJquipollence, (leqnipollentut), or, as I would 
term it, Double Negation, is deserving of bare mention. It is of 
mere grammatical relevancy. The negation of a negation is tanta- 
mount to an affirmation. B is not not- A, is manifestly only a 
roundabout way of saying B is A ; and, vice versa, we may express 
a position, if we perversely choose, by sublating a sublation. The 
immediate inference of Equipollence is thus merely the grammati- 
cal translation of an affirmation into a double negation, or of a 
double negation into an affirmation. Non-nullus and Non-nemo, 
for example, are merely other grammatical expressions for aliquis 
or quidum. So Nonnihit, Nonnunquam, Nonnusquam, &c. 

The Latin tongue is almost peculiar among languages for such 
double negatives to express an affirmative. Of course the few 
which have found their place in Logic, instead of being despised 
or relegated to Grammar, have been fondly commented on by the 
ingenuity of the scholastic logicians. In English, some authors 
are fond of this indirect and idle way of speaking ; they prefer 
saying — “I entertain a not unfavourable opinion of such a one," 
to saying directly, I entertain of him a favourable opinion. 
Neglecting this, I pass on to 

The third species of Immediate Inference, noticed by the 
logicians. This they call Subaliernation, but it may be more 
unambiguously styled Restriction. If I have £100 at my credit 
in the bank, it is evident that I may draw for £5 or £10. In like 
manner, if I can say unexclusively, that all men are animals, I can 
say restrictively, that negroes or any other fraction of mankind are 
animals. This restriction is Bilateral, when we restrict both sub- 
ject and predicate, as — 

All Triangle is all trilateral. All ratiaiial is all risible. 

.'. Some triangle is some trilateral. .'. Some rational is some risible. 

It is Unilateral, by restricting the omnitude or universality either 
of the Subject or of the Predicate. 

Of the Subject — 

All ntan is some animal; 

.'. Some man is some animal. 

Of the Predicate, as— 


Digitized by Coogle 


2C8 


A1’1>ENUIX. 


Some animal m all risible 
Some animal is some risible. 

It has not been noticed by tlie logicians, that there is only an 
inference by this process, if the some in the inferred proposition 
means some at least, that is, some not exclusive of all; for if we 
think by the some, some only, that is, some, not ail, so far from 
there being any competent inference, there is in fact a real opposi- 
tion. The logicians, therefore, to vimlicate their doctrine of the 
Opposition of Subalternation, ought to have declared, that the some 
was here in the sense of some only; and to vindicate their doctrine 
of the Inference of Subalternation, they ought, in like manner, to 
have declared, that the some was here taken in the counter sense 
of some at least. It could easily be shown, that the eiTors of the 
logicians in regard to Opposition, are not to be attributed to 
Aristotle. 

Before leaving this proces.s, it may be proper to ob.servc that we 
might well call its two j)ropo.sitions together the restringent or 
restrictive, {propositiones restrinyentes vel restrictivw) ; the given 
proposition might be called the restringend, (proposiiio restrin- 
genda), and the product the restrict or restricted, (propositio 
restricta.) 

So much for the species of Immediate Inference recognised by 
the logicians. 

There is, however, a kind of immediate inference overlooked by 
logical writers. I have fonnerly noticed, that they enumerate, 
(among the sj)ecies of Opposition), Subcontrariety, (subcontrarietas, 
virevavTiorr)^), to wit, — some is, some is not ; but that this is not 
in fact an opposition at all, (as in truth neither is Subaltema- 
tion in a certain sense.) Subcoutrariety, in like manner, is with 
them not an opposition between two partial somes, but between 
different and different ; in fact, no opposition at all. But if they 
are thus all wrong by commission, they are doubly wrong by 
omission, for they overlook tlie immediate inference which the 
relation of propo.sitions in Subcontrariety affortls. This, however, 
is sufficiently manifest If I can sa)% All men are some animals, 
or. Some animals are all men, I am thereby entitled to say, — 
All men are not some animals, or Some animals are not some 
men. Of course here the some in the inferred projwsitious means 


Digitized by GoogI 


APPENDIX. 


2G9 


some other, as in the original proposition, some mly; but the 
inference is perfectly legitimate, being merely a nece.ssary explica- 
tion of the thought : for inasmuch as I think and say that all men 
are some animals, I can think and say that they are some animals 
only, which implies that they are a certain some, and not any 
other animals.® This inference is thus not only to some others 
indefinitely, but to all others definitely. It is further either afiSrma- 
tive from a negative antecedent, or negative from an affirmative. 
Finally, it is not bilateral, as not of subject and predicate at 
once ; but it is unilateral, either of the subject or of the predi- 
cate. This inference of Subcontrariety, I would call I nteyration, 
because the mind here tends to determine all the parts of a whole, 
whereof a part only has been given. The two propositions toge- 
ther might be called the integral or integrant, (propositiones 
integrates vel integrantes). The given proposition would be styled 
the integrand, {propositio integrandd) ; and the product, the 
integrate, (propositio integrata).$ 

I may refer you for various observations on the Quantification 
of the Predicate, to the collection published under the title, 
Discussions on Philosophy and Literature. 


The grand general or dominant result of the doctrine on which 
I have already partially touched, but which I will now explain 
consecutively and more in detail, is as follows ; — Touching Proposi- 
tions, — Subject and Predicate ; — touching Syllogism.s, — in Catego- 
ricals. Major and Minor Terms, Major and Minor Premise.s, Figures 
First, Second, Third, Fourth, and even what I call No Figure, are 
all made convertible with each other, and all conversion reduced to a 
simple equation ; whilst in Hypothcticals, both the species, (viz. 
Conjunctive and Disjunctive reasonings), are shown to be forms 

a If we my tome animal it all mon, Iherefure, tome animalt are not tome 
and tome animal it not any man ; in that animalt. 

caae, we nauet hold tome as naeaning P Mem. Immediate inference of Con* 
tome only. We may have a mediate tradiction omitted. Alao of Relation, 
eyilogiam on it, aa : which would come under EquipoIIence. 

[For Tabular Schemes of Propositional 
Some animalt are all men; Forms, and of their Mutual Relations, 

Some animalt are not any man; gee below, pp. 277, 278 . — Ed.] 


Digitized by Google 



270 


APPENDIX. 


not of mediate argumentation at all, but merely complex varieties 
of the immediate inference of Restriction or Subalternation, and 
are relieved of a load of perversions, limitations, exceptions, and 
rules. The differences of Quantity and Quality, &c. thus alone 
remain ; and by these exclusively are Terms, Propositions, and 
Syllogisms formally distinguished. Quantity and Quality combined 
constitute the only real discrimination of Syllogistic Mood. Syllo- 
gistic Figure vanishes, with its perplexing apparatus of special 
rules ; and even the General Laws of Syllogism proper are reduced 
to a single compendious canon. 

This doctrine is founded on the postulate of Logic : — To state 
in language, what is efficient in thought ; in other words. Before 
proceeding to deal logically with any proposition or syllogism, we 
must be allowed to determine and express what it means. 

Fii-st, then, in regard to Propositions. — In a proposition, the 
two terms, the Subject and Predicate, have each their quantity in 
thought. This quantity is not always expressed in language, for 
language tends always to abbreviation ; but it is always under- 
stood. For example, in the proposition. Men are animals, what 
do we mean ? We do not mean that some men, to the exclusion 
of others, are animals, but we use the abbreviated expression 
men for the thought all men. Logic, therefore, in virtue of 
its postulate, wfirrants, nay requires, us to state this explicitly. 
Let us, therefore, overtly quantify the subject, and say. All men 
are animals. So far we have dealt with the proposition, — 
we have quantified in language the subject, as it was quantified 
in thought. 

But the predicate still remains. We have .said — All men are 
animals. But what do we mean by animals ? Do we mean all 
animals, or some animals I Not the former ; for dogs, horses, 
oxen, &c. are animals as well as men, and dogs, horses, oxen, &c. 
are not men. Men, therefore, are animals, but exclusively of dog.s, 
horses, oxen, &c. All men, therefore, are not equivalent to aU 
animals ; that is, we cannot say, as we cannot think, that all men 
are all animals. But we can say, for ui thought wo do affirm, 
that all men are some animals. 

But if we can say, as we do think, that all men are .some 
animals, we can, on the other hand, likewnse say, as we do think, 
that some animals are all men. 


Digitized by Coogl 


APPENDIX. 


271 


If thi.s be true, it is a matter of indifference, in a logical point 
of view, (whatever it may be in a rhetorical), which of the two 
terms be made the subject or predicate of the proposition ; and 
whichsoever term is made the subject in the first instance, may, 
in the second, be converted into the predicate, and whichsoever 
term is made the predicate in the first instance, may, in tlie 
second, be converted into the subject. 

From this it follows : — 

1°, That a proposition is simply an equation, an identification, 
a bringing into congruence, of two notions in respect to their 
Extension. I say, in respect to their Extension, for it is this quan- 
tity alone which admits of ampliation or restriction, the Compre- 
hension of a notion remaining always the same, being always taken 
at its amount. 

2°, The total quantity of the proposition to be converted, and 
the total quantity of the proposition the product of the conver- 
sion, is always one and the same. In this uncxclusive point of 
view, all conversion is merely simple conversion ; and the dis- 
tinction of a conversion, as it is called, by accident, ari.scs only 
from the partial view of the logicians, who have looked merely to 
the quantity of the subject. They, accordingly, denominated a pro- 
position universal OT particular, as its subject merely w'as quanti- 
fied by the predesignation some or all ; and where a proposition 
like. All men are animals, (in thought, some animals), was con- 
verted into the proposition. Some animals are men, (in thought, 
all men), they erroneously supposed that it lost quantity, was re- 
stricted, and became a particular proposition. 

It can hardly be said that the logicians contemplated the re- 
conversion of such a proposition as the preceding ; for they did 
not (or rarely) give the name of conversio per accidens to the case 
in which the proposition, on their theory, was turned from a par- 
ticular into a universal, as when we reconvert the proposition. 
Some animals are men, into the proposition. All men are ani- 
mals.’^ They likewise neglected such affirmative propositions as 

a See above, vol. L p. 264 . — Ed. [A Hub, Logica^ t ii. 1. i. q. L c. 2, p. 32. For 
mUtake by logicians in general, that Aristotle uses the terms unittrtal, and 
partial conversion, is the mere partial eonvfrticm, simply to express 

synonym of per amWen*, and that the whether the con rerfCTis is an universal or 
former is so used by Aristotle. See Vul- particular proposition. See § 4 of tlie 


Digitized by GoogLe 



APPEXDIX 


272 

had in thought both subject and predicate quantified to their 
whole extent; as, AU triangular figure is trilateral, that is, if 
expressed as understood. All triangular is all trilateral figure , — 
All rational is risible, that is, if explicitly enounced. All rational 
is all risible animal. Aristotle, and subsequent logicians, had 
indeed frequently to do with propositions in which the predicate 
was taken in its full extension. In these the logicians, — but, be it 
obiserved, not Aristotle, — attempted to remedy the imperfection of 
the Aristotelic doctrine, which did not allow the quantificiition of 
the predicate to be taken logically or fonnally into account in 
affirmative propositions, by asserting that in the obnoxious cases 
the predicate was distributed, that is, fully quantified, in virtue of 
the matter, and not ui virtue of the form, (i»t materia-, non rations 
forma). But this is altogether erroneous. For in thought we 
generally do, nay, often must, fully quantify the predicate. In our 
logical conversion, in fact, of a projmsition like All men are 
animals, — some animals, we must formally retain in thought, 
for we cannot formally abolish, the universal quantification of 
the predicate. We, accordingly, must formally allow the propo- 
sition thus obtained, — Some animals are all men. 

The error of the logicians is further shown by our most naked 
logical notation ; for it is quite as easy and quite as natural to 
quantify A, B, or C, as predicate, as to quantify A, B, or C, as 
subject. Thus, AllH is some A ; Some A is all B. 



I may here also animadvert on the counter defect, the counter 


chapter on Conversion, (An. Prior., i. 2), 
where |>articular affirmatives are said to 
be necessarily converU^d, iv 

Convfritio jyrr aceUlen» is in two forms 
differently dcfinfxl by different logicians. 
TlicBrstby Boethius, by whom tbename 
w as originally given, U that in which tlie 
quantity of the proposition is contin- 
gently changed either from greater to 


Icss.nrfrom lesstogreatcr,««/ra rerilalf, 
the quality of the terms and projM>8i- 
tions remaining always the same. So 
Uidiger, De Sentu Vert et FahS^ p. 803. 
The second is that of logicians in gene- 
ral, where the quantity of the pniposi- 
tion is diminished, the quality of the 
propositions and terms remaining the 
same, »air<i rrritatr.,] 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


273 


error, of the logicians, in their doctrine of Negative Propositions. 
In negative propositions they say the predicate is always distri- 
buted, — always taken in its full extension. Now this is altogether 
untenable. For we always can, and frequently do, think the pre- 
dicate of negative propositions as only partially excluded from the 
sphere of the subject For example, we can think, as our naked 
diagrams can show, — All men are not some animals, that is, not 
irrational animals. In point of fact, so often as we think a sub- 
ject as p>artially included within the sphere of a predicate, eo ipso 
we think it as partially, that is, particularly, excluded therefrom. 
Logicians are, therefore, altogether at fault in their doctrine, that 
the predicate is always distributed, i.e. always universal, in negative 
propositions.” 

But, 3", If the preceding theory be true, — if it be true that sub- 
ject and predicate are, as quantified, always simply convertible, 
the proposition being in fact only an cnouncement of their equa- 
tion, it follows, (and this also is an adequate test), that we may at 
will identify the two terms by making them both the subject or 
both the predicate of the same proposition. And this we can do. 
For we can not only sAy — as A is B, so conversely B is A, or as 
All men are some animals, so, conversely. Some animals are ail 
men; but equally say — A and B are convertible, or. Convertible 
are B and A\ All men and some animals are convertible, (that is. 


• [MeUnchthon, {ErotetMLiay L. ii. Z>e 
ConvtrMionCf p. 616), followed by hU 
pupil and commentator Strigeliue, {In 
ErotemeUa^ pp. 676, 681), and by Keck* 
ermann, Log. Minut^ L. ii. c. 3, Op. 
p. 222), and Others, thinks that ** there 
ia a greater force of the particle none, 
{nulluSf not any), than of the particle all, 
(offuiu). Fur, in a universal n^ative, 
the force of the negation is so spread 
over the whole proposition, that in its 
conversion the same sign is retained, (as 
— Ab ttar it eomumed; therefore, no 
Jlamt tohich u contutned U a ttar) : 
whereas such conversion dues not take 
place in a universal affirmative.** This 
Strigelius compares to the diffusion of 
a ferment or acute poison ; adding that 
the affirmative particle is limited to the 
subject, whilst the negative extends to 

VOU TI. 


both subject and predicate, in other 
words, to the whole proposition. 

This doctrine is altogether erroneous. 
It is an erroneous theory devised to 
explain an erroneous practice. In the 
first place, we have here a commutation 
of negation with quantification ; and, at 
the same time, conversion, direct con- 
version at least, will not be said to 
change the quality either of a negative 
or affirmative proposition. In the se- 
cond place, it cannot be pretended that 
negation has an exclusive or even greater 
affinity to universal than to particu- 
lar quantification. We can equally well 
say not tome, not all, not any ; and the 
reason why one of these forms is pre- 
ferred, lies certainly not in any attrac- 
tion or affinity to the negative par- 
ticle.] 

S 


Digitized by Coogle 


274 


APPEITDIX. 


some convertible things), or, Convertible, (that is, some convertible, 
things), are some animals and all men. By convertible, I mean 
the same, the identical, the congruent, &c.« 


The general errors in regard to Conversion, — the errors from 
which all the rest proceed, are — 

1°, The omission to quantify the predicate throughout 

2°, The conceit that the quantities did not belong to the terms. 

3°, Tlie conceit that the quantities were not to be transposed 
with their relative terms. 

4®, The one-sided view that the proposition was not equally 
composed of the two terms, but was more dependent on the sub- 
ject than on the predicate 

5°, The consequent error that the quantity of the subject term 
determines the quantity of the proposition absolutely. 


o [With the doctrine of Conversion 
taught in the text, compare the follow- 
ing authorities : — Laurentius Valla, 
L. ii. c. 24, f. 37. Titius, 
j4r$ CoffUantii, (v. Ridiger, De Sensu 
Veri eC FaUi, L. ii. c. i. p. 232). 
Reusch, Sys/ema Zofffatm, § 380, p. 413 
1741. Hollmann.Zoi/fca, § 89, 
p. 172. Ploucquet. Fries, Zof/ii, § 33, 
p. 146. E. Reinbold, Zog^^ § 117, p. 
286. Ancients referred to by Am- 
moniuB, In De Interp., c. viL, § 4, f. . . , 
Paulus ValliuB, Lof/ica, t. ii, In An, 
Prior., L. i. q. ii. c. iv.] (Valla 1. c. 
says Non amplius ac latiusaccipitur 
pncdicatum quam subjectum. Ideoque 
cum illo converti potest, ut omnu homo 
tit animal: non utiquo totum genus 
animal, sed aliqua pars hujus generis . . 
ergo, Aliqua pan animalis est in omni 
homine. Item, Quidam hotno ut ani- 
mal, scilicet est quiedam pan animalit, 
Q^ioedampan animalis est quidam 
homo, &c.” Qottlieb Gerhard Titius, 
An Coffitandi, c. vii. § 3 ef seq., p. 126. 
Lipeiaj, 1723 (first ed. 1701). “ Nihil 
autem aliud agit Couversio, quam ut 
simpliciter pnedicatum et subjectum 
transponat, bine ncc qualitatem nec 


quantitatem iis largitur, aut eas mutnt, 
sed prout reporit, ita convertit. Ex 
quo necessario sequitur conversionem 
esse uniformem ac omnes propositiones 
eodem plane mode converti. Per ex- 
empla, (1), NuHus homo ut lapU, ergo, 
.Xullus lapis est homo, (2), Quidam homo 
no» est medicut (omnin), ergo, Medicut 
non est homo quidam, seu Xullus medicus 
ut homo quidam . , . (3), Hie Petrus 
non est doetus (omnts), ergo, Omnis doe- 
tus nonut hie Petrus . . . (4), Omnts 
homo ut animal (quoddam), ergo, Quod- 
dam animal est homo (6), Quidam homo 
currit {particulariter), ergo, Quidam cur^ 
rens est homo, (6), Hie Paulus est doetus 
{quidam), ergo, Quidam doehu est hie 
Paulus. In omnibus bis exomplis sub- 
jectum cum sua quantitate in locum 
pncdicati, et hoc, eodem modo, in illius 
sedem transponitur, ut nulla penitus 
ratio solida appareat, quare conversi- 
onem iu diversas species divellcro de- 
beamus. Vulgo tamen aliter seutiunt 
quando triplicem conversionem, nempo 
simplieem, per accident, ac per contra- 
positionem, adatruunt. . . . Enimvero 
conversio per aeddens et per contraposi- 
tionem gratis asseritur, nam conversio 


Digitized by Coog[e 



APPENDIX. 


2Y5 


(j°, The consequent error that there was any increase or dimi- 
nution of the total quantity of the proposition. 

7°, That thoroughgoing conversion could not take place by one, 
and that the simple, form. 

8°, That all called in at least the form of Accidental Conversion ; 
all admitting at the same time that certain moods remain incon- 
vertible. 

9“, That the majority of logicians resorted to Contraposition, 
(which is not a conversion at all) ; some of them, however, as 
Burgersdyk, admitting that certain moods still remained obstinately 
inconvertible. 

10°, That they thus introduced a form which was at best indi- 
rect, vague, and useless, in fact not a conversion at all. 

11°, That even admitting that all the moods were convertible 
by one or other of the three forms, the same mood was convertible 
by more than one. 


propoaitionis affinnantis uDiyeraaliA per- 
inde simplex est ac ea qua universalis 
negans couvertitur, licet post earn sub- 
jectum sit particulare ; conversionU 
enim hie nulla culpa est, quso quanti* 
tatem, qus non adost, largiri ncc potent 
neo debet. . . . Error Tulgaris doctrins, 
nisi fallor, inde est, quod existimavorint 
ad conversionom simplicem requiri, u/ 
pr<fdicat\tm (utumat iigmun tt quantitn- 
tfm subjfcti , , . Conversionem per 

eontrapontionan quod attinet, facile m- 
tend! potest (1) exempla hcio jactari 
solito, posse conveili simpliciter ; (2) 
convenioncm per contrapositionem, re- 
?era non esse conversionem; interim (3) 
putativam iatam conversionem non in 
universali affirmante, et porticulari ue- 
gante solum, sed in omnibus potiua pro- 
positionibus locum habere . . . e.g., 
Quoddam animal non tit quadrupei, ergo, 
NuUut quadrupe$ est anitnai quoddam.** 
See the criticism of the doctrine of 
Titius by Kidiger, quoted below, p. 811. 
Ploucquet, Methodus Calculandi in 
Logieis, p. 49 (1763). " Intelloctio identi- 
tatis Bubjecti et pncdicati est a^rmatio. 
. . . Chnnis circulus est tinea curra. 

Qua) propoeitio logice expressa hose est : 
— Omnis circulus est qncedam linea curva. 


Quo pacto id, quod intelligitur in prtedi* 
cuto identificaturcum eo quod intelligitur 
in subjecto. Sive norim, sive non norim 
prmtor circulum dari quoque alias cur- 
varum species, verum tamen eat quon- 
dam lincam cur\’am sennu comprthensivQ 
Bumtam, esse omnem circulum, seu om- 
nem circulum esse yaaiif/am lineam cur- 
vam/’ Vallius, 1. c. ** Negativa) vero 
convertuntur et in jiartlculares et in 
universaloB negativas; ut si dicamus, 
Socrates non est lapis, convertens illiiis 
erit, Atiquis lapis non est Socrates, ct 
Nullus lapis est Socrates, et idem di- 
cendum erit de omni alia simili proposi- 
tione.” — E d.] 

[That Universal Affirmative Proposi- 
tions may be converted simply, if their 
predicates are reciprocating, see Cor- 
vinuB, Instit. Phil. Hat., § 514. lenie, 
1742. Baumgarten, l^gica, § 280, 
1765. ScotuB, In. An. Pr., L. L qu. 
14, Ulrich, Instit. Log. et Met., 
§ i.2, 177. (1785). Kreil, Logik, §§ 46, 
62, (1789). Isendoom, Logica Peripa- 
tetica, L. iii. c. 8, pp. 480, 431. Wal- 
lis, Logica, L. ii. c. 7. Zabarella, In. 
An. Prior, Tahul(z, p. 148. L«amb«rt, 
De Vnixersaliori Calculi Idea, § 24 et 
mi] 


Digitized by Coogle 



27G 


APPENDIX. 


12°, That all this mass of error and confusion was from their 
overlooking the necessity of one simple and direct mode of con- 
version ; missing the one straight road. 


We have shown tliat a judgment (or proposition) is only a 
comparison resulting in a congruence, an equation, or non-equa- 
tion of two notions in the quantity of Extension ; and that these 
compared notions may stand to each other, as the one subject and 
the other predicate, as both the subject, or as both the predicate of 
the judgment. If this be true, the transposition of the terms of 
a proposition sinks in a very easy and a very simple process ; 
whilst the whole doctrine of logical Conversion is superseded as 
operose and imperfect, as useless and erroneous. The systems, new 
and old, must stand or fall with their doctrines of the Conversion 
of propositiona 

Thus, according to the doctrine of the logicians, conversion 
applies only to the naked terms themselves : — the subject and 
predicate of the prejacent interchange places, but the quantity 
by which each was therein affected is excluded from the move- 
ment ; remaining to affect its correlative in the subjacent proposi- 
tion. This is altogether erroneous. In conversion we transpose 
the compared notions, — the correlated terms. If we do not, ever- 
sion, not conversion, is the result 


If, (as the Logicians suppose), in the convertens the subject 
and predicate took each other’s quantity, the proposition would 
be not the same relation of the same notions. It makes no 
difference that the converse only takes place when the subject 
chances to have an equal amount or a less than the predicate. 
There must be at any rate a reasoning, (concealed indeed), to 
warrant it : in the fonner case — that the predicate is entitled to 
take all the quantity of the subject, being itself of equivalent 
amount ; in the second, (a reasoning of subaltemation), that it is 
entitled to take the quantity of the subject, being less than its 
own. All this is false. Subject and predicate have a right to 
their own, and only to their own, which they carry with them, 
when they become each other. 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


277 


(rf) APPLICATION OF DOCTRINE OF QUANTIFIED 
PREDICATE TO PROPOSITIONS. 


(I). New Propositional Forsis — Notation. 


Instead of four species of Proposition determined by the Quantity 
and Quality taken together, the Quantity of the Subject being 
alone considered, there are double that number, the Quantity of the 
Predicate being also taken into account. 




Affirmative. 

(1) [AfA] 

C : 

(ii) [Afl] 

C : 

(3) [If A] 

A, 

(iv) [If I] 

c, 

Negative. 

(v) [EnE] 

C: 



( A) (A) 

(6) [EnO] C: 
(A) (I) 

(vii) [OnE] B,' 
(I) (A) 

(8) [OnO] C, 

(I) (I) 


- : r All Triangle is all Trilateral [fig. 1]. 
-, A All Triangle is some Figure (A) 

[fig- 2]. 

- : C Some Figure is all Triangle [fig. 2]. 
-, B Some Triangle is some Equilateral 
(I) [fig. 4]. 

- : D Any Triangle is not any Square (E) 
[fig. 3].^ 

- , B Any Triangle is not some Equilateral 

[fig. 4]. 

- : C Some Equilateral is not any Triangle 

(0) [fig. 4]. 

- ,B Some Triangle is not some Equila- 

teral [fig. 4].“ 


• [lu this table the Roman numerals 
distinguish such propoeitional forms as 
are recognised in the Aristotclic or 
common doctrine, whereas the Arabic 
ciphers mark those (half of the whole) 
which I think ought likewise to be 
recognised. In the literal symbols, I 
simplify and disintricate the scholastic 
notation ; taking A and I for universal 
and particuUr, but, extending them to 
cither quality, marking affirmation by f, 
negation by n, the two first consonants 


of the verbs and no/o, — verbs 

from which I have no doubt that Petrus 
Hispanus drew, respectively, the two first 
vowels, to denote his four complications 
of quantity and quality.]— 
p. 686. 

[In the notation employed above, the 
comma , denotes some / the colon : all ; 
the line — " denotes the affirmative 

copula, and negation is expressed by 
drawing a line through the affirmative 
copula ; the thick end of the line 


Digitized by Coogle 


278 


APPENDIX. 


(2). Quantity of Peopositions — Definitdde and 
Indefinitude. 

Nothing can exceed the ambiguity, vacillation' and uncertainty 
of logicians concerning the Quantity of Propositions. 

I. As regards what are called indefinite (dSiopwrroi more pro- 
perly indesignate or preindesignate propositions. The absence of 
overt quantification applies only to the subject ; for the predicate 
was supposed always in affirmatives to be particular, in negatives to 
be universal Eeferring, therefore, only to the indesignation of the 
subject : — indefinites were by some logicians, (as the Greek com- 
mentators on Aristotle {?), Apuleius apud Waitz, In Org. i. p. 
338, but see Wegelin, In Anepongmi Phil. Sgn., p. 588), made 
tantamount to particulars: by others, (as Valla, Dudectica, L. 
ii. c. 2-i, f. 37), made tantamount to universals. They ought 
to have been considered as merely elliptical, and to be definitely 
referable either to particulars or universals.* 


denotes the subject, the tliin end the 
predicate, of Extension. In Intension 
the thin end denotes the subject, the 
thick end the predicate. Thus : — 
C : A is read, All C ts tome A. 

C : ¦ I : D is read, Ko C is any D. The 
Table given in the text is from a copy 
of an early scheme of the authors new 
Propositional Forms. For some time 
after his discovery of the doctrine of a 
quantified pre<licate, Sir W. Hamilton 
seems to have used the vowels E and 
0 in the formul® of Negative Proposi- 
tions ; and the full period (.) as the 
symbol of tome (indehnite quantity). In 
the college session of 1845-46, he had 
adopted the comma (,) as the symbol of 
indefinite quantity. As the period ap- 
pears in the original copy of this table 
as the symbol of some, its ilate cannot 
be later tlian 1845. The comma (,) has 
been substituted by the Editors, to adapt 
the table to the Author’s latest f<.>rm of 
notation. The translation of its symbols 
into concrete propositions, affords deci- 
sive evidence of the meaning which the 
Author attached to them on the new 
doctrine. That this, moreover, was the 
uniform import of Sir W. Hamilton’s 
propositional notation, from the earliest 
development of the tbeoty of a quantified 


predicate, is placed beyond doubt by 
numerous passages in papers (not print- 
ed), and by marginal notes on books, 
written at various periods between 1839- 
40, and the date of his illness, July 1844, 
when he was compelled to employ au 
amanuens's. The letters in round brack- 
ets, (A) and (I), are the vowels finally 
adopted by the Author, in place of E and 

0. See below, p. 283, Ed.J 

a [Tliat Indefinite pro{x>sitions are to 
be referred to universals, see Purchot, 
Instil. Phil. Xoi/fca, I. § ii. c. 2, pp. 124, 
125, 126. Ihiltenbeccius, Jjoyica Coi\- 
/racto, c. vi. p. 92, (1560). Baumeister, 
Inst. Phil. § 213. J. C, Scaliger, 
Exercitationes, Ex. 212, § 2. Drobisch, 
I*^ji^> § 39. Neomagua, Ad Trapeznn- 
Hum, {. 1 0. To be referred to particular; 
see Lovauienses, Com, in A rist. Dial. p. 
161. Molimeus, Ekmenta Logica, L. 1. 
c. 2. Alex. Aphrod, In An. Prior., c. iL 
p. 19. Denzinger, Logica, § 71. Either 
universal or particular, Keckermann, 
Oj*era, p. 220. Aristotle doubts : see 
An. Prior, L. I. c. 27, ¦§ 7, and De 
Interp. c. 7. That Indefinitude is no 
se)»arate species of quantity, sec Schei- 
bler, Olvera Ijogica, p. iii. c. 6, p. 443. 
Gr®cus Anonymus, De Syllogismo, L. 

1. c. 4, f. 42. Leibnitz, Opera, t iv. 


Digitized by Coogle 


ArPJCNDlX. 


279 


II. A remarkable uncertainty prevails in regard to the meaning 
of particularity and its signs, — some, &a Here some may mean 
some only — some not all. Here some, though always in a certain 
degree indefinite, is definite so far as it excludes omnitude, — is used 
in opposition to cdl. This I would call its Semi-definite meaning. 
On the other hand, some may mean some at least, — some, perhaps 
all. In this signification some is thoroughly indefinite, as it does 
not exclude omnitude or totality. This meaning I would call the 
Indefinite. 

Now of these two meanings there is no doubt that Aristotle used 
particularity only in the second, or thoroughly Indefinite, meaning. 
For 1°, He does not recognise the incom possibility of the super- 
ordinate and subordinate. 2^, He makes all and on n-a; or particu- 
lar negative, to be contradictories ; that is, one necessarily tnie, the 
other necessarily false. But this is not the case in the Semi-definite 
meaning. The same holds good in the Universal Negative, and 
Particular Afifirmative. 


The particularity, — the some, — is held to be a definite some when 
the other tenn is Definite, as in ii and 3, in 6 and vii On the 
other hand, when both terms are Indefinite or Particular, as in iv. 
and 8, the some of each is left wholly indefinite. 


The quantification of definitude or non-partiadarity (:) may 
designate ambiguously or indifferently one or otlier of three con- 
cepts. 1°, It may designate explicit omnitude or totality ; which, 
when expressed articulately, may l>e denoted by (: :). Thus — AU 
triangles are all trilaterals. 2°, It may designate a class con- 
sidered as undivided, though not positively thought as taken in its 
whole extent ; and this may be articulately denoted by (;.). Thus 
— The triangle is the trilateral; — The dog is the latrant . — 
(Here note the use of the definite article in English, Greek, French, 
German,® &c.) 3°, It may designate not what is merely undivided. 


p. iii. p. 123. Frie», der Isogxk, 

§ 30, p. 137. Raxuus, Schol. Diai., L. 
viL c. 2, p. 457. Downam, Jn Ilami 
ViaUet.f L. ii c. 4, p. 359. Kacciolati, 
Bud. Log. p. ii c. Hi, p. 67. Delari- 
viksro, youvclU Logiqut Clattiquet L. ii 
H. u. c. 3, B. 530, p. 334. 

Thai Indtihnitude baa somotimea a 


logical import, when we do not know 
whether all, or tome, of the one be to 
be affirmed or denied of the other. £. 
Reinhold, Zoyri', § 88. Anm. 2, pp. 193, 
194. Ploucquet, Methodut Calculandi^ 
pp. 48, 53, ed. 1773. Lambert, Neuet 
Organen, I., g 235, p. 143.] 
a [Oq effect of the definite article and 


Digitized by Coogle 



28U 


APPENDIX. 


though divisible, — a class, but what is indivisible, — an individual ; 
and this may be marked by the small letter or by (: ) — ^Thus 
— Socrates is the husband of Xanthippe; — This horse is 
Bucephalus. 

Ill like manner particularity or iudefinitude (,), when we wish 
to mark it as thoroughly indefinite, may be designated by (*,), 
whereas when we would mark it as definitely indefinite, as ex- 
cluding all or not any, may be marked by (”). 

The indefinites (aoptara) of Aristotle correspond sometimes to 
the particular, sometimes to one or other, of the two kinds of 
universals.” 


The designation of tndefimtude or particularity, some ( , or ,) 
may mean one or other of two very different things. 

1 It may mean some and some only, being neither all nor none, 
and, in this sense, it will be both affirmative and negative, (,,). 

2°, It may mean, negatively, not all, perhaps none, some at 
most; affirmatively, no< none, perhaps all, — some at least, (, ,). 

Aristotle and the logicians contemplate only the second mean- 


iU absence in different langiiAgcs, in re- 
ducing the definite to the indefinite, 
see Delarivi^re, Logxqutt §§ 580, 581. 

On the Greek article, see Ammonius, 
In I)e Intrrp. c. vii. f. 67 b. 

On use of the Arabic article in quan- 
tification, see Averroes, De /wfrryi., p. 
39, ed. 1552:— 

Al in the Arabic tongue, and Ila 
in the Hebrew, and in like manner the 
articles in other languages, sometimes 
have the power of universal predesigna- 
tions, sometimes of particular. If the 
former, then they have the force of con- 
traries ; if the latter, then the force of 
sub-contrariea. For it is true to say, a/, 
that is, ip$c homo is vihitt, and al, that 
is, ipse homo U not tchiU ; that is, when 
the article al or ha, that is, ipse, denotes 
the de-signatiou of particularity. They 
may, however, be at once false, when 
the article al or ha has the force of the 
universal predcsignation.’’ (See also p. 
52 of the same book.) 

In English the definite article always 
defines, — renders definite, — but some- 
times individualises, and sometimes ge- 


neralises. If we would use man gene- 
rally, we must not prefix the article, as 
in Greek, German, French, Ac., so stealth, 
government, &c. But in definition of 
horse, &c., the reverse, as the dog, {le 
ehien, 6 &c.) A in English is often 

equivalent to any.] 
a [Logicians who have marked the 
Quantities by Definite, Indefinite, &c. 

Aristotle, Pr. c. iv. § 21, and 
there Alexander, Pacius. Theophras- 
tus, (Facciolati, Rud. Log., p. L c. 4, 

?. 39.) Ammonius, In I)e Inter.ff. 72 b. 
(Brandis, Scholia, p. 113.) Stoics and 
Non-peripatetic Logicians in general, 
see Sext. Empiricus, Adv. Log., § 98 
ft seq., p. 476, ed. Fabricii ; Diog. 
Laert. Lib. vii. seq. 71, ubi Menagius. 
Downam, In Rami Dialecticam, L. ii. 

?. 4, p. 363, notices that a parti- 
cular proposition was called by the 
Stoics indefinite, {k6pt<rrov)\ by some 
I.Atins, and sometimes by Ramus him- 
self, infinite; because it does not de- 
signate some certain species, but leaves 
it uncertain and indefinite.” Hurtado do 
Mendoea, Ditp. Log. et Met., t. i, d. iv. § 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


281 


ing. The reason of tliis perhaps is, that this distinction only 
emei^s in the consideration of Opposition and Immediate Infer- 
ence, which were less elaborated in the former theories of Logic ; 
and does not obtrude itself in the consideration of Mediate Infer- 
ence, which is there principally developed. On the doctrine of the 
logicians, there is no opposition of subaltemation ; and by Aris- 
totle no opposition of subaltemation is mentioned. By other 
logicians it was erroneously introduced. The opposition of Sub- 
contraries is, likewise, improper, being precarious and not between 
the same things. Aristotle, though he enumerates this opposition, 
was quite aware of its impropriety, and declares it to be merely 
verbal, not real® 

By the introduction of the first meaning of some, we obtain a 
veritable opposition in Subaltemation ; and an inference in Sub- 
contrariety, which I would call Integration. 

(3.) Opposition of Peopositions. 

Propositions may be considered under two views ; according as 
their particularity, or indefinitude, is supposed to be thoroughly 
indefinite, unexclusive even of the definite ; some, meaning some 
at least, some, 'perhaps all, some, perhaps 'not any ; or definite 
indefinitude, and so exclusive of the definite ; some, meaning some 
at most, — some only, — some not all, &c. The latter thus excludes 
omnitude or totality, positive or negative ; the former does not. 
The former is the view promulgated as alone contemplated by 
Aristotle ; and has been inherited from him by the Logicians, with- 
out thought of increase or of change. The latter is the view which 
I would introduce ; and though it may not supersede, ought, I 
think, to have been placed alongside of the other. 

Causes of the introduction of the Aristotelic .system alone : — 

1°, To allow a harmony of Logic with common language ; for 
language eliding all that is not of immediate interest, and the 
determination of the subject-notion being generally that alone 
intended, the predicate is only considered in so far as it is thought 
to cover the subject, that is, to be at least co-extensive with it. 

2,p. 114. LovaoienBee, /n Z>ia/.,p. a On both forms of Opposition, see 
161. Hollmann, Zot/tra, p. 173. Boethius, Scheibler, [Opera Lwjica^ $ iit, de Pra- 
Opera, p. 845. Reusch,5y«Z Zo^.,p. 424. potittonibus, c. xi. p. 487} and above, 
Esser, Lofpky § 58. Weiss, Logik^ §| 149, vol. i. p. 261 . — Ed.] 

150. So Kiesewetter, §§ 102, 103,] 


Digitized by Coog[e 



282 


Al'PENDIX. 


But if we should convert the terms, the inadequacy would be 
brought to light. 

2°, A great number of notions are used principally, if not ex- 
clusively, as attributes, and not as subjects. Men are, consequently, 
very commonly ignorant of the proportion of the extension be- 
tween the subjects and predicates, which they are in the habit of 
combining into propositions. 

3°, In regard to negatives, men naturally preferred to attribute 
positively a part of one notion to another than to deny a part 
Hence the unfrequency of negatives witli a particular predicate 

On the doctrine of Semi-definite Particularity, I would thus 
evolve the Opposition or Incompossibility of propositions, neglect- 
ing or throwing aside (witli Aristotle) those of Stibaltemation 
and Sub-contrariety, but introducing that of Inconsistency. 

Incompossibility is either of propositions of the same, or of dif- 
ferent, quality. Incompossible propositions differing in quality are 
either Contradictories without a mean,— no third, — that is, if one be 
true the other must be false, and if one be false the other must be 
true ; or Contraries with a mean, — a third, — that is, both may be 
false, but both cannot be true. Incompossible propositions of the 
same quality are Inconsistents, and, like Contraries, they have a 
mean, that is, both may be false, but both cannot be trua 

Contradictories are again either simple or complex The simple 
are either, 1", Of Universals, as undivided wholes; or, 2°, Of In- 
dividuals, as indivisible parts.a 

The complex are of universals divided, as 4 — 5. 

Contraries, again, which are only of divided universals, are 1°, 
Bilateral, as 1 — 5 ; or, 2°, Unilateral, as 1 — 6, 1 — 7, 2 — 5, 3 — 5 ; 
or, S”, Cross, as 2 — 7, 3 — 6. 

Inconsistents are either, 1°, Affirmatives ; or, 2°, Negatives. Af- 
firmatives, as ] — 2, 1 — 3, 2 — 3. Negatives, as 5 — 6, 5 — 7. The pro- 
]K>sitions 6 — 7 are sometimes Inconsistents, sometimes Consistents. 

All the other propositional forms, whether of the same or of 
different qualities, are Compossible or Unopposed. 

The differences in Conipossibility of the two schemes of Indefin- 
ite and Definite particularity lies, 1°, in the whole Inconsistents ; 
2°, in two Contraries for Contradictories. 1°, According to the 

a Qeiiond terms, used as individual Ma» u nol morktl. So that there are 
terms, when oppoeed to each other, may three kinda of contrmdictoriea. 
be contradictories, as Man it mryr/a/, 


Digitized by Coog[c 


Al'l’ENDlX. 


283 


former, all oilirraative and all negative propositions arc consistent, 
whereas in the latter these are inconsistent, 1 — 2, 1 — 3, 2 — 3; 
among the affirmatives, and among the negatives, 5 — 6, 5 — 7. 
(As said before, 6 — 7 is in both schemes sometimes compossible, 
and sometimes incompwssible). 2°, Two incompossibles, to wit, 
2 — 7, 3 — 6, which, on the Aristotelic doctrine, are Contradictories, 
are in mine Contraries. 

The propositional form 4 is consistent with all the affinnatives ; 
8 is not only consistent with all the negatives, but is compossible 
with every other form in universals. It is useful only to divide a 
class, and is opposed only by the negation of divisibility. 

By adopting exclusively the Indefinite particularity, logicians 
threw away some important immediate inferences ; those, to wit, 1 °, 
From the affirmation of one sotne to the negation of another, and 
vice versa; and, 2°, From the affirmation of one inconsistent to the 
negation of another. 1°, Thus, on our system, but not on theirs, 
affirming oilman to be some animal, we have a right to infer that 
no man is some (other) animal; affirming that some animal is all 
man, we have a right to infer that some (other) animal is not any 
man ; affirming some nun are some blacks, (Negroes), we arc en- 
titled to say that (same) some men are not some (other ) blacks, 
(Hindoos), and also that (other) some men are not the (same) some 
blacks. And so backwards from negation to affirmation. This 
inference I would call that of [Integration]. 

2°, Affirming all men are some animals, we are entitled to 
infer the denial of the propositions, all men are all animals, some 
men are all aninuils. And so in the negative inconsistents. 

AFFIRMATIV1'3. 

1.) Toto-total = Afa = All — is all — . 

ii.) Toto-partial = Afi = All — is some — . (A) 

3.) Parti-total = Ifa = Some — is all — . 

iv.) Parti-partial = In = Some — is some — . (1) 

NEOATIVEa 

V.) Toto-total = Ana = Any — is not any — . (E) 

6.) Toto-partial = Ani = Any — is not some — . 

viL) Parti-total = INA = Some — is not any — . (O) 

8.) Parti-partial = Ini = Some — is not some — . 


Digitized by Googlc 



28t 


APPENDIX. 


TABLE OF THE Mutual Relations of the Eight Propositional Forms 
ON Either System of Particularity. (For Generals only.) 



Abbreviations :— bi. =bilalrral; cr. = cron; Contnir. = Conlmria; di. = rfir«rt; 
Tncons. = /ncon*ixtenU ; Int. or Intcgr. = IntetpralioH ; Rcpug^i. *=* C’t>»lra- 

ilictoritt ; Res. or Rostr. « Rtstricliony SuhalUrMtion ; un. » ytnUtUeral. — Bliuika; ini. 
= Cow.pouiHu \ in II. = No inftrmce, — {Uniiattraf, bUateralf cros*, rfi'rcd, refer to the 
Extremes.) 

The preceding Table may not bo quite accurate in details. 


Digitized by Coogle 




APPENDIX. 


285 


(e) SYLLOGISMS. 

Observations on the Mutual Relation of Syllogistic 
Teems in Quantity and Quality. 

General Canoa — What worst relation of subject and predicate, 

subsists between either of two terms and a common third term, 

with which one, at least, is positively related; that relation 

subsists between the two terms themselves. 

There are only three possible relations of Terms, (notions, repre- 
sentations, presentations). 

1°, The relation of Toto-total Coinclusion, (coidentity, absolute 
convertibility or reciprocation) (AfA). 

2°, The relation of Toto-total Coexclusion, (non-identity, ab.so- 
lute inconvertibility or non-reciprocation) (AnA). 

3“, The relation of Incomplete Coinclusion, which involves the 
counter-relation of Incomplete Coexclusion, (partial identity and 
non-identity, relative convertibility and non-convertibility, reci- 
procation, and non-reciprocation). This is of various orders and 
degreea 

a) Where the whole of one term and the part of another are 
coinclusive or coidentical (Afl). This I call the relation of 
toto-partial coinclusion, aa All men are some animals. This 
necessarily involves the counter-relation of toto-partial coexclu- 
sion (AnI), as Any man is not some animal. But the con- 
verse of this affirmative and negative affords the relations of 

b) Parti-total Coinclusion (IfA), and Coexclusion (InA), as 
Some animal is all man. Some animal is not any man. 

c) There is still a third double relation under this head, when 
two terms partially include and partially exclude each other (Ifl 
Ini), as Some women are some authors, and Some women are 
not some authors. This relation I call that of Parti-partial 
Coindusion, and Parti-partial Coexclusion. 

Of these three general relations, the first is [technically styled] 
the best ; the second is the worst ; and the third is intermediate. 

Former logicians knew only of two worse relations, — a particular, 
worse than a universal, affirmative, and a negative worse than an 
affirmative. As to a better and worse in negatives, they knew 


Digitized by Coogic 



286 


APPENDIX. 


nothing ; for as two negative premises were inadmissible, they had 
no occasion to determine which of two negatives was the worse or 
better. But in quantifying the predicate, in connecting positive 
and negative moods, and in generalising a one supreme canon of 
syllogism, we are compelled to look further, to consider the inverse 
procedures of affirmation and negation, and to show {e.g. in v. a. 
and vL b., ix. a. and x. b), how the latter, by reversing the former, 
and turning the best quantity of affirmation into the worst of 
negation, annuls all restriction, and thus apparently varies the 
quantity of the conclusion. It thus becomes necessaiy to show 
the whole order of best and worst quantification throughout the 
two qualities, and how affirmation commences with the whole in 
Inclu.sion and Negation, with the parts in Exclusion. « 

Best ’ Toto-total, 

Toto-partial, 

Parti-total, 

Parti-partial. 

Parti-pai’tial,l 
Parti-total, 

Toto-partial, 

Toto-total. 

As the negation always reduces the best to the worst relation, 
in the intermediate relations determining only a commutation from 
equal to equal, whilst in both, the symbols of quantity, in their in- 
verse signification, remain externally the same ; it is evident, that 
the quantification of the conclusion will rarely be apparently diffe- 
rent in the negative, from what it is in the corresponding positive, 
mood. There are, indeed, only four differences to be found in the 
negative from the positive conclusions, and these all proceed on the 
same principle — viz. in v. a. and vi. b., in ix. a. and x. b. Here 
the particular quantification of the positive conclusions disappears 
in the negative moods. But this is in obedience to the general 
canon of syllogism, — “ that the worst relation subsisting between 
either extreme and the middle, should subsist between the extremes 
themselves.” For what was the best relation in the former, becomes 
the worst in the latter ; and as affirmation comes in from the 
greatest whole, whilst negation goes out from the least part, so, in 
point of fact, the some of the one may become the not any of the 



JioTSt 


> Identity or Coinclusion. 


Non-identityor Coexclusion. 


a S 60 Ma^ntinuA, (In BmndiiS SrKfdia, p. 113, nud there the Platonics.) 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


287 


other. There is here, therefore, manifestly no exception. On the 
contrary this affords a striking example of the universal applicabi- 
lity of the canon under every change of circumstances. The canon 
would, in fact, have been invalidated, had the apparent anomaly 
not emerged. 


I. Terms each totally coinclu- 
sive of a third, are totally co- 
inclusive of each other. 


II. Tenns each parti-totally 
coinclusive of a third, are parti- 
ally coinclusive of each other. 


III. A term totally, and a 
term parti-totally, coinclusive of 
a third, are toto-partially coin- 
clusive of each other. 


IV. A term parti-totally, and 
a term totally, coinclusive of a 
third, are parti-totally coinclu- 
sive of each other. 


V. A term totally, and a term 
toto partially, coinclusive of a 


a) A term totally coexclu- 
sive, and a term totally coin- 
elusive, of a third, are totally 
coexclusive of each other. 

b) A term totally coinclu- 
.sive, and a term totally coex- 
elu.sivc, of a third, arc totally 
coexclusive of each other. 

a) A term parti-totally co- 
exclusive,and a term parti-totally 
coinclusive, of a third, are parti- 
ally coexclusive of each other. 

b) A tenn parti-totally coin- 
clusive, and a term parti-totally 
cocxclusive, of a third, are par- 
tially coexclusive of each other. 

a) A term totally coexclusive, 
and a terra parti-totally coin- 
clusive, of a third, are toto-parti- 
ally cocxclusive of each other. 

b) A term totally coinclusive, 
and a term parti-totally coexclu- 
sive, of a third, are toto-partially 
cocxclusive of each other. 

a) A tenn parti-totally co- 
exclusive, and a term totally co- 
inclusivc, of a third, are parti- 
totally coexclusive of each other. 

b) A term parti-totally co- 
inclusive, and a term totally co- 
cxclusive, of a third, are jiarti- 
totally coexclusive of each other. 

a) A tenn totally coexclusive, 
and a term toto-partially coin- 


Digitized by Coogic 


288 


APPENDIX. 


third, are parti-totally coinclu- 
sive of each other. 


VI. A term toto - partially, 
and a term totally, coinclu.sive 
of a third, are toto -partially 
coinclusive of each other. 


VII. A term parti-totally, and 
a term partially, coiiiclusive of a 
third, are partially coinclusive 
of each other. 


VIII. A term parthilly, and a 
term parti-totally, coinclusive of 
a tliird, are partially coinclu.sive 
of each other. 


IX. A terra totally, and a 
term partially, coinclusive of a 
third, are partially coinclusive of 
each other. 


X. A term partially, and a 
term totally, coinclusive of a 


elusive, of a third, are totally 
coexclusive of each other. 

b) A term totally coinclusive, 
and a term toto-partiaJly coex- 
clusive, of athird,are parti-totally 
coexclusive of each other. 

a) A term toto - partially co- 
exclusivc, and a term totally co- 
inclusive, of a third, are toto-pai- 
tially coexclusive of each other. 

b) A term toto-partially co- 
inclusive, and a term totally co- 
exclusive, of a third, are totally 
coexclusive of each other. 

a) A term parti-totally co- 
exclusive, and a term partially 
coinclusive, of a third, are parti- 
ally coexclusive of each other. 

b) A term parti-totally co- 
inclusive, and a term partially 
coexclusive, of a third, are par- 
tially coexclusive of each other. 

a) A term partially coexclu- 
sive, and a term parti-totally co- 
inclusive, of a third, are partially 
coexclusive of each other. 

b) A term partially coiuclu- 
sive, and a term parti-totally co- 
exclusive, of a third, arc partially 
coexclusive of each other. 

a) A term totally coexclusive, 
and a term partially coinclusive, 
of a third, arc parti-totally co- 
exclusive of each other. 

b) A term totally coinclusive, 
and a term pai-tially, cocxclusive 
of a third, are partially cocxcln- 
sivo of each other. 

a) A term partially coexclu- 
sive, and a term totally coinclu- 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


289 


third, are partially coinclusive of 
each other. 


XI. A term parti-totally, and 
a term toto-partially, coinclusive 
of a third, are parti-totally co- 
inclusive of each other. 


XII. A term toto-partially, 
and a term parti-totaUy, coinclu- 
sive of a third, are toto-partially 
coinclusive of each other. 


sive of a third, are partially co- 
exclusive of each other. 

b) A term partially coinclu- 
sive, and a term totally coexclu- 
sive, of a third, are toto-partially 
coexclusive of each other. 

a) A term parti-totally coex- 
clu.sive, and a term toto-j)arti- 
ally coinclusive, of a third, are 
parti-totally cocxclusive of each 
other. 

b) A term parti-totally coin- 
clusive, and a term toto-partially 
coexclusive, of a thinl, are parti- 
totally cocxclusive of each other. 

a) A tcnn toto-partially coex- 
clusive, and a term parti-totally 
coinclusive, of a tliird, are toto- 
partially coexclusive of each 
other. 

b) A term toto-partially co- 
inclusive, and a term parti-totally 
coexclusive, of a third, are toto- 
partially coexclusive of each 
other. 


(/).— OBJECTIONS TO THE DOCTRINE OF A QUANTIFIED 
PREDICATE CONSIDERED. 

(1). General. 

MATERIAL AND FORMAL.— THEIR DISTINCTION. 

But it is requisite, seeing that there are such misconceptions 
prevalent on the point, to determine precisely, what is the formal 
which lies within the jurisdiction of Logic, and which Logic gua- 
rantees, and what the material which lies without the domain of 
Logic, and for which Logic is not responsible. This is fortunately 
ca.sy. 

VOL. IL T 


Digitized by Google 


Al’I'ENUIX, 


2!)0 


Logic knows, — takes cognisance of, certain general relations ; 
and from these it infers certain others. These and tliese alone it 
knows and guarantees ; and the.se are formal. Of all beyond these 
forms or general relations it takes no cognisance, affords no assur- 
ance ; and only hypothetically .says, — If the several notions ap])lied 
to these forms stand to each other in the relation of those forms, 
then so and so is the result. But whether these notions are rightly 
applied, that is, do or do not bear a certain reciprocal dependence, 
of this Logic, as Logic, knows nothing. Let ABC represent three 
notions, A containing B, and B containing C; in that case Logic 
assures us that C is a part of B, and B a part of A ; that A contains 
C ; that C is a part of B and A. Now all is formal, the letters 
being supposed to l)c mere abstract symbols. But if we apply to 
them, — fill them up by, — the three determinate notion.s, — Animal 
— Man — Negro, we introduce a certain matter, of which Logic is 
not itself cognisant ; Logic, therefore, merely says, — If these notions 
hold to each other the relations repre.sented by ABC, then the 
same results will follow ; but whether they do mutually hold these 
relations, — that, as material, is extra -logical. Logic is, therefore, 
bound to exhibit a scheme of the forms, that is, of the relations in 
their immediate and mediate results, which are determined by the 
mere necessities of thinking, — by the laws of thought as thought ; 
but it is bound to nought beyond this. That, as material, is beyond 
its jurisdiction. However manifest, this has, however, been fre- 
quently misunderstood, and the material has been currently passed 
off in Logic as the formal. 

But further. Logic is bound to exhibit this scheme full and un- 
exclusive. To lop or limit this in conformity to any circumstance 
extrinsic to the bare conditions, — the mere form, of thought, is a 
material, and, consequently, an illegitimate curtailment. To take, 
for instance, the aberrations of common language as a model, 
would be at once ab.surd in itself, and absurd as inconsistent even 
with its own practice. And yet this double absurdity the Logic 
now realised actually commits. For while in principle it avows 
its allegiance to thought alone ; and in part it has overtly repudi- 
ated the elisions of language ; in part it has accommodated itself 
to the usages of speech, and this also to the extent from which even 
Grammar has maintained its freedom. Grammar, the science jmo- 
per, — the nomologj’, of language, has not established ellipsis ns a 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


291 


third law beside Concord and Government ; nor has it even allowed 
Concord or Government to be superseded by ellipsis. And why ? 
Because the law, though not externally expressed in language, was 
still internally operative in thought. Logic, ou the contrary, the 
science proper, — the iiomology, of thought, has established an im- 
perative ellipsis of its abstract forms in conformity to the precari- 
ous ellipses of outward speech ; and this, although it profe.sses to 
look exclusively to the internal process, and to explicate,— to fill 
up what is implied, but not stated, in the short cuts of ordinary 
language. Logic has neglected, — withheld, — in fact openly sup- 
pressed, one-half of its forms, (the quantification of the predicate 
universally in affirmatives, particularly in negatives), because 
these forms, though always operative in thought, were usually 
passed over as superfluous in the matter of expression. 

Thus has logic, the science of the form, been made hitherto the 
slave of the matter, of thought, both in what it has received and in 
what it has rejected. And well has it been punished in its servi- 
tude. More than half its value has at once been lost, confusion 
on the one hand, imperfection on the other, its lot ; disgust, con- 
tempt, comparative neglect, the consequence. To reform Logic, 
we must, therefore, restore it to freedom ; — emancipate the form 
from the matter ; — we must, 1°, Admit nothuig material under 
the name of formal, and, 2°, Reject nothing formal under the 
name of material. When this is done. Logic, stripped of its acci- 
dental deformity, walks forth in native beauty, simple and com- 
plete ; easy at once and useful 

It now remains to show that the quantities of the Predicate de- 
nounced by logicians arc true logical forms. 

• ••••• 

The logicians have taken a distinction, on which they have de- 
fended the Aristotelic prohibition of an overt quantification of the 
predicate ; the distinction, to wit, of the formal, in opposition to 
the maierial, — of what proceeds vi fomue, in contrast to what 
proceeds id maleriw. It will be requisite to determine explicitly 
the meaning and application of these expre-ssions ; for every 
logical process is formal, and if the logicians be correct in what 
they include under their category of material, the whole system 
which I would propose in supplement and correction of theirs, 
must be at once surrendered as untenable. 


Digitized by Coogle 



292 


APPENDIX. 


In the first place, the distinction is not established, in terms at 
least, by Aristotle. On the contrary, although the propositional 
and syllogistic relations which he recognises in his logical precept 
be all formal, ho, as indeed all others, not unfrequently emplo}’s 
some which are only valid, say the logicians, vi materia;, and not 
ratione formce, that is, in spite of Logic. 

But here it is admitted, tliat a distinction there truly us ; it is, 
consequently, only necessary, in the second place, to ascertain its 
import. What then is meant by these several principles? 

The answer is easy, peremptory, and nnambignous. All that is 
formal, is true as consciously necessitated by the laws of thought ; 
all that is material, is true, not as necessitated by the laws of 
thought, but as legitimated by the conditions and probabilities dis- 
coverable in the objects about which we chance to think. The one 
is a priori, the other a posteriori ; the one is necessary, the other 
contingent ; the one is known or thought, the other unknown or 
unthoughk 

For example ; if I think that the notion triangle contains the 
notion trilateral, and again that the notion trilateral contains the 
notion triangle; in other words, if I think that each of these is 
inclusively and exclusively applicable to the other ; I formally say, 
and, if I speak as I think, must say — All triangle is all trilateral. 
On the other hand, — if I only think that all triangles are trilateral, 
but do not think all trilatcrals to be triangular, and yet say, — All 
triangle is all trilateral, the proposition, though materially true, 
is formally false. 

Again, if I think, that this, that, and the other iron-attracting 
stones are some magnets, and yet thereon overtly infer, — All 
magnets attract iron ; the inference is formally false, even though 
materially not untrue. Whereas, if I think that this, that, and the 
other iron-attracting stones are all magnets, and thence conclude, — 
All magnets attract iron; my conclusion is formally true, even 
should it materially prove false. 

To give the former example in an abstract notation ; If I note 
C : : r. I may formally convert the proposition and state 

r : uw : C. But if I note C : — F, I cannot formally 
convert it ; for the r mean either : F or . F ! *iod if I do, 
the product may or may not be true according as it is accidentally 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


293 


applied to tills or that particular matter. As to the latter ex- 
ample : C, m : (m m' m," &c.) : r 


This sjUogism is formally legitimate. But, to take the following 
antecedent : this, if formally drawn, warrants only, (1), a particular 
conclusion ; and if, (2), a universal be drawn, such is logically null: 
C, w : (m m' m" &c.) : — i-* 

1 . 

2 . : 

This being the distinction of formal and material, — that what 
is formally true, is true by a subjective or logical law ; — that what 
is materially true, is true on an objective or extra-logical condition ; 
the logicians, with Aristotle at their head, are exposed to a double 
accusation of the gravest character. For they are charged : — 1°, 
That they have excluded, as material, much that is purely formal ; 
2°, That they have included, as formal, much that is purely material. 
Of these in their order. 

1°, I shall treat of this under the heads of Affirmative and of 
Negative propositions. 

Of the four AflSrmative relations of concepts, as subject and 
predicate ; to wit — 1, The Toto-total ; 2, The Toto-partial ; 3, The 
Parti-Total •, 4, The Parti-Partial ; one half (1, 3) are arbitrarily 
excluded from logic. These are, however, relations equally neces- 
sary, and equally obtrusive in thought, with the others ; and, as 
fonnal realities, equally demand a logical statement and considera- 
tion. Nay, in this partial proceeding, logicians are not even self- 
consistent. They allow, for example, the toto-partial dependency 
of notions, and they allow of their conversion. Yet though the 
terms, when converted, retain, and must retain, their original re- 
lation, that is, their reciprocal quantities ; we find the logicians, 
after Aristotle, declaring that the predicate in afllrmative proposi- 
tions is to be regarded as particular ; howbeit, in this instance, 
where the toto-partial is converted into the parti-total relation, 
their rule is manifestly false. When I enounce, — All man is 
animal, I moan, — and the logicians do not gainsay me, — All man 
is some animal. I then convert this, and am allowed to say, — 

a For an explanation of the notation giam, Mo below. Appendix XI. — Ed. 
here employed, in reference to Syllo- 


Digitized by Coogle 


294 


APPENDIX. 


So)7ie animal is man. But I am not allowed to say, in words, 
though I say, — indeed must say, in thought, — Some animal is 
all 7nan. And why? Simply because there is an old traditionary 
rule in Logic, which prohibits us in all cases, at least of affirmative 
propositions, to quantify the predicate universally ; and to estab- 
lish a reason for this exclusion, the principle of materiality has 
been called in. But if all is formal which is necessitated by thought, 
and if all that is formal ought to find an expression in Logic, in 
that case, the universal quantification of the notion, when it stands 
as predicate, may be, ought, indeed, on demand, to be, enounced, 
no less explicitly than when it stood as subject. This quantifica- 
tion is no more material on the one alternative than on the other ; 
it is formal in both. 

In like manner, the toto-total relation is denounced. But a 
similar exposition shows that notions, thought as reciprocating or 
coequal, are entitled, as predicate, to have a universal quantifica- 
tion, no less than as subject, and this formally, not materially.® 

In regard to the four Negative relations of terms, — 1. The Toto- 
total, — 2. The Toto-partial, — 3. The Parti-total, — 4. The Parti- 
partial; in like manner, one half, but these wholly different 
classes, (3, 4), are capriciously abolished. I say capriciou.sly ; for 
the relations not recognised in Logic are equally real in thought, 
ns those which are exclusively admitted. Why, for example, may 
I say, as I think, — Some animal is not any man ; and yet not 
say, convcrtibly, as I stUl think, — Any man is not some animal? 
For tliis no reason, beyond the caprice of logicians, and the elisions 
of common language, can be as.signed. Neither can it be shown, 
as I may legitimately think, — Some animal is not some animal, 
(to take an extreme instance), that I may not formally express the 
same in the technical language of reasoning. 

In these case.s, to say nothing of others, the logicians have, 
therefore, been guilty of extruding from their science much that 
is purely formal ; and this on the untenable plea, that what is 
formal is material 


a It w hardly requisite to notice the 
blundering doctrine of eomo authors, 
that the predicate is materially quantified, 
even when prcdcsignatc<l as universal. 
It is BufiBciont to observe tliat this 


opinion ia explicitly renounced by the 
acuter !ogtcianK,when they have chanced 
to notice tlie absurdity.— See Fonseca, 
Instil, Dial. L vi., c. 20. 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


295 


(2). Spectal. 

Two objections have been taken to the universal quantification 
of the predicate. It is said to be— 1°, False; 2°, If not false, 
useless. 

L Tlie first objection may be subdivided into two heads, inasmuch 
as it may be attempted to establish it, a), on material ; b), on 
formal, grounds. Of these in their order : — 

a). This ground seems to be the only one taken by Aristotle, 
who, on three (perhaps on four) different occasions denounces the 
universal quantification of the predicate (and he but implicitly 
limits it to affirmative propositions), as “ always untrue."^ The 
only proof of this unexclusive denunciation is, however, one si)ecial 
example which he gives of the falsity emerging in the proposition, 
— All man is all animal. This must be at once confessed false ; 
but it is only so materially and contingently, — argues, therefore, 
nothing for the formal and necessary illegitimacy of such a quanti- 
fication. As extra-logical, this proof is logically incompetent ; for 
it is only because we happen, through an external knowledge, to 
be aware of the relations of the concepts, man and animal, that 
the example is of any import. But, because the universal quanti- 
fication of the predicate is, in this instance, materially false, is such 
quantification, therefore, always formally illegal ? That this is not 
the case, let us take other material examples. Is it, then, materially 
false and formally incompetent, to think and say, — All human is 
all rational, — All rational is all risilde, — All risible is all capa- 
ble of admiration, — All trilateral is all triangular, — All trian- 
gular is all figure with its angles equal to two right angles, &c. ? 
Or, employing Aristotle’s material example, is it untrue, as ho 
asserts, to say — Some animal is all man; and this either collec- 
tively, — A part of the class animal is the whole of the class man, 
— or dislributively, — Some several animal is every several man. 

But the absurdity of such a reasoning is further shown by the 
feet, that if it were cogent at all, it would equally conclude against 
the validity of the universal quantification of the subject. For 
this proposition is equally untrue (employing always Aristotle’s 
own material example), — All animal is man. 

After this, it may the less surprise us to find that Aristotle 

• See below^ p. 208 .— £d. 


Digitized by Goog[e 



29G 


APPENDIX. 


silently abandons his logical canon, and adheres to truth and nature. 

In fact, he frequently does in practice virtually quantify the predi- 
cate, his common reasonings often proceeding on the reciprocation 
or coextension of subject and predicate. Nay, in his logical 
system, he expressly recognises this coextension ; unless, indeed, 
we overtly supply the quantification of the predicate, his doctrines 
of Induction and of Demonstration proper have no logical nota- 
tion ; and, unless we covertly suppose it, they are actually arrested. 

His definitions of the Universal, as severally given in his Pi-xor 
and Posterior Analytics, are, in this respect, conflictive. In the 
former, his universal, (known in the schools as the Universale 
Prioristicuni), explicitly forbids, whereas the latter, (the Univer- 
sale Posterioristicum of the schoolmen), implicitly postulates, the 
quantification of the predicate. 

b). The defect in the polemic of their master was felt by his 
followers. They, accordingly, in addition to, but with no correc- 
tion of, Aristotle’s doctrine, argue the question on broader ground ; 
and think that they disprove the formal validity of such quantifi- 
cation by the follomng reasoning. Overlooking the case, where 
the sulyect is particularly, the predicate universally, quantified, as 
in the instance I have just given, they allege the case of what are 
called reciprocating propositions, where both subject and predicate 
are taken in their utmost extension, vi materice, as subsequent 
logicians “ say, but not Aristotle. In this case, then, as in the 
example. All man is all risible, they assert that the overt quanti- 
fication of the predicate is inept, because, the all as applied to 
the subject being distributively taken, every individual man, as 
Socrates, Plato, &c., would be all, (that is, the whole class), risible. j 

This objection is only respectable by authority, through the great, 
the all but unexclusive, number of its aUegers ; in itself it is futile. 

Terms and their quantifications are used either in a distributive, 
or in a collective, sense. It will not be asserted that any quantifi- 
cation is, per se, necc.ssarily collective or necessarily distributive ; 
and it remains to ascertain, by rule and relation, in which signi- 
fication it is, or may be, employed. Now a general rule or postu- 
late of logic is, — That in the same logical unity, (proposition or 
syllogism), the same term or quantification should not be changed 

« [See, for ex.amp]e, P.iciui!, /« A a. In An. Prior, L. i., c. 9, ami above, p. 

Prior, L. i., 0 . B, p. 134. Alcjt.andcr, 274, note a, »u4. /».] 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


297 


in importa If, therefore, we insist, as insist we ought, that the 
quantification here, all, should be used in the same proposition 
in the same meaning, that is, as applied to the one term, collec- 
tively or distributively, it should be so applied likewise to the 
other, the objection fails. Thus taken collectively: — All, (that 
is, the whole class), man is all, (that is, the whole class), risible, 
the proposition is valid. Again, taken distributively : — All, (that 
is, every several), man is all, (that is, evm\i/ several), risible, the 
proposition is, in like manner, legitimate. It is only by violating 
the postulate, — That in the same logical unity, the same sign or 
word should be used in the same sense, that the objection applies ; 
whereas, if the postulate be obeyed, the objection is seen to be 
absurd. 

It is hardly necessary to say anything in confutation of the 
general doctrine, that in Reciprocating propositions the predicate is 
taken in its full extent, vi materice. In the first place, this doc- 
trine was not promulgated by Aristotle ; wlio frequently allowing, — 
frequently using, — such propositions, implicitly abandons the rule 
which he explicitly lays down in regard to the non-predesignation 
of the predicate by a universal. In the second place, apart from 
authority, such doctrine is in itself unfounded For as form is 
merely the necessity of thought, it is as ea.sy to think two notions 
as toto-totally coinciding, (say, triangle and trilateral), as two 
notions toto-partially and parti-totally coinciding, (.say, triangle 
and figure). Accordingly, we can equally abstractly represent their 
relations both by geometric quantities, (lines or figures), and by 
purely logical symbols. Taking lines ; — the former i ; the 

latter I . Taking the symbols, the former C : ^ : r ; 

the latter A, — : B. But if the reciprocation were deter- 
mined by the mere matter, by the object contingently thought 
about, all abstract representation would be impos.sible. So much 
for the first objection, — that the universal quantification of the 
predicate would, at least in affirmative propositions, be falsa 

II. As to the second objection, that such quantification would 
be useless and superfluous, disorderly, nay confusive, this only 
manifests the limited and one-sided view of the objectors, even 
though Aristotle be at their head 

• Seo above, p, 253 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



298 


APPENDIX. 


Is it useless in any case, theoretical or practical, that error be 
refuted, truth established ? And in this case : — 

1°, Is it disorderly and confusive, that the doctrine of Expon - 
ibies , as they are called, should be brought back from anomaly 
and pain to ease and order, — that propositions Exclusive and 
Exceptive, now passed over for their difficulty, and heretofore 
confessedly studied as “ opprobria and excruciations,” should be 
shown to be, not merely reducible by a twofold and threefold tor- 
tuosity, through eight genera and eight rules, but simple, though 
misunderstood, manifestations of the universal quantification of 
the predicate ? “ 

2°, Is it useless to demonstrate that every kind of proposition 
may be converted, and not some only, as maintained by Aristotle 
and the logicians? And is it disorderly and confusive, in all 
cases, to abolish the triple (or quadruple) confusion in the triple 
(or quadruple) processes of Conversion, and to show, that of these 
processes there is only one legitimate, and that, the one simple of 
the whole ? 

3°, Is it disorderly and confusive to abolish the complex confu- 
sion of Mood and Figure, with all their array of rules and excep- 
tions, general and special ; and thus to recall the science of reason- 
ing to its real unity ? 

4°, Is it useless and superfluous to restore to the science the 
many forms of reasoning which had erroneously, ineffectually, and 
even inconsistently, been proscribed ? 

6°, Is it useless or superfluous to prove, that all judgment, and, 
consequently, all reasoning, is simply an equation of its terms, and 
that the difl'erence of subject and predicate is merely aibitrary ? 

6°, In fine, and in sum, is it useless or superfluous to vindicate 
Logic against the one-sided views and errors of logicians, to recon- 
cile the science with truth and nature, and to reestablish it, at 
once, in its amplitude and simplicity ? 

{ g ) — Historical Notices of Doctrine of 
Quantified Predicate. 

L — Aeistotijl 

It will be sufficient to make one extract from Aristotle in illus- 
« Sec above, p. 261 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Coog[e 



APPENDIX. 


290 


tration of his doctrine upon this point, and I select the following 
passage from his Categories, c. y. § 7. 

“ Further, the primary substances, [TrpwTai ovcriat , — individual 
existences], — because they are subjects to all the others, and as all 
the others are predicated of, or exist in, them, — are, for this reason, 
called substances by pre-eminence. And as the primaiy sub- 
stances sbind to all the others, so stands the Species to the Genus. 
For genera are predicated of species, but not, (xmverselg, species 
of genera; so that of these two, the species is more a substance 
than the genus.” 

Ammonius, who has nothing in his Commentary on the Cate- 
gories relative to the above passage of Aristotle, state.s, however, 
the common doctrine, with its reasons, in the following extract 
from his Commentary on Porphyry’s Introduction, (f. 29, ed. Aid. 
1546). 

“ But confining ourselves to a logical consideration, it behoves 
us to inquire, — of these, which are subjected to, which predicated 
of, the others ; and to be aware, that Genera are predicated of 
Differences and Species, but not conversely. Tliese, as we have 
said, stand in a certain mutual order, — the genus, the difference, 
and the species ; the genus first, the species last, the difierence in 
the middle. And the .superior must be predicated of the inferior ; 
for to predicate the inferior of the superior is not allowablu If, 
for example, we say, — All man is animal, the proposition is true ; 
but if we convert it, and say, — All animal is man, the enounce- 
ment is false.® Again, if we say, — All horse is irrational, we are 
right ; but if conversely we say, — All irrational is horse, we are 
wrong. For it is not allowed us to make a subject of the acci- 
dental. Hence is it incompetent to say that Animal is man, as 
previously stated.” 

[Gateg. ch. ii § 1. 

“ When one thing is predicated of another as of its subject, all 
that is said [truly] of the predicate will be said [truly] also of 

a The converse of a true proposition aninval, and, All hont u $om€ irm- 
is always true; but the false propoai- f tonal. Convert these, — Some antmal 
tiona which are here given, as conver- it all man, and, Some tfraftonal u all 
sions of the true, are not conversions horse; the truth remains, but the one> 
at all. The tnie propositions, if ex« sided doctrine of the logicians is ex- 
plicitly stated, arc, — All taan i$ tome ploded. 


Digitized by Google 



300 


APPENDIX. 


the subject. Thus man is predicated of this and that man,® and 
animal of man ; animal will therefore be predicated of this and 
that individual, for this and that individual is both man and 
animal.” 

Be Interpret, c. viL § 2-4. ; see also c. x 

“ To enounce something of a universal universally, I mean as. 

All or every man is white, Ko man is white. 

To enounce something of universals not universally, I mean as, 
Man is white, Man is not white ; for wliilst the term man 
is universal, it is not used in these enouncements as universal. 
For all or every (was) does not indicate the universal [itself], 
but that [it is applied to a subject] universally. Thus, in 
reference to an universal predicate, to predicate the universal, is 
not true. For no affirmation is true, in which the universal is 
predicated [of an universal predicate], as, A ll or every vmn is all 
or every animal.” (See Ammonias, Boethius, Psellus, Magentinus, 
&c). 

Prior Analytics, Bk. I. c. 27, §. 9. “The consequent [i.e. the 
predicate] is not to bo taken as if it wholly followed [from the 
antecedent, or subject, exclusively]. I mean, for e.\ample, as if 
all [or everyl animal [were consequent] on man, or all [or every~\ 
science on music. The consequence simply [is to be assumed], as 
in our propositions h;is been done ; to do otherwise (as to say that 
all [or every] man is all [or eveiry] animal, or that justice is 
all [or every] good, is useless and impossible ; but to the antece- 
dent [or subject] the all or [every] is prefixed.” 

Posterior analytics, B. I. c. xiL § 10. “The predicate is not 
called all [or every ] ; [that is, the mark of universality is not 
annexed except to the subject of a proposition]. 

In refutation of Aristotle’s reasoning against the universal pre- 
designation of the predicate— it will equally disprove the universal 
predesignation of the subject. For it is absurd and impossible to 
say. All aniiiud is man; All (every) immortal is the soul; 
All pleasure is health; All science is music; All motion is 
pleasure.^ But in point of fact such examples disprove nothing ; 
for all universal prcdcsignations are applicable neither to subject 

• [For the tU here, os cUewhere, do- 3 Kxamplca from Wcgelin, In Grfg» 
noU'O the j/yna<U}n) not the Antjionymi Ounp, Phil, Stfnt, L. iv. c. 

individuum vagum.] 1, p. 473; L vl c. 1, p. 673. 


Digitized by Googk' 


APPENDIX. 


301 


nor predicate, nor to both subject and predicate — are thoughts not 
things; and so are jvedesignations; therefore, &c. It is only 
marvellous that such examples and such reasoning could satisfy the 
acutest of intellects; that his authority should have imposed on 
subsequent logicians is less wondcrful.a] 

Quantification of Predicate — Aristotle. 

1. Admits that syllogism mental not oral (An. Post. L 10). This 
to be bonic in mind. 

2. That individual is never predicated, (Cat. c. 2), refuted by re- 
ciprocation of singular, (An. Pr. ii. 23, § 4). 

3. That affirmative universal not [to] be added to predicate, incom- 
patible with what he says of reciprocation, (in An. Pr. ii. cc. 
22 and 23 alibi). Tliat his custom to draw universal conclu- 

a And here I may correct an error, oa ^Mcb, I am confident, wrd intended hy 
I conceive it to bo, which han dcrtccntled Aristotle. 

from the oldest to the most recent in- There are only two grounds of inter- 
terpreters of the Or^non, and been pretation. The rule must be expoundttd 
atlopted implicitly by logicians in gene- in conaiatency™!®, With itself ; 2% Must 
ral. It is found in Alexander and be with the analogy of Aristotelic usage. 
AramoniuH, as in Trendelenburg, Saint- 1®. On the former ground, the o<tm- 
Hilaire, and Waitz; nor indeed, as far mon doctrine seems untenable; for what 
as 1 know, has it ever been calle<l in Aristotle declares to be identical, by that 
question during the interval. It regards doctrine becomes difierent, nay opposeil. 
the meaning of the definition elevated An inferior concept may be in a higher 
into a two-fold axiom, the ew in toto, whole or class, either ])artial]y or totally; 
Ac., and diti dt omni, Ac., toward the and the definition on the prevalent in- 
conclusion of the first chapter of the terprehttiun virtually runs — ** To say 
first book of the Prior Anafylin. ^4 that one thing is all or part in the whole 
4r elrcu *r§potf 4r4p<p irol rb tcari of another, and to say that this other 
wayrbt /eanjyopfTa-6<u0ar4pov6tiT€poyrau- is predicated of it unexclusively, are 
T4t>4(rriy. This, with its ambiguity, may convertible.” Hod Aristotle, therefore, 
be thus literally, however awkwardly, used the expression in the signification 
translated :—** But [to say] that one attributed to him, he must, to avoid the 
thing ii in a whole of Arr, and [to say] contradiction, have said — Tb 8^ to*' 
that one thing ts predirated of all an- rrtpoy 4y cIkcu ir4p<p (“But 

other, nre identical.*' — Now, the question to say that one thing ia all inn whole 
— What does Aristotle here mean other,” Ac.) 
by “ o trAofe ofArrf" for it may signify, 2*. On the second ground, it may, 
either the class or higher notion under however, be answered, that tbe ambi- 
which an inferior concept comes, or the guity of the word, as it stands, is super- 
inferior concept itself, of which, as of a seded, its signification being determined 
subject, the higher is predicated. The by other passages. I join issue ; and on 
former is the sense given by all the this ground am well content to let the 
commentators ; the latter, the sense question be decided. 


Digitized by Goog[e 



302 


APPENDIX. 


sions in Third Figure and affirmative in Second” with allow- 
ance of simple conversion in certain universal affirmatives. 

4. That particular not in negative predicate, absurd in ov was, 
non omnis. 


Aristotle s doctrine of Predesignation. 

1°, How can Aristotle, on his doctrine, make universal terms taken 
indiflerently, or without predesignation, be tantamount to parti- 
culars? {An. Prior, I. c. 4, § 13, Org. Pacii, p. 135, alibi), 

2°, An. Prior, 1, & 27, § 7. He says, as elsewhere, “ a proposi- 
tion being indefinite, [preindesignate], it is not clear whether it be 
universal ; when, however, it Ls definite, [predesignate], that is 
manifest.” Contrast this statement with his doctrine of the all. 

3°, There are syllogisms in Aristotle, which are only valid 
through the quantity of the j)iedicate.3 

4", Aristotle requires, though he does not admit, the universal 


In tho firut place, the moaning I attri- 
bute to the expression, “ ^holc other ** — 
that is, whole subject or inferior notion, 
ia, in short, in strict conformity with 
Aristotle’s ordinary language. There 
are, 1 admit, sundry itass.agcs in his logi- 
cal writings, where the term %chole U 
clearly ui^l synonymous with cla»* 
or kifjher notion ; os. to limit oursclrcs 
to the Prior in Book I. iv., § 

2 ; and II. i- § 4. But, every winylt texlt 
in which tho term kUoU ap|H?ar8 in this 
relation, is overruled by more than /re 
other*, in which it is no less clearly ap* 
plied to denote the totality of a lower 
notion, of which ahighcr is pro<Ucatod — 
poiwages in which the wonl whole (8aos) 
is u.*ic<l convortibly with all (»as). See 
for example, A n. Pr. II. ii., § 5, § 1 6 — UL 
§ 5, § 7 g 13 {hi*.), § 14, § 15-iv. § 
6 (hi*.), § 8, g 10, § 12 xxu. § 7, § 
8 — xxiii. § 4. 

But in the second place, (and this is 
directly subversivo of the counter-opi- 
nion, even in the principal of tho few 
pasteigcs where the term whole is uslhI 
for cIosh), the lower noti^.m may be in 
or under the higher, only jxirtinilarly; 
and this manifestly shows that Aristotle 
could Dot possibly mean, by merely 


saying, that one thing is another, as in a 
class, that it is so unexclMtrely, or im»- 
vtrsally. Compare An. Pr. I. iv. §§ 2, 
3, 10. On tliis interpretation, /ian'iuml 
lUrio would then be annulled ; a special 
result which ought to have startlcil tho 
logicians into a dijubt of the accuracy 
of the receivenl doctrine in general. (See, 
xnttar omnium, Pocius, in his relative 
Notes and Commentary.) 

That doctrine miLst, therefore, be aban- 
doned, and the rule re<luced to a defini- 
tion, read in tho following signification : 
— “ But to say that one thing it in the 
whole of another, a* in a snhjeet, and to 
prediciiteone thiny universallyof another, 
are merely various expre.-yfions of the 
same mmining." This, in fact, is just 
tlie preliminary explmation of the tw'o 
ordinary modes of stating a proj><mition, 
Bubseiiuently used by Arifctotlo. Here, in 
both convertibles, he descends from ex- 
tension to comprehension, fr^m tho pre- 
dicate to the subject ; and the ingenious 
exposition by tlie commentators, old and 
new, of the inverse intention of the phi- 
losopher in the two clauses, must be re- 
gaixled as erroneous. 

a See below, p. 346 . — Kd. 

0 See below, p. 340 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


303 


prcdesignation of the predicate in his syllogism of Induction. Vide 
An. Prior., L. iL, c. 23, § 4, Organon Pacii, p. 399. Compare 
also his doctrine, p. 396.) 


II. Alexander Aphrodisiensls. 

Alexander Aphrodisiensls, in his commentary on the first book 
of the Prior A mdgtics, and in reference to the second passage of 
Aristotle, states as follows : 

"And in the book of Enouncement Aristotle explains, why he 
there says ; — ‘ that to predicate the universal of a universal predi- 
cate is not true ; for there will be no projswition, if in it we pre- 
dicate the universal of the univeraal, as. All man is all animal.' 
He repeats the same also here ; .showing, how it is useless to 
attempt thus to express the con.secution, [of higher from lower 
notions] ; and adds, that it is not only useless, but impossible. 
For it is impossible, that all man should be all animal, as 
[useless to say, (a)(pr)aTOP eiTreu' must have dropt out)], that all 
man is all risible. We must not, therefore, apply the all to the 
consequent, [or predicate], but to that from which it follows, [or 
subject]. For man is to be taken universally, as that from which 
animal follows, supposing this to be the consequent of all man. 
Thus shall we obtain a stock of universal propositions. The proce.ss 
is the same, in making man the consequent on its proper all; 
but 7nan is not consequent on all biped, but on all rational. 

" The words, ‘ as we express ourselves,’ mean — as we expre.ss 
ourselves in common usage. For we say, that all man is simply, 
animal, and not all animal, and that all pleasure is natural, not 
all natural; prefixing the all, not to the consequent, but to the 
subject from which the predicate follows.” (Edd. Aid., f. 100 a; 
Junt., t 122 a ; Compare Aid., f. 86 a ; Junt, £ 105 a.) 

III. — Ammonius Hermi.e. 

Ammonius Hermire, In de Interp. c. ’vii. § 2. (Aldine edi- 
tions, of 1503, sig. C. vii. 59, of 1546, ff. 70, 74). 

“ In these words Aristotle inquires : — Whether, as the an- 
nexation of the afiSrmativc predesignation (rtpocrhuipiapoi) to the 


Digitized by Coogle 



30i 


ArPENDIX. 


subject constitutes one distinct class of propositions, the same 
annexation to the predicate, may not, likewise, constitute another ; 
and he answers, that the supposition is absolutely groundless. 
Thus the enouncement — all (or every) man is all (or every) ani- 
mal, (ttcIs ivOpoiiTO'i nav ^(oov ecrri) ; asserts that each man is 
all anunal — as horse, ox, &c. But this proposition is impos- 
sible ; as is shown by Aristotle in his here omitting the word 
‘ true.’ For no affirmation can bo true, in which the universal is 
predicated of a universal predicate ; that is, in which the universal 
predesignatc is added to a universal predicate ; as when we say 
that man (of whom all, or, as he says, universally, animal is 
predicated), is not simply animal, but all animal. He, therefore, 
teaches, that such an affirmation, as utterly untrue, is utterly in- 
competent 

" Neither does Aristotle allow the pretle.signation some to be 
annexed to the predicate, that propositions may, thereby, become 
true always or occasionally. For logicians, (as they do not pro- 
pose to themselves every superfluous variety of enunciation), are 
prohibited from considering propositions, (not only those always 
true or always false), but those which express no difference in re- 
ference to nece.ssary or impossible matter, and afford us absolutely 
no di.scrimination of truth from falsehood. Thus, particular pro- 
positions, which may be alternatively true and false, ought not to 
have a predcsignated predicate. For in a proposition, which has 
all their power, without any predesignation of its predicate ; why 
should we prefer to the simpler expression, that which drags about 
with it a superfluous ailditamcnt ? Why, for example, instead of — 
All man is some animal, [I read, ti ^elov], or. All man is not all 
animal,'^ shoidd we not say — All man is animal, and in place of 
All man is no stone, not say, — All man is not stone ; or, what 
is a simpler and more natural enouncement still, — No man is stone. 

“And when we find .some of the ancients teiiching that the 
particular affirmative predesignation is to be connected with the 
predicate, as when Aristotle himself styles the soul a certain (some) 

a It will l>o olincrveil, Umt Ammo- trlno; and this imponHibilitj itself ought 
nius docs not attempt an equivalent for to have opened his eyes upon the inauf- 
this proponition. In fact it is lmj>o»- ficicncy of the view he maintained. 

Bible on the couanon or AristotcUc doc* 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


.S0.5 


entelechy, (hn-fX^udv Tiva), and Plato, rhetoric, a certain (some) 
experience, (iiJ.7Tet.piau two) ; it is to be observed that tlic some 
is there added for the sake of showing, that the predicate is not 
convertible with the subject, but is its genus, and requires the 
adding on of certain differences in order to render it the subject’s 
definition. 

“ But, add they, is not the reasoning of Aristotle refuted by 
fact itself, seeing that we say. All nmn is capable of all science ; 
thus truly connecting the universal predesignation with the uni- 
versal predicate ? The answer is this : — that, in truth it is not the 
predicate to which we here annex the all. For what is predi- 
cated, is what is said of the subject. But what is here said of 
man is, not that he is science, but that he is capable of science. 
If, therefore, the aU were conjoined with the capable and the 
proposition then to remain true, as when we say — all man is all 
capable of science; in that case, the reasoning of Aristotle would 
be refuted. But this proposition is necessarily false. It, in fact, 
asserts nothing less, than that of men, each individual is all 
the kind ; — that Socrates is not Socrates only, but also Plato, 
Alcibiades, and, in short, every other man. For, if all 7nan is all 
capable of science, Socrates being one of the all, is, therefore, 
himself all capable of science; so that Socrates will be Plato, 
Alcibiades, &c., since they also are capable of science. For if 
Socrates be not, at once, Plato, Alcibiades, &c., neither will he be 
aU capable of science. 

“ Now, that we ought not to prefix the universal affirmative pre- 
designation to the predicate, (whether the predicate be more gene- 
ral than the subject, as All man is all animal, or, whether they be 
co-adeqnate, as AM man is all risible,) — this is manifest from 
what has been said. Even when the terms arc coadequate or re- 
ciprocating, the proposition runs into the absurd. For, declaring 
that aU man is all risible, it virtually declares, that each indi- 
vidual man is identical with all men ; that Socrates, in that he is 
a man, is aU risible, consequently, aU man, 

“ But why is it, that the predicate is intolerant of the predesig- 
nation aU, though this be akin to the countcr-predesignation no 
or none/ Is it because the affirmative predicate, if predicated 
universally, tends always to contain imder it the subject, and this 
not only when itself coadequate with the subject, but when trans- 

VOL. II. D 


Digitized by Coogle 



30C 


APPENDIX, 


cendingthe subject in extension ; while, moreover, through a parti- 
cipation in its proper nature, it is suited to bind up and reduce to 
unity the multitude of individuals of which the subject is the 
complement ? For, as Aristotle previously observed — ‘ The aU 
does not indicate the universal, but that [the universal predicate 
inheres in, or is attributed to, the subject] universally.’ If, there- 
fore, the aflinuative predicate thus tend to collect into one what 
are by nature distracted, in virtue of having been itself previously 
recognised as simple ; in this case, the all, [superadded to this 
universal predicate, in fact], enounces not a unity, but a multitude 
of several things, — things which it is manifestly unable to complicate 
into reciprocity. But, on the other hand, since what is negatively 
predicated of, is absolutely separated from, the subject; we are, 
consequently, enabled to deny of the subject aU under the predicate, 
as in saying, AU man is no stone. We may indeed condense 
this proposition, and say more simply. All man is not stone; or 
more simply stUl, No man is stone; thus dispensing with the 
affirmative predesignation in a negative proposition.” 

IV. — Boethius. 

Boethius, 7/1 Librum de Interpretatione, editio secunda,ct in tex- 
tum laudatum. Opera, p. 348. 

“ What he says is to this purport : — Every simple proposition 
consists of two terms. To these there is frequently added a de- 
termination cither of universality or of particularity ; and to 
which of the two parts these determinations are to be added, ho 
expounda It appears to Aristotle that the determination ought 
not to be conjoined to the predicate term ; for in this proposition, 
Man is animal — {Homo est animal) it is inquired whether the 
determination ought to be coupled with the detennination, so that 
it shall be — {Omnis homo animal est) — All (or every) man is ani- 
mal ; or with the predicate, so that it shall be, — {Homo omne ani- 
mal est) — Man is all {or every) animal; or with both the one and 
the other, so that it shall be. All (or every) man is aU (or every) 
animal, {Omnis homo omne animal est). But neither of these 
latter alternatives is competent. For the determination is never 
joined ’to the predicate, but exclusively to the subject ; seeing 
that all predication is either greater than the subject, or equal 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


307 


Thus in this proposition — All (or every) man Is animal, (omnts 
homo animal est), animal [the predicate] is gi'eater than man 
[the subject] ; and, again, in the proposition — Man is risible, 
(homo risibilis est), risible [the predicate] is equated to tnan [the 
subject] ; but that the predicate should be less and narrower than 
the subject is impossible. Therefore, in those predicates which are 
greater than the subject, as, for example, where the predication is 
animal, the proposition is manifestly false, if the determination of 
universality be added to the predicate tenn. For if we say, Man 
is animal, (homo est animal), we contract animal, which is greater 
than man, by this determination to [an identity of extension with] 
man, the subject, although the predicate, animal, may be applied 
not only to man, but to many other objects. Moreover, in those 
[subjects and predicates] which are equal, the same occurs; for if I 
say. All (or every) man is all (or every) risible, (omnis homo omne 
risihUe est ), — ^in the first place, in reference to the nature of man 
itself, it is superfluous to adject the determination ; and, again, 
if this be added to all several men, the proposition becomes false, 
for when I say. All (or every) man is all (or every) risible, by this 
I seem to signify that the several men are [each of them] all or 
every risible, which is absurd. The determination is, therefore, to 
be placed not to the predicate but to the subject. But the words 
of Aristotle are thus redueed to the following import : — In those 
predicates which are universal, to add to them aught universal, 
so that the universal predicate may be predicated universally, 
is not true. For tins is what he says — ‘‘ In the case of a univer- 
sal predicate,” (that is, in a proposition which has an universal pre- 
dicate), “ to predicate the universal, itself universally, is not true.” 
For in an universal predicate, that is, which is rmiversal and is 
itself predicated, in this case universally to predicate the predi- 
:Cate which is universal, that is, to adject to it a determination of 
universality, is not true : for it cannot be that any affirmation 
should be true in which a universal determination is predicated of 
a predicate universally distributed ; and he illustrates the concep- 
tion of the matter by the example, ''All or every man is all (or 
every) animal, (omnis homo omne animal est), of the incompe- 
tency of which we have already spoken.” 

Boethius, In Librum de Tnterpretatione, editio prima Opera, 


Digitized by Google 



308 


APPENDIX. 


p. 236. (Text so wretchedly printed that the sense must be con- 
stituted by the reader. ) 

[Aristotle, c. vii. § 4]. “ ‘ In what is predicated as an universal, 
to predicate the universal universally is not true.' 

“ In this sentence he instructs us what is the place to which the 
determination of universality .should be rightly added. For he 
teaches that the universality, which we call the universal determi- 
nation, is to be connected with the subject term, never with the 
predicate. For were we to say — AU (or every) man is animal, 
[omnis homo animal esl), we should say rightly, atmexing the 
all (or every) to the subject, that is, to the term man. But if we 
thus speak — All or every man is all or every animal, {omnis 
homo omne animal est), we should speak falsely. He, therefore, 
does not say this [in the words] — ‘ in what is predicated as an 
universal,’ as animal of man ; for animal is imiversal, being pre- 
dicated of all or every man. [But he says] — To predicate this 
universal itself, animal, to wit, universally, so that we enounce 
— All (or every) animal is man, {omne animal esse hominem), is 
not true ; for he allows this to be rightly done ncitlier in these nor 
in any other affirmation.* He adds, therefore : — ‘ For no affirma- 
tion will be true in which a universal predicate shall be univer- 
sally predicated, as All or every man is all or every animal, 
{omnis homo est omne animal).’ 

“Why this happens, I will explain in a few words. The 
predicate is always greater than the subject, or equal to it. 
Greater, as when I say Man is animal, {homo animal est) ; here 
animal is predicated, man is subjected, for animal is predicated of 
more objects than man. Again, it is equal when we thus speak — 
Man is risible, {homo risibilis est) ; hero man is the subject, 
risible the predicate. But man and risible are equal ; for it is 
proper to man to be a risible animal. But that the predicate 


a Tlio Coimbra JesuiU (SebaAtianua 
Cuntus, 1606), erronoouMly make Boe* 
tbiiu and Averroee oppose Aristotle, 
*'tbiuking that the sign of uoirersnlity 
may be annexed to the predicate of a 
universal proposition, when it is coexten- 
sive with the stibjcct," (ad Ucutn ii., p. 
158). This, a mistake, has been copied 


by their brother Jeeuit, P. Vallius of 
Home, in his mighty Logic (ad loctim). 
With Boethius he joins Levigersonidee ; 
*— he means the Rabbi Levi Ben Qersou, 
of Catalonia, who died at Perpignan in 
3370, who wrote on Theology, Philoso- 
phy, Mathematics, and Ix>gia SeoJOcher 
r. Lerif from Dartolocci and Wolf. 


Digitized by Gc^o^K’ 



APPENDIX. 


S09 


Should be found less than the subject, is impossible. Is the predi- 
cate the greater ? Then, to adject the universal to the predicate, is 
false, as in the example he himself has given — AU (or every) vian 
is all (or every) animal, {omnis homo omne animal est). Is it 
equal ? Then, the adjection is superfluous, as if one should say. All 
every man is all or every risible, {omnis homo omne i-istbile 
est). Wherefore, to predicate a universal predicate universally is 
incompetent.” 


V. — Averroes. 

Averroes, Perihermenias, L. I., c. v. 

“Propositions are not dividetl from the conjunction of the pre- 
designation (clausunc) with the predicate ; becau.se the predesig- 
nation, when added to the predicate, constitutes a false or a super- 
fluous proposition : — False, as All or every nuin is all (or every) 
animal, {omnis homo est omne animat); .superfluou.s, as A/i (or 
every) man is some or a certain animal, {omnis homo est quod- 
dam, animat).’’ Vide Conimbricenses, In Arist. Dial., iL 1 08. 


VI. — Alrertds Magnus. 

Albertus Magnus, Periherminias, L. I., Tractatus, v. c. 1 , {Op. 
ed. Lugd. 1651, t. I., p. 261). 

[‘‘Ly ‘omnis’ non est universale, sed signum universalitatis. 
Quare ly ‘omnis’ et hujusmodi signa distributiva non sunt uni- 
versalia, secundum Avicennam” ]. Hoc enim signum distri- 
butivum, quod est omnis, non est universale, proprie loquendo : 
sed est signum per quod stat pro particularibus universaliter uni- 
versale, cui tale signum est adjunctum. Causa autem, quare non 
sit universale, est ; — quia, quamvis secundum grammaticum sit 
nomen appellativum, hoc est, multis secundum naturre sure apti- 
tudincm conveniens ; tamen est, secundum formam, infinitum, 
nuUam euim naturam unam dicit. Propter quod omnis natuno 
communis est distributivum. Universale autem est, quod est in 
multis et de multis, sum naturae, suppositis. Ideo omnis , et 
ntdlus, et hujusmodi signa universalia esse non possunt ; sed 
sunt signa dcsignantia utrum universale sit acceptum universaliter 


Digitized by Google 


310 


APPENDIX. 


vel particularitcr, secundum sua supposita. Et hnec sunt verba 
Avicennas. 

[ “ Quare signum universale non sit ponendum a parte 
pncdicati.] In subjecto universal! signum distributivum ordi- 
nandum : quia per divisionein subject!, prsedicatum partibus 
attribuitur subjecti, nt divisim participent id per prsedica- 
tioucm, ct non in pncdicato ponendum: quia quum prsedicatum 
formalitcr sit acceptum, non proprie dividitur, nisi altenus, hoc est, 
subjecti divisione : sed inmqualiter redditur subjecto et partibus 
ejus. Unde id quod est universale, praxiicari potest, nt Omnis 
homo est animal ; sed univer-sale universaliter acceptum non po- 
test pnedicari ; nulla enim vera affirmatio esse potest, in qua do 
universali aliquo pncdicato predicctur sive praedicatio fiat ; quo- 
niam imiversaliter sic patet, quod falsum est, Onmis homo est 
omne animal, et si ponatur, quod Kullum animal sit nisi homo. 
Cum enim homo subjiciatur gratia partium suarum, ct pra3di- 
cata formaliter accipiantur, oportet quod Quilibet homo esset 
omne animal, quod falsum est.” 

VII.— Levi Ben Geisson. 

Levi Ben Gerson (or Levi Gersonides), a Jewish philosopher, 
who died in 1370 at Perpignan, wrote commentaries on Aven'oes’ 
Commentary upon the logical books of Aristotle. The following is 
what he says on Averroes’ doctrine touching the quantification of 
the predicate, as it is found (f 39) of the Venice edition, in folio, 
of 1 552,0 of the works of Aristotle and Averroes : — “ Although 
it be not neces.sary that when the quantitative note is attached to 
the predicate, this should bo false or superfluous, seeing that it 
may be neither, as when we say, AW man is all rational ; and the 
same holds good in all other reciprocating propositions ; — never- 
theless, as in certain matters it may so happen, Ari.stotle has de- 
clared that the quantitative note is not to be joined to the predi- 
cate in any language. But it may be here objected, that if thi.s 
be the case, the quantitative note should not be annexed even to 
the subject, since there too it may be either false or superfluous, 
yuperfluous, — as when we say, Soiiie animal is rational. For the 
very same follows here, as if we simply say. Animal is rational ; 

a Not io tho 8vo cOition of these works. Venice, 1560. 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPKNDIX. 


311 


the some, therefore, is superfluous. False, — as when we say. All 

animal is rational. The reason, therefore, assigned by Aristotle 
why the quantitative note should not be annexed to the predicate, 
is futile, seeing that for the same reason it should not be connected 
with the subject To this we may answer; That the cause why 
the quantitative note is not usually conjoined with the i)rcdicate, 
is, that there would thus be two quajsita at once, — to wit, whether 
the predicate were affirmed of the subject, and, moreover, whether 
it were denied of everything beside. For when we say. All man 
is all rational, we judge that all man is rational, and judge, like- 
wise, that rational is denied of all but man. But the.se are in 
reality two different qumsita ; and therefore it has become usual 
to state them, not in one, but in two several propositions. And 
this is self-evident ; seeing that a qusesitum, in itself, asks only — 
Does, or does not, this inhere in that ? and not — Does this inhere 
in that, and, at the same time, inhere in nothing else ? ” 

VIII. — The Masteks of Louvain. 

Facultatis Artium in Academia Lovaniensi Commentaria in 
Aristotelis Libros de Dialectica,(\b^S),Ti. iii. c. l,p. 162, e<L1547. 

Speaking of the text in the De Interpretations, the Masters, inter 
alia, allege : “ But if it be even elegantly said by a poet — ‘ Nemo 
est omnis homo,’ — ‘ Non omnes omnibus artes’ — [proverb, ‘ Unus 
homo nullus homo’], why may we not eontradict this aptly, 
howbeit falsely, — ‘ Aliquis est omnis homo’ ? Why, (they say), do 
you determine the predicate by the note of universality, seeing 
that the quantity of the proposition is not to be sought from the 
predicate, but from the subject ? We answer, because we wish 
to express a certain meaning in words, which by no others can be 
done. But if the mark of universality could only be employed in 
changing the quantity of propositions, it would not be lawful to 
annex it to the part of the predicate. We have, therefore, thought 
these few cautions requisite to evince that what is condemned by 
these critics for its folly, is not incontinently sophistical or foolish 
babbling. But as to the universal rule which Aristotle enounces, 
— ‘ No aflirmation will be true,’ &c. — it is sufficient if it hold good 
in the majority of cases ; whether the predicate exceed the subject, 
as, AU man is all animal, — be its equal, as, All man is all risible. 


Digitized by Coogle 



312 


APPENDIX, 


or its inferior, as, [/Some] animal is all man. In a few cases, 
however, the exception is valid ; as, — This sun is every sun. One 
phoenix is all phoenix, and some others. Nor are these futile 
subtleties, since reason herself approves.” 

IX.— Titius and Ridigek. 

The only notice of these speculations of Titius,a which I have 
met with in any subsequent philosopher, (and I speak from an 
inspection of several hundred logical systems, principally by Gher- 
mans), is his friend Ridiger’s ; who in his elaborate work De Sensu 
Veri et Falsi, first published some eight years subsequently, (in 
1709 . but I have only the second edition of 1722), attempts a 
formal refutation of the heresy of a quantified predicate. It was 

a [Titius, A ra Cogitandi, c. vL, has the subjectum restringi nequit, sed ad alia 
following relative to the quantification quoque extendi aptum manet. § 43, 
of the predicate': — § SC, “ Licet autezn Ast si pncdicatum a subjecto removeas, 
Propoflitionum quantitos ex Subjecto universale iUud crit, cum quicquid in 
(cstimetur, attamen Praedicatum non cjua vel comprehensione vel extenaione 
I>cnitus negligcndum videbatur, cou vul‘ cst nb hoc sejungatur, noc imminuit 
go in hoc tractatione fieri solet, nam et univeraalitatem, quod idem ab aliis sub- 
hujus quantitatcra obsenmsae utilo cst, jcctU quoque removeatur, nam si pi*(D- 
et crediderim et disquisitionis hujus dicatum aliis etiam conveniat, turn qui- 
neglcctu varies errorcs tarn in doctrina dem uni subjecto non potest dici uni- 
Conversionis, quam Syllogit^tica esse ex- versaliter tributum, vcnim si de multU 
ortos, quos suis locis videbimus. § 37, negetur, potest nthilominus do certo 
Breviter itaquo observandum,in proposi- uliquo subjecto unirersaliter quoque ne- 
tionihus affirmativis, licet univeraalibus, gari. § 44 , Quodsi habitus attributi 
pncdicatum plcrumquc esse jKirticularc, permittat, potcrit aliquando propoaitio 
tribuique subjecto secundum totam qui- affirmativa pncdicatum universale, et 
dem Ruam coinprchengioucm^ non vero negative particuLvre liabcrc ; nihil enim 
fxteturlonem. § 39, K contrario in propo- obstat, quo minus aliquando totum al- 
silionibus nogativis, licet ])articularibua, teri jungero, vel partem ab oodom re- 
plerumque pncdicatum cst unircrtale, movero queas. § 45, Hacc itaque pro- 
ne tarn Recundum comprehensionem posititio : — OmnU homo c*t rUihilU^ 
quom oxtensumem suam totam, a sub- habet pncdicatum universale, si risibili- 
jecto removotur. g 41 , Interim nou pu- tatem pro hominis proprio habeas; sicut 
tarem nfiirmationem vcl negationem hic, — SullutTuirae9thomo,{^i\.ChrU' 
ipaam diversam illam pncdicsiti quan- tuinn*)^\e\Quidam maiievt non uthomo 
titotem nccessario iKiatuhire, se<l credi- pncdicatum particularo conti- 

dorim potius, id omne a diverse rerum neiit, dum pars solum comprehensionis 
et idearum habitu oriri, nffirmntioni et extensionU removetur.’* For the 
ven* et negationi pncilicati qiuintita- application, by Titius, of the principle of 
tern csj*o velut indilferentem. § 42, a (tuantifiod predicate to the doctrine of 
Nam plerumque praxlicuta subjectis sunt Conversion, see above pp. 274, 275 ; and 
latiora; quodsi igitur ilia cum his corn- to the theory of Syllogism, see below^ 
]K>uas, non potcrit non pniNlioatum i»ar- p. 375, and Appendix, X. — Ed.J 
iiculare indc emergore, dum unice ud 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX, 


313 


only, however, after “the most manifest demonstrations of the 
falsehood of this novel prejudice ha<l been once and again privately 
communicated to his very learned fnend, ” (Titius ?), that Bidiger 
became at length tired, as he expresses it, “ of washing a brick,” 
and laid the polemic before the public. It was not certainly the 
cogency of this refutation which ought to have thrown the counter 
opinion into oblivion ; but this refutation, such as it is, though 
with nothing new, is deserving of attention, as presenting the most 
elaborate discussion of the question to be met with, after Am- 
monius, and in modem timea But the whole argument supposes 
certain foundations ; and it will be sufiBcient to show that these 
are false, to dispose of the whole edifice erected upon them. I 
ought to mention, that it was Ridiger’s criticism which first directed 
my attention to the original of Titius. 

“ Origo autem hujus erroris neglectus notissimie acquivoca- 
tionls signomm omnia et quidam esse videtur, qua hmc signa, 
vel collective sumi possunt, vel distributive. Priori modo, quan- 
titas in prmdicato concepts sensum quidem infert non penitus 
absurdnm, emterum propositionem constituit identicam et frua- 
traneam.” Ridiger then goes on to a more detailed statement 
of what he supposes to be the grounds on which the erroneous 
opinion proceeds.® 

First Case. — “ Verbi gratia, Quoddam animal eat omnia homo ; 
hoc est. Species queedam animalis, homo nempe, omne id, quod 
homo eat ; quod alium sensum, habere nullum potest, quam, quod 
omnia homo ait homo: sic autem collective sumitur et signum 
subject! et signum prcedicati.’' This objection is absurd, for it is 
suicidal ; applying equally to the proposition which the objector 
holds for good, and to that which he assails as bad. All man is 
(some) animal. Here, is not animal or some animal, just a 
certain species of animal, and is not this species, man, to wit, all 
that is man, and nothing else ? There is, consequently, the same 
tautology in the one case as in the other ; and if we arc blamed 
for only virtually saying, by the former. All man is man, does 
the objector say a whit more than this, by the latter ? Ridiger 
goes on: “ Quodsi vel altemm signum, vel utramque, distributive 
sumatur, semper absurdus erit propositionis sensus.” 


• S<>cond Edition, pp. 232, 302. 


Digitized by Coogle 



314 


APPENDIX. 


Second Case. — " Vcrbi gratia, sumatur utrumque signum distri- 
butive, sensus erit, Qiwddam individuuni animalis, (v. g. Petrus,) 
est omne individuum homitiis, (y. g. Davus, Oedipus).’’ Tliis is a 
still higher flight of absurdity ; for, to refute the proposition, it is 
first falsely translated into nonsense. Its true meaning, both 
quantified terms being taken distributively, is ; — AU several men 
are some several animals, or. Every several man is some several 
animal. 

In these two cases, therefore, all is correct, and the objection 
from the identity or absurdity of a quantified predicate, null. 

Third Case. — “ Sumatur signum subjecti distributive, signum 
prsedicati collective, sensus erit : Quoddain individuum animalis 
est universa species hominis.” 

Fourth Case. — “ Sumatur, denique, signum subjecti collective, 
signum pnedicati distributive, sensus erit : Qucedam species ani- 
malis,ut universale et pnedicabile, est omne individuum hominis.” 

In regard to these last two cases, it is sufiBcient to refer to what 
has been already said in answer to Ammonius (p. 296) ; or simply 
to recall the postulate, that in the same logical unity (proposition 
or syllogism) the terms should be supposed in the same sense. If 
this postulate be obeyed, these two cases are inept, and, conse- 
quently, the objections superfluous. 

Kidiger then proceeds to treat us with four long “ demonstra- 
tions a priori,” and to one elaborate “ demonstration a posteriori 
but as these are all foimded on the blunders now exposed, it would 
be idle to refute them in detail. 

Ridigcr, it may well surprise us, howbeit the professed cham- 
pion of “ the old and correct doctrine,” is virtually, perhaps nneon- 
8ciou.sly, a confessor of the truth of “ the new and false prejudice 
for I find him propounding four several syllogistic forms, three of 
which are only valid through the universal quantification of the 
predicate in affirmatives, and two, (including the other one), proceed 
on a correct, though partial, view, opposed to that of the logicians, 
touching the conclusion of the Second Figure, (L II. c. vi.) I 
shall insert the quantities, operative but not expressed. 

In the Fins't Figure — “ At, aut ego nihil video, aut longe natu- 
raliur est hie ]>rocessus ; — Quoddam fluidum est [f/uorfda/nj leve; 
quoddain corpus est \omne\ fluidum ; ergo quoddam corpm e.d 
quoddam leve; quam si dicas, &c., (§ 34). — Here the middle 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


31 ^ 


term is, and must be, aflSrmatively distributed as predicate. 



In the Second Figure. — “ Verbi gratiA: — Quoddam ens ent 
\omne\ animal: omnia homo est [/luoddani] animal; ei'go, omnia 
homo eat [quoddami] ena. H»c conclusio verissima, &c.” (§ 39.) 
lu like manner the middle is here universally quantified in an 
afiirmativa M,— r. 


The following, Ridiger (p. 330) gives, as “two new moods, 
which cannot be dispensed with.” — "Quoddam animal eat [o/zmi’s] 
homo ; nullum brutmn eat [u/fus] homo; ergo, quoddam animal 
non eat [ttZiitm] brutum' Item : — Quoddam animal non eat 

[iti/ws] homo ; omnia civia eat [quidam] homo ; ergo, quoddam 
animal non eat [it/iiw] civia.” — In the first of these, the middle, 
as predicate, is aflSrmatively distributed ; and in both syllogisms, 
one conclusion, denied by the logicians, is asserted by Ridiger, 
although the other, which involves a predicate, particular and 
negative, is recognised by neither. 



X. — Godfrey Plodcqtjet. 

Godfrey Ploucquet, a philosopher of some account. Professor 
of Logic and Mctaphysic in the University of Tubingen, by various 
writings, from the year 1759, endeavoured to atlvance the science 
of rea.soning ; and his failure was perhaps owing more to the 
inadequacy and limitation of his doctrine, than to its positive 
error. To say nothing about his attempt to retluce Logic to a 
species of computation, in which his one-sided views came into 
coiifliction with the one-sided views of Lambert, he uiubjubtedly 
commenced auspiciously, on the principle of a (juantified predicate. 
This, like a few preceding logicians, he certainly saw afforded a 
mean of simplifying the conversion of propositions but he did 
not see that it could accomplish much more, if properly applied, 

a An extract from hU Pundammta quantification of tlio pretlieatc, will b« 
Philotophia Speculat\v(r, 1759, contain- found in Mr Bayuce' Essay, p. 128. 
iug Plouequet's doctrine toucliiug tbe 


Digitized by Google 


316 


APPENDIX. 


in the theory of syllo^sm. On the contrary, in syllogistic, he pro- 
fessedly returns, on mature consideration, to the ordinary point 
of view, and thinks himself successful in recalling the common 
doctrine of inference to a single canon. That canon is this : — 
“The terms in the conclusion are to be taken’ absolutely in the 
same extension which they hold in the antecedent.” — " In conclusi- 
one sint termini plane iidem, qui in prsemissis, intuitu quantitatia” 
{Meihodus tarn devwnstrandi directe omnes syllogiamorum 
species, quam vitia formce detegendi, ope unius regulce; — Me- 
thodus ccUculandi in Logicis ; passivu Both in 1763). This 
rule, as applied to his logical calculus, he thus enoimces: “Arrange 
the terms in syllogistic order; strike ont the middle; and the 
extremes then afford the conclusion.” — “ Deleatur in praemissis 
medius ; id quod restat indicat conclusionem." (Methodus calcu- 
lundi, passim ; Elemeiita Philosophice Gonteviplativce, Logica, 
§ 1 22, 1778.) This rule is simple enough, but, unfortunately, it is 
both inadequate and false Inadequate (and this was always 
sufficiently apparent) ; for it does not enable ns to ascertain, (and 
these the principal questions), how many terms, — of what identity 
— of what quantity — and of what quality, can be legitimately 
placed in the antecedent. But it is not true, (though this was 
never signalised) ; for its peculiar principle is falsified by eight of 
the thirty-six moods, to wit, in affirmatives, by ix., x., xi., xii., and 
in negatives, by ix. b, x. a, xL b, xii. a.“ In all these, the quan- 
tity of an extreme in the conclusion is less than its quantity in the 
antecedent We can hardly, therefore, wonder that Ploucqiiet’s 
logical speculations have been neglected or contemned ; although 
their author be an independent and learned thinker, and his works 
all well worthy of j)crusaL But, though dismissed by Hegel and 
other German logicians, not for its falsity, with supreme contempt, 
Ploucquet’s canon has, however, found its admirers in this country, 
where I have lately seen it promulgated as original 


XI. — Ulrich. 

Institutiones Logicce et Metaphysiccr, § 171, 1785. — “Non 
tantum subjecto sed et prwdicaio, ad subjectum relate, sua constat 
([uautitas, suumquc igitur signum quantitatis pnefigere licet. Sed 
ha)c pncdicati quantitas ex veterum praeceptis sa?pe justo minor 

a See Table of Moodd below, AppondU, XI. — Eo. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


317 


invenitur. In loco de conversione distinctius de eo exponetur.” 
In that place, however, nothing of the kind appears."* 


IV. 


CANONS OF SYLLOGISM; GENERAL HISTORICAL 
NOTICES AND CRITICISM. 


A. HISTORICAL NOTICE.S. 

(a) gUOTATIONS FROM VARIOUS LOOICIANa 
(Collecttsi and TranslaUHl Autumn 1844. See above, Vol. I. p. 303 . — Ed.) 

I. — David Derodon. 

David Derodon (who died at Geneva in IGGL and had been 
previously Professor of Philosophy at Die, Orange and Nismes), 
was a logician of no little fame among the Frcneh Huguenots ; the 
study of his works was, (if I recollect aright), even formally recom- 
mended to the brethren of their communion, by one of the Galil- 
ean Synods. “ Either the Devil or Doctor Derodon,” was long 


a [That the Extension of Predicato is 
always reduced to Extension of Subject, 
i.e.f is etjuivalent to it, see Purchot, 
Instit. Phil., LfH/ka, L pp. 123, 125. 
Tracy, EUmens /diotofpe, t. iii. Disc. 
Prel., pp. 99, 100. Crnuaaa, t. 

iii. p. 190. Derodon, I^>gica 
P. iL,c.v.,art 4, p.224. Boethius, 0/>rro, 
p. 348, (see above, p. 306). SergMnt, 
Method to SeUnce^ b. iL, leas. i. p. 127. 
Beneke, Lehrbuch der LoffiJc, § 156, p. 
100. Stattler, Lofjiea, § 196. 

That the Predicate bos quantity ; and 
potential designation of it as well as 
the Subject, see Hoffbauer, Analt/tUc 
der Urtheile und SrA/fistr, g 31 seq. 
Lambert, Deuttcher Gelehrter Briefwech^ 
»el, Brief vL vol I p. 395. Platncr, 
Philo»ojth{$che AphorUmen, L § 646. 
Corvinua, Instit, Phil, ifof., § 413. 
Conimbriccnscs, In ArisL Dial., i. it 


pp. 158, 283. Scotus, In An, Prior. L. I. 
qu. 4,f. 240 : qu. 13, ff.254'’, 255*; qu. 
14, f. 266**; qu.23,f. 273». 

For instances of Aristotle virtually 
using distributed predicate, see A n. Post, 
i. 6, g 1. Cf. Zabarella, ad loe. Opera 
Logica, p. 735. The same, In An. Post. 
I. 2. Opera, p. 827, and De Quarta 
Figura Sgllog. Op., p. 123. The adding 
mark of univoraality to predicate is, 
Aristotle says, ** useless and impossible’* 
{An Prior., L c. 27, 8 9); yet see ii. c. 
22, §§ 7. 8; c. 23, g§ 4, 6. On this 
question, see Bolzano, LogUe, g 131, p. 
27, (and above, pp. 295, 301, 302.) 

That the predesignatiou of the predi- 
cate by all collectively, in fact, reduces 
the universal to a singular proposition, 
see Purchot, Instit. Phil., i, pi 124. Cf. 
Logica Caniraeta Trajectina, P. ii c. 5. 
(1707.)] 


Digitized by Google 



818 


APPENDIX. 


a proverbial expression in France for the anthorship of an acute 
argument ; and tlie “ Sepulchre of the Mass” has been translated 
into the vernacular of every Calvinist country. Derodon has left 
two systems of Logic ; a larger, {Logica Restituta, 1659), and a 
smaller {Logica Contmeta, 166i), both published in 4to.<> I shall 
quote only from the former. 

It is imjtossible to deny Derodon ’s subtlety, but his blunders 
unfortunately outweigh his originabty. Leaving Conversion as he 
found it, after repeating, with approbation, the old rules, — that the 
predicate is not to be overtly quantified universally, (p. 573), but 
to be taken, in affirmative propositions particularly, as in negative 
propositions universally, (p. 023) ; we are surprised to find him 
controverting, in detail, the special rules of syllogism. This polemic, 
as might be expected, is signally unsuccessful ; for it is frequently 
at variance with all principle, and uniformly in contradiction of his 
own. It is, indeed, only interesting as a manifestation, that the old 
logical doctrine was obscurely felt by so original a thinker to be 
erroneous; for the corrections attempted by Derodon are, them- 
selves, especially on the ground which he adopts, only so many 
errors. He unhappily starts with a blunder ; for he gives, as rectus, 
an example of syllogism, in which the middle term is, even of ne- 
cessity, undistributed ; and he goes on (pp. 627, 628, 636, 637, 638, 
639, 649) either to stumble in the same fashion, or to adduce rea- 
sonings, which can only be vindicated as inferential, by supplying 
a universal quantity to the predicate in affirmative proposition.s, 
or by reducing it to particularity in negatives ; both in the teeth 
of Derodon’s own laws. I have, however, recorded, in my Table of 
Syllogisms, some of his examples, both the two forms which he has 
named, and four others which he only enounces ; according, by 
liberal construction, what was requisite to give them sense, and 
which, without doubt, the author would himself have recognised. 

II.— Rapin. 

Rapin, Reflexions sur la Logique, § 4, 1 684. 

“Before Aristotle there had appeared nothing on logic systematic 

« Derodon seetDS wholly unknown to a considerable number In the nrnie bind- 
the German logiciana, and, I need hardly ing must have been importe<l at once, 
utld, to thoeo of other countrica. In probably in conwquence of the synodical 
Scotland hia works ore not of tlie rarest ; recommendation. 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


319 


and established. His genius, so full of reason and intelligence, 
penetrated to the recesses of the mind of man, and laid open all 
its secret workings in the accurate analysis which he made of its 
operations. The de]>ths of human thought had not as yet been 
fathomed. Aristotle was the first who discovered the new way 
of attaining to science, by the evidence of demonstration, and of 
proceeding geometrically to demonstration, by the infallibility of 
the syllogism, the most accomplished work and mightiest effort of 
the hmnan mind,” &c. 

Rapln errs in making Aristotle lay the rule of proportion along 
with the Dictum, de Omni as a principle of syllogism. 


III. — Leibnitz. 

Leibnitz, De la conformity de la Foi avec la Raison, § 22. 
Op. t. i., p. 81. “ Hence the facility of some writers is too great, 
in conceding that the doctrine of the Holy Trinity is repugnant 
with that great principle which enounces — What are the same 
with the same third, are the same with each other ; that is, if A 
be the same with B, and C be the same with B, it is necessary that 
A and C should also be the same with one another. For this 
principle flows immediately from the principle of Contradiction, 
and is the ground and basis of all Logic ; if that fail, there is no 
longer any way of reasoning with certainty.” 


IV.— Eedsch. 

Reusch, Systema Logicum, 1734. 

§ 506. " That dictum of the Aristotelians de Omni et Kollo, 
(503), evinces, indeed, a legitimate consequence, but it only regu- 
lates one species of syllogisms, at least immediately. By this reason, 
therefore, logicians have been induced to prove the consequence of 
the other species by means of the first, to which they are reduced. 
But, that we may be able to supersede this labour, I have en- 
deavoured to give a broader basis to the Dictum de Omni et Nullo, 
or by whatever name that rule is called, to which, in the construc- 
tion of syllogisms, the order of thought is conformed. 

§ 507. “ For the whole business of ordinary reasoning is accom- 
plished by the substitution of ideas in place of the subject or predi- 


Digitized by Google 



320 


APPENDIX. 


cate of the fundamental proposition. This some call the equation 
of thoughts. Now, the fundamental proposition may be either 
affirmative or negative, and in each the ideas of the terms may be 
considered either agreeing or diverse, and according to this various 
relation there obtains a various substitution, which wo shall clearly 
illustrate before engaging with our doctrine of the Dictum de 
Omni et Nullo.” [Having done this at great length, he proceeds]. 

§ “ 510. From what has been now fully declared, the following 
Dictum de Omni et Nullo may be formed, which the definition 
itself of reasoning and syllogism (§ 502) supports, and to which 
all syllogisms in every figure and mood may be accommodated. 

“ If two ideas (two terms) have, through a judgment, (proposi- 
tion), received a relation to each other, either affirmative or nega- 
tive, in that case it is allowable, in place of either of these, (that 
is, the subject or predicate of that judgment or proposition), to svh- 
stitute another idea, (term), according to the rules given of Equi- 
pollence or Reciprocation (§ 508, s. 9), of Subordination, of Co- 
ordination,” (see Waldin, below, p. 324). 


IV. — CRDSiua 

Cru.sius, Weg zur Oeioissheit. Ed. i. 1747 ; Ed. iL 17C2. 

§ 256. “ The supreme law of all syllogism is. What we cannot 
otherwise think than as true, is true, and what we absolutely can- 
not think at all, or cannot think but as false, is false.”’* 

§ 259. Of necessary judgments, of judgments which we cannot 
but think, “ which are not identical, and which constitute, in the 
last result, the positive or the kernel in our knowledge ; to which 
we apply the principle of Contradiction, and thereby enrich the 


• Kftnt, {Vbtr die Eridenz in Tneta- 
pJtyziMrhm WihJfcnichafteitf 1763, Vervu 
Sekrift. ii 43), has hereon the following 
ol>sennition : — “In regard to the bu* 
preme rule of all certainty which this 
celebrated man thought of placing as 
the principle of all knowledge, and, 
consequently, also of the metaphysical, 
^Whjat / cannot othenctMC think than a* 
true U (rue, &c. ; it is manifest that this 
proposition can never bo a principle of 
truth for any knowledge whatever. For 


if it be agreed that no other principle 
of truth U possible than inasmuch as 
wo arc incapable of holding a thing not 
for true, in this case it is acknowledged 
that no other principle of truth is com- 
petent, and that knowledge is indemon- 
strable. It is indeed true that there are 
many indemonstrable knowledges, but 
the feeling of conviction in regard to 
them is a confeasion, but not a ground 
of proof, that they are true.” — See also 
Reid, Intellectual Powers, Essay iv. ch. 4 . 


Digitized by Coogie 



APPENDIX. 


321 


understanding with a knowledge of real judgments,” — such judg- 
ments are principally the following : Every power or force ia in- 
herent in a subject ; All that arises, (begins to be), arises in virtue 
of a sufficient cause ; AU whose non-existence cannot be thought, 
has its cause, and has at some time arisen, (begun to be) ; Every 
substance eahsts somewhere ; AH that exists, exists at some time ; 
Twomaterial things cannot exist at the same time,and in precisely 
the same place. There are also many other propositions, which 
treat of the determinate qualification of tilings as present ; fur ex- 
ample — The same point of a body cannot he at once red and green ; 
A man cannot be in two places at once, and so forth. 

“§261. All the judgments previously alleged, (§ 259), may be 
comprehended under these two general propositions, — What can- 
not in thought be separated from each other, cannot be separated 
from each other in reality ; and. What cannot in thought be con- 
nected into a notion, cannot in reality be connected; to wit, 
although no contradiction shows itself between the notions, but we 
are only conscious of a physical necessity to think the thing so and 
so, clearly and after a comparison of all the circumstances with 
each other. For we now speak of propositions which are not 
identical with the Principle of Contradiction, but of such as prima- 
rily oiford the matters on which it may be applied. Hence we see 
that the supreme principle of our knowledge given above, (§ 256), 
has two determinations ; inasmuch as the impossibility to think a 
something arises, either because a contradiction would ensue, or 
because we are positively so compelled by the physical constitution 
of our thinking faculties. 

“ § 262. The highest principle of all syllogism thus resolves itself 
into the three capital propositions ; 

1. Nothing can at once be and not be in the same point of view. 

2. Things which cannot be thought without each other, widtout 
each other cannot exist 

3. What cannot be thought as with and beside each other, can- 
not exist unth and beside each other, on the supposition even that 
between the notions there is no contradiction. 

“ The second of these capital propositions I call the Principle 
of Inseparables, (principium inaeparabilium) ; and the third 
the Principle of InconjoinaMes, {principium inconjungdnlium). 
They may be also termed the three Principles of Reason. 

VOL. II. X 


Digitized by CoogU 



322 


APPENDIX. 


Ch. VIII. Of the different species of syllogisms, he says, (§ 272), 
“among the higher principles of syllogisms it is needful only 
to enumerate the PHnciple of Contradiction, and the Principle 
of Sufficient Reason, which is subsumed from the principle of In- 
separables, (§ 262). We shall state the laws of syllogism in this 
order, — Consider those which flow, 1°, From the Principle of 
Contradiction ; 2°, From the Principle of Sufficient Reason ; and, 
3°, From both together.” 

V. — Francis Hutcheson. 

[Francisci Hutcheson.] Logicw Compendium. Glasguce, in 
adibus academicis, excudebant Robertas et Andreas Foulis, Aca- 
demics Typography 1764. 

Part III., Ch. iL p. 58. 

" The whole force of .syllogism may be explicated from the fol- 
lowing axioms. 

“ First Axiom. — Things which agree in the same third, agree 
among themselves. 

“ Second Axiom. — Things whereof the one agrees, the other 
does not agree, in one and the same third, these things do not 
agree among themselves. 

“ Third Axiom. — Things which agree in no third, do not agree 
among themselves. 

Fourth Axiom. — Things which disagree in no third, do not 
disagree among themselves!' 

“ Hence are deduced the general rules of syllogisms. 

“ Of these the three first regard the Quality [not alone] of Pro- 
positions. 

“Rule 1. — If one of the premises be negative, the conclusion 
will be negative (by Ax. 2). 

“Rule 2. If both premises be affirmative, the conclusion will he 
affirmative (by Ax. 1). 

" Rule 3. — If both premises be negative, nothing follows: because 
of things mutually agreeing and mutually disagreeing, both may 
be different from a third thing (by Ax. 3, 4). 

“ Two Rules regard the Quantity of Terms. 

“ Rule 4. — Let the middle be once at least distributed, or taken 


Digitized by Cooglc 


APPENDIX. 


323 


universally ; for the common term frequently contains two or more 
species mutually oppyosed, of which it may be predicated according 
to various parts of its extension ; these [.specific] terms do not, 
therefore, truly agree in one third, unless one at least of them 
agrees with the whole middle (by Ax. 3, 4). 

‘‘ Rule 5. — No term ought to he taken more universally in the 
conclusion than in the premises : because no consequence is valid 
from the particular to the universal [Because wo should, in that 
case, tran.scend the agreement or disagreement of the two terms 
in a third, on which, ex hypothesi, we found], 

“ [In like manner there are two rules] concerning the Quantity 
of Propositions. 

"Rule 6. — If one of the premises he particular, the conclusion 
will also he particular. 

“ For, Ca.se I. — If the conclusion be affirmative, therefore both 
premises wiU be aflBrmative (by Rule 1,'. But, in a particular pro- 
position, there is no term distributed ; the middle is, therefore, to 
be distributed in one or other of the premises (by Rule 4). It will, 
therefore, be the subject of a universal affirmative proposition ; 
but the other extreme is also taken particularly, when it is the 
predicate of an affirmative proposition, the conclusion will, there- 
fore, be particular (by Rule 5). 

“ Case 2. — Let the conclusion be negative ; its predicate is, 
therefore, distributed : hence, in the premises, the major and the 
middle tenns are to be distributed (by Rules 5 and 4). 

“ But when one of the premises is negative, the other is affirma- 
tive (by Rule 3). If one premise be particular, these two terms only 
can be distributed ; since one premise affirms, whilst the other is 
particular. The minor extreme, the subject of the conclusion, is 
not, therefore, distributed in the premises ; it cannot, therefore, (by 
Rule 5), be distributed in the conclusion. 

"Rule 7. — From two particular premises nothing follows; at 
least according to the accustomed mode of speaking, where the pre- 
dicate of a negative proposition is understood to be distributed. 
For, 1“, If the conclusion affirm, both premises will affirm, and, 
consequently, no term is distributed in the premises ; contrary to 
Rule 4. 2°, Let the conclusion be negative, its predicate is there- 
fore distributed ; but in particular premises there is only distributed 


Digitized by Coogle 



324. 


APPENDIX. 


the predicate of a negative proposition ; there is, therefore, neces- 
sarily a vice, (either against Kule 4. or Rule 5).” <« 


VI. — Savonarola. 

Savonarola, Compendium Lojices, L. iv. p. ll.'S, ed. Venetiis, 
1542. — “ In whatever syllogism any proposition can be concluded, 
there may also bo concluded every other proposition which follows 
out from it.” On this he remarks : “ When any syllogism infers a 
conclusion flowing from its immediate conclusion, it is not to be 
called one syllogism but two. For that other conclusion does not 
follow simply in virtue of the premises, but in virtue of them 
there first follows the proper conclusion, and from this conclusion 
there follows, by another syllogism, the conclusion consequent on it 
Hence there are tacitly two syllogisms ; otherwise the moods of 
syllogisms would be almost infinite.” 


VII. — Baumoaeten. 

Baumgarten, Acroasis Logica. Ed. Tdllner. Ed. I. 1765. 

§ 297. “ Every reasoning depends on this proposition : — A and 
B connected with a third C, are connected with each other : in 
affirmation immediately, in negation mediately. This proposition 
is, therefore, the foundation and principle of all reasoning ; which, 
however, is subordinate to the principle of Contradiction. 

§ 324. “ Every ordinary syllogism concluding according to the 


a " Rules 1 and 7 art thus contracted 
into one ; The conclusion fullotcs the 
v'caier jxirt; that is, the negative or 
tbe particular. All those Rules are in- 
clude<l in tbe following verses 

DUtribuas medium, nec quartus ter- 
minus o<lsit, 

Utraque nec pncmisaa negans, noc 
particuluris. 

Scctotur i>artem concluaio deterio- 
rem ; 

Et non lUstribuat nisi cum proimissa, 
negetve. 

In on unusual mode of speaking, a cer- 
tain negative conclusion may be effected 
with a n*>n-distributivo predicate. As 
in this examjilc ; 


A B 

Some Frenchmen are [some] learned; 

C B 

Some Englishmen are not [««y] learned^ 
Therefore^ some Englishmen are not some 
Frenchmen.'* 



(What are within [ ] ore by me). 

[Written Autumn 1844. In the hitcat 
notation (,) is substituted for (.), and (:) 
for See below, Appendix XI. — Ed ] 


Digitized by Coogic 



APPENDIX. 


S26 


Dictum, either de Omni, or de KvUo. This Dictum is thus the 
foundation of all ordinary syllogisms.” (It had been previously * 
announced, §§ 319, 321.) 

“Whatever is truly affirmed of a notion universally, is also truly 
affirmed of all that is contained under it. Whatever is tnily 
denied of a notion universally, is also truly denied of all that is 
contained under it.’’ 

VIIL— Keimabus. 

Rcimanis, VernunfUehre. 1766. 

§ 176. “ The fundamental rules of syllogism are, consequently, 
no otlier than the rules of Agreement [Identity] and of Contradic- 
tion. For what the geometer in regard to magnitudes takes as 
the rule of equality or inequality, that the reasoner here adopts as 
the universal rule of all mediate insight : — If tivo things be iden- 
tical vnth a third, they are also in so far identical with each 
other. But if the one be, and the other be not, identical with the 
third, then they are not mutually identical, but rather mutually 
repugnant.” 

§ 177. Here he notices that the Dictum de Omni et Nullo is 
not properly a rule for all figures, but for the first alone. 


IX— Waldin. 

Waldin, Novum Logicce Sysiema. 1766. 

§ 335. “ Since the syllogism requires essentially nothing but a 
distinct cognition of the sufficient reason of some proposition, the 
most universal rule of all syllogisms is, — The sufficient reason of a 
given proposition is to be distinctly cognised. 

§ 364. “ The most general rule of all reasonuigs, (§ 335), remains 
also the rule of all reasonings as well in synthesis as in analysis. 
But in the synthesis of the ordinary syllogism, the middle term in 
the major proposition is referred to the major term, in the minor 
proposition to the minor term. (§ 360). Wherefore, from this 
relation we must judge whether the middle term be or be not the 
sufficient reason of the conclusion. Wherefore, the synthesis of the 
ordinary syllogism is to be cognised from the relation of its ideas. 
This you may thus express : 

" 1.) After the true proposition, the relation of whose ex- 
tremes you distinctly apprehend ; 


Digitized by Coogle 


326 


APPENDIX. 


“ 2.) Add to its subject or predicate another idea different 
from both, vihether agreeing or disagreeing ; 

“ 3.) Inquire into the relation of the added idea, to the end 
that you may know whether the middle term in the given relation 
infer the conclusion; and this is known by the application of the 
rules of Reciprocation, Subordination, Co-ordination, and Oppo- 
sition. If any one wish to call this the Dictum de Omni et JV ullo, 
I have no objections." 

“ Observation. This they call the Dictum de Omni et X ullo of 
the celebrated Reusch. It stands true indeed ; but is beset with diffi- 
culties, inasmuch as it is rather a complexus of all rules than one 
only, which as yet is to be referred to the class of pia desideria. 
Logicians have, indeed, taken pains to discover one supreme rule 
of all ordinary reasonings ; but no one has as yet been so happy 
as to find it out.” Then follows a criticism of the attempts by the 
Port Royal and Syrbius. 


X. — SXATTLER. 

Stattler, Philosophia, P. I. Logica, 1769. 

§ 237. “ In this comparison of two ideas with a third, six 
different cases may in all occur : for either, 

1. ) “ One of the two ideas contains that same third, which 
again contains the other ; or, 

2. ) “ Both of the two are contained in the third ; or, 

3. ) “ Each of the two conUtins the third ; or, 

4. ) “ One of the two contains the third, the other being repug- 
nant with it ; or, 

5. ) “ One of the two is contained in the third, with which the 
other is repugnant ; or, 

6. ) Both of the two are repugnant to the third. 

" The former three cases generate an affirmative conclusion, the 
latter three a negative.” In a note Stattler eliminates a seventh case, 
in which neither may contain, and neither be repugnant to the 
third. 

§ 244. General Law of all Reasonings. “ In all reasonings, 
as often as a consequent is, by legitimate form, inferred from 
an antecedent, so often is there included in the antecedent what 
the consequent enounces ; either the congruity and reciprocal 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


327 


containment, or the repugnance of A and C; and if euch be not 
included in one or other of the antecedents, whatever is inferred 
in the consequent is void of legitimate form.’’ 

XI. — Sauteb. 

Santer, Institutiones Logicce, 1798. 

§ 123. “ Foundations of Syllogism. — In every syllogism there 
are two notions compared with a third, to the end that it may 
appear whether they are to be conjoined or sejoined. There are, 
therefore, here, three possible cases. For there agree with the 
assumed tliird, either both notions, or one, or neither. In reasoning, 
our mind, therefore, reposes on these axioms, as on fundamental 
principles. 

1. ) “ Where two notions agree with the same third, they agree 
with one another, 

2. ) " Where one is contained by the third, with which the other 
is repugnant, they are mutually repugnant. 

3. ) “ When neither notions agrees with the third, there is between 
them neither agreement nor repugnance.” 

XII. — SUTEB. 

Sutcr, Logica. 

§ 61 . " Quae eidem tertio convcniunt vel disconveniunt, etiam 
conveniont vel disconveniunt inter sa” 

XIII.— Sequy. 

Seguy, Philosophia ad Usum Scholarum Accommodata, T. I. 
Logica. Paris, 1771. 

P. 175, ed. 1785. “ Concerning the rule of recent philoso- 

phers." 

Having recited the general rule of the Port Royal Logic, he 
thus comments on it ; — 

" 1°, This is nothing else than the principle of reasoning ; there- 
fore, it is improperly adduced as a new discovery, or a rule strictly 
so called. 

“ 2®, It may be useful, to the rude and inexperienced, to recog- 
nise whether a syllogism be legitimate or illicit. 

“ But the principal fault of this rule is, that it contains no certain 
method whereby we may know when, and when not, one of the 


Digitized by Google 


328 


APPENDIX. 


premises contains a conclusion ; for the discovery of which we 
must frequently recur to the general rules.” “ 

P. 178. Seguy exposes Father BufiBer’s error in saying “that, 
according to Aristotle and the common rules of Logic, the middle 
term ought absolutely to be the predicate in the first or major 
proposition seeing that the middle term is not the predicate in 
the first and third Figures. This must be a mistake ; for I can- 
not find such a doctrine in Bufiier, who in this respect, in many 
places, teaches the eorrect. 


XrV.— HOFFBAtTER. 

Hoflfbauer, Anfangsgriinde der Logik, 1794', 1810. 

“§317. Fundamental Principles. 

" I. 1 .) An attribute which belongs to all and every of the objects 
contained under a notion, may also be affirmed of these objects so 
contained. (Dictum de Omni.) 

“ 2.) An attribute which belongs to none of the objects contained 
under a notion, must also be denied of these objects so contained. 
(Dictum de Nullo.) 

“ II. When, of the objects X and Z, the one contains an atttri- 
bute which the other does not contain, and they are thus different 
from each other, then X is not Z, and Z is not X. 

“ m. 1.) When objects which are contained under a notion a are 
also contained under another notion b, then this last notion con- 
tains under it some at least of the objects which are contained 
mider the first. 

“ 2.) If certain objects which are not contained under a notion a 
are containetl under b, then b contains under it some at least of 
the objects which are not contained under a. 

“ IV. 1 .) If objects which are contained under a notion a belong 


a Followed by Larroque, KUmfn* dt E contra^ PKilowpkia i. 

p. 231 ; GaUuppi, j^bni rfi 159. Troxler, 41. 

Logica e di Mela/sica, L 47, L 348. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


329 


to those which are contained under another notion b, then this 
second notion b contains under it some at least of the objects 
which are contained under a. 

“ 2.) If all objects which are contained under a notion a belong 
to those which are not contained under a certain other notion b, 
then this notion b contains under it no object which is contained 
under the notion a. 

“3.) If all the objects contained under a certain notion a are 
different from certain other objects contained under b, then 6 con- 
tains under it at least some objects which are not contained 
under a. 


XV.— Kant. 

Kant, Lofftk. 1800-6. II. Syllogism.s. 

“ § 56. Syllogism in general . — A syllogi.sm is the cognition that 
a certain proposition is necessary, through the subsumption of its 
condition under a given general rule. 

“§ .57. General principle of all Syllogisms. — The general 
principle whereon the validity of all inference, through the 
reason, rests, may be determinately enounced in the following 
formula : — 

" What stands tinder the condition of a rule, that stands also 
under the rule itself. 

“ Observation . — The syllogism premises a General Rule, and a 
Subsumption under its Condition. Hereby we understand the con- 
clusion a priori, not as manifested in things individual, but as 
universally maintained, and as nece.ssary under a certain condition. 
And this, that all stands under the universal, and is determinable 
in universal laws, is the Principle \tse\{ Rationality ox oi Neces- 
sity, (principium rationalitatis sen necessitatis.) 

“ § 58. Essential constituents of the Syllogism . — To every syl- 
logism there belong the three following parts : — 

"1.) A general rule, styled the Major proposition, (propositio 
major, Ohersatz) 

“ 2.) The proposition which subsumes a cognition under the con- 
dition of the general rule, called the Minor proposition, {propositio 
minor, Untersatz) ; and, finally, 

“ 3.) The proposition which aflSrms or denies the predicate in the 


Digitized by Coogic 



830 


APPKNDIX. 


rule of the subsumed cognition, — the Concluding jiroposition, or 
Conclusion, {Gonclnsio, ikldusssats). 

“ The two first propositions, taken in connection with each other, 
are called the Antecedents, or Premises, { Vordersatse). 

“ Observation. — A rule is the assertion of a general condition. 
The relation of the condition to the assertion, how, to wit, this 
stands under that, is the Exponent of the rule. The cognition, 
that the condition, (somewhere or other), takes place, is the Sub- 
sumption. 

“ The nexus of what is subsumed under the condition, with the 
assertion of the rule, is the Conclusion." 

Having shown the distribution of syllogisms into Categorical, 
Hypothetical, and Disjunctive, he proceeds to speak of the first 
class. 

“ § 63. Principle of Categorical Syllogisms. — The principle 
whereon the possibility and validity of Categorical Syllogisms 
is this, — What pertains to the attribute of a thing, that pertains to 
the thing itself ; and what is repugnant to the attribute of a thing, 
that is repugnant to the thing itself, (iVota notce est nota ret tjtsius; 
Repvgnans notce, repugnat rei ipsi). 

" Obsei-vation. — From this principle, the so-called Dictum de Omni 
et Nullo is ea.sily deduced, and cannot, therefore, be regarded as the 
highest principle either of the Syllogism in general, or of the Cate- 
gorical Syllogism in particular. Generic and Specific Notions are 
in fact the general notes or attributes of all the things which stand 
under these notions. Consequently the rule is here valid — What 
pertains or is repugnant to the genus or species, that also per- 
tains or is repugnant to all the objects which are contained 
under that genus or species. And this very rule it is which is 
called the Dictum de Omni et NuUo.” 

XVL— Christian Weiss. 

Christian Weiss, Logik, 1801. 

“§ 216. Principle for all Syllogisms. — The principle of every 
perfect Syllogism con.sists in the relation of one of the notions 
contained in the conclusion to a third notion {terminus niedius), 
to which the other notion of the conclusion belongs. Now the re-' 
lotion which the first of these holds to the middle notion, the 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


S31 


same must hold to the second, just because the second coin- 
cides with the middle notion to the same eadent as the first. 

“Remark. — ‘Relation to’ means only any determinately 
thought relation, expressed in a judgment 

“ The older logicians adopt, some of them, the principle Nota 
notcB cst nota rei ipsius, — quod repugnat notce, repugnat ipsi rei ; 
this, however, is only properly applicable to the first figure. The 
expression of others is preferable, Qucecumque conveniunt (vel 
dissentiunt) in uno tertio, eadein conveniun (vel dissentiunt) inter 
se. Others, in fine, among whom is Wolf, give the Dictum de 
Omni et Nullo (cf § 233) as the principle of syllogisms in gene- 
ral ; compare Philosophical Aphorisms [of Plainer], P. i. § 546. 
All inference takes place according to a universal rule of reason, 
here only expressed in reference to syllogism, to which, however, 
some have chosen to give a more mathematical expression ; — If 
two notions be equal to a third, they are also equal to each other. 

[iVota bene. — Weiss’s mistake (§ 231) in supposing that Aris- 
totle “ designated the .syllogistic moods with words, like his learned 
followers.”] 

“ § 231. Categorical Syllogisms, Figure I. — The first figure con- 
cludes by means of a subordination of the minor term in the 
conclusion under the subject of another judgment. 

“ § 233. This takes place under the general principle : — 

“ 1.) What i^ertains to all objects contained under a notion, 
that pertains also to some and to each individual of their 7ium- 
ber among them. 

“2.) What belongs to none of the objects contained under a 
notion, that also does not pertain to some or to any hulicidual of 
their number among them. 

“These are the celebrated Dicta de Omni and de Nullo, — Quid- 
quid priedicatur de omni, idem etiam de aliquo, and, Quidquid 
pradicatur de nullo, id nec de aliquo prcedicatur.” 

XVII.— Fries. 

Fries, System der Logik. 

“ § 52. Hitherto we have maintained two views of the Syllogism 
in connection. The end in view of rea.soning is this, — that cases 
should be subordinated to general rules, and through them become 
determined. For example, the general law of the mutual attrac- 


Digitized by Coogic 



332 


APPENDIX. 


tion of all heavenly bodies has its whole significance, for my 
knowledge, in this, that there arc given individual heavenly 
bodies, as Sun and Earth, to which I apply it. To enounce these 
relations, it is, in the first place, necessary that I have a general rule, 
as Major Proposition, (Obersatz) ; in the second, a Minor Propo- 
sition, (Untersatz), wliich subordinates cases to the rule, and, 
finally, a Concluding Proposition, which determines the cases 
through the rule. On the other hand, we see that every Con- 
clusion is an analytico-hypothetic judgment, and this always 
flows from the Dictum do Omni et Nullo, inasmuch as the relation 
of subordination of particular under universal notions, is the only 
relation of Reason and Consequent given in the form of thought 
itself. Now, if the conclusion, as syllogism, combines a plurality 
of judgments in its premises, in this case the principle of the in- 
ference must lie in a connection of the thoughts, — a connection 
which is determined by the matter of these judgments. In the 
simplest case, when taking into account only a single syllogism, 
I thus would recognise in the premises the relation of subordina- 
tion between two notions by reference to the same third notion, 
and therethrough perceive in the conclusion the relation of these 
two notions to each other. I know, for example, that all men 
are mortal, and that Cains is a man. Consequently, through the 
relation of the notion of mortality, and of my imagination of 
Cains, to the notion vuin, the relation of Cains to mortality is 
likewise determined : — Cains is mortal. The first of these views 
is a mere po.stulate; but in conformity to the second we are 
enabled immediately to evolve the general form of syllogisms, and 
from this evolution does it then become manifest that all possible 
syllogisms .satisfy the postulate. We, therefore, in the first instance, 
attach ourselves to the second view. Through this there is deter- 
mined as follows : — 

“ 1.) Here the determination of one notion is carried over to an- 
other, superordinatc or subordinate to itself. To every .syllogism 
there belong three notions, called its terms, (termini). (We say 
notions, (Begriffe), because they are, in general, such, and when indi- 
vidual representations [or images] appear as terms, in that ca.se 
there is no inter-commutation possible). A major term, or supe- 
rior notion, (Oberhegriff), P, is given as the logical determination 
of a middle term or notion, (Mittelbegriff), M, and, through thi.s. 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


333 


it ia positively or negatively stated as the determination of a minor 
term or notion, {Unterbegriff), S. 

“ 2.) If, then, we regard the propositions in which these relations 
are enounced; there is, firstly, in the conclusion, {Schlusssatz), 
the minor term, or inferior notion, subordinated to the major term, 
or superior notion, (S is P). Further, in one of the premises, the 
middle must be connected with the major term or notion, (M is P). 
This is called the major proposition, {Obersatz). In the other, 
again, the minor is connected with the major term or notion, (S is 
M); this is called the minor proposition, {U ntei'satz). 

“ The form of every syllogism is therefore : — 

Mi^or Proposition, M it P. 

Min or Proposition, S it M. 

Conclusion, S it P. 

“ In the example given above, man is the middle term; mortality 
the major term ; and Caius the minor term. The syllogism is : — 


Major Proposition, 
Minor Proposition, 

Conclusion, 


All men are mortal ; 
Caiui is a man ; 


Caius is rnortal. 


“ The fundamental relation in all syllogisms is that of the 
middle term to the major and minor terms, in other words, that of 
the carrying over of a logical determination from one notion to 
another, through certain given subordinations. For howbeit the 
Dictum de Omni et Nullo, as a common principle of all syllogisms 
in thefonuula, — liViaf holds good of the universal, holds also good 
of the particulars subordinate thereto, and stiU more in that 
other, — The attribute of the attribute is also the attribute of the 
thing itself, — is proximately only applicable to the categorical sub- 
ordination of a representation [or notion] under a notion ; still, 
however, the law of mental connection is altogether the same in 
syllogisms determined by the subordination of consequence under 
a reason, [Hypothetic Syllogisms], or of the complement of parts 
under a logical whole, [Disjunctive Syllogisms]. The displayed 
form is the form of every possible syllogism. In fact, it also coin- 


Digitized by Google 



334 


APPENDIX. 


cide8 with the first requirement that, in the syllogism, a case 
should always be determined by a rule, inasmuch as every syllo- 
gism proposes a universal premise, in order rigorously to infer its 
conclusion. This will bo more definitely shown, when we treat of 
syllogisms in detail Only the declaration, that the rule is always 
the major proposition, is sometimes at variance with the declara- 
tion, that the major proposition contains the relation of the 
middle term to the major term. We must, however, in the first 
place, always follow the determination of the latter. For every 
syllogism properly contains the three processes: — 1). The subor- 
dination of a particular under a universal ; this is the function of 
the minor proposition, and the relation between the minor and major 
terms ; 2), Postulate of a logical determination for one of these 
two ; this is the function of the major proposition, and the relation 
of the middle to the major tenn ; 3), The carrying over this deter- 
mination to that other ; this is the function of the conclusion and 
the relation of the minor to the major term. 

“ § 53. The subonlination of a particular to a universal must, 
therefore, in eveiy syllogism, be understood wholly in general 
Here either a particular may be detennined through its superordi- 
nated universal, and such an inference from universal to particular 
we shall call a sylloyism in the first figure ; or there is a universal 
known through its subordinated particular, and this inference from 
the particular to the universal is called a syllogism in the second 
[third] figure. If, for example, the subordination is given me, — 
All gold is metal ; I can either transfer an attribute of metal, 
for instance fusibility, to the gold, or enounce an attribute of 
gold, ductility, for instance, of some metal In the first case, I 
draw a conclusion in the first figure, from the universal to the 
particular : — 

All inetat u fusible ; 

A II ynhl is metal ; 

A ll gold is fusible. 

“ In the other case, I conclude in the second [third] figure from 
the particular to the general : — 

All gold is ductile ; 

All gold is metal ; 

Some metal is ductile.” 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


335 


Then, after distribution of the Syllogism into Categorical, Hypo- 
thetical, and Divisive, (Disjunctive), he proceeds with the first 
class. 


XVIIL — Kiesewettee. 

Kiesewetter, Allgemeine Logik, 1801, 1824 I. TheiL 

“§ 228. — All pure Categorical Syllogisms, whose conclusion is an 
aflBrmative judgment, rest on the following principle : — What per- 
tains to the attribute of an object, pertains to the object itself. All 
syllogisms, whose conclusion is a negative judgment, are based upon 
the principle : — What is repugnant to the attributes of an object, 
is repugnant to the object itself Two principles which can be 
easily deduced, — the first from the principle of Identity, the second 
from the principle of Contradiction. 

" § 229. — If we take into consideration that the major proposi- 
tion of every categorical syllogism must be a universal rule, — from 
this there flow the following rules : — 

"1. Whatever is universally affirmed of a notion, that is also 
affirmed of everything contained under it. The Dictum de Omni. 

“ 2. What is universally denied of a notion is denied also of every- 
thing contained under it. The Dictum de Nullo. 

“ These rules are also thus expressed ; — 

“ What pertains to the genus or species, pertains also to whatever 
is contained under them. What is repugnant to the genus or 
species, is repugnant also to whatever is contained under them.” 

See also the Weitere Auseinandersetzung on the paragraphs. 

XIX. — Larroqde. 

Larroque, EUmens de Philosophie, Paris, 1830. Logique, 
Ch. i., p. 202. “ The attribute of an affirmative proposition is 
taken sometimes particularly, sometimes universally. It is taken 
particularly, when it has a greater extension than the subject ; uni- 
versally, when it has not a greater extension, which occurs in every 
proposition where the two terms are identical Tlie reason of this 
difference is palpable. If the attribute be a term more general 
than the subject, we affirm that the subject is a species or indivi- 
dual contained in the extension of the attribute : — Man is mortal ; 
Paul is learned : — that is, man is one, and not the only, species 


Digitized by Coogle 


33G 


APPENDIX. 


contained in the extension of the term mortal ; Paid is an indivi- 
dual, and not every individual, contained in the extension of the 
term learned. If, on the contrary, the attribute bo not mure 
general than the subject, the attribute is the same thing with the 
subject, and, consequently, we affirm that the subject is all that is 
contained in the extension of the attribute ; — A circle is a plane 
surface, which has all the points, in [a line called] its circumfer- 
ence, at an eipial distance from a point called its centre — that is, 
a circle is all or every plane surface, &c. 

" The attribute of a negative proposition is always taken univer- 
sally. When we deny an attribute of a subject, we deny of this 
subject everything that has the nature of that attribute, that is to 
say, all the species, as all the individuals, contained in its extension : 
The soul is not extended ; to wit the soul is not any of the species, 
not any of the individuals contained in the extension of the term 
extended." 

Ch ii., p. 230. “We have supposed, in the demonstration of 
these rules [the general rules of the Categorical Syllogism], that 
the attribute of an affirmative premise is always taken particularly. 
It would, therefore, seem that the calculations on which this demon- 
stration rests, are erroneous, whensoever the attribute is not a term 
more general than the subject, for we have seen that, in these cases, 
the attribute can be taken universally. But it is to be observed, that 
when the two terms of a proposition are identical, if the one or the 
other may be taken universally, they cannot both be so taken at 
once ; and that, if it be the attribute which is taken universally, it 
ought to be substituted for the subject, which then affords a parti- 
cular attribute. A triangle is a figure which has three sides and 
three angles. We cannot say, triangle is all figure, which, &c.; 
but we can say, A ll triangle is some figure, which, &c. ; or, A U figure 
which has three sides and three angles, is some triangle. Now, in 
adopting either of these last expressions of the proposition, the 
attribute is particular.” 

Ch. il, p. 231. “ We have seen that the Syllogism inferred finm 
its premises a proposition to be proved ; now this conclusion can- 
not be inferred from, unless it be contained in, the premises. From 
this incontestable observation, the author of the Port Koyal Logic 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


337 


has endeavoured to draw the following pretended rule, by aid of 
which we may detect the vice of any fallacious reasoning whatso- 
ever ; Thus, should one of the premises contain the conclusion, 
and the other show that it is so contained. A great many treatises 
on Logic call this the single rule of the moderns. This pompous 
denomination seems to point at some marvellous discovery, of 
which the ancients had no conception, — at some consummative 
result of the ctforts of the human intellect. It is true, indeed, that 
a syllogism is invalid, if the conclusion be not contained in the 
premises ; but a fine discovery forsooth ! Tins all the world 
already knew, — Aristotle among the rest ; but he justly noted that 
it is not always easy to see whether the conclusion be contained 
in the premises, and it is to lussurc ourselves of this that he laid 
down his rules. The pretended rule of the Port Royal is, therefore, 
not one at all ; it enounces only an observation, true but barren.” 

XX. — Gali.uppi. 

Qalluppi, Lezioni di Logica e di Metafisica. 1832. Lcz. 
xlvii., p. 353, ed. 1841. 

“ In a reasoning there must be an idea, common to the two pre- 
mises ; and a judgment which affirms the identity, either partial 
or perfect, of the other two ideas.” 

In the same Lecture, (p. 348), he .shows that he is ignorant of the 
law quoted from the Philosophia Lugdunensis, being by the 
authors of the L’Art de Penser. 

XXI. — Buffiee. 

Buffier, Premiire Logique, about 1725. The following is from 
the Recapitulation, § 109: — 

The Syllogism is defined, a tissue of three propositions so con- 
stituted, that if the two former be true, it is impossible but that 
the third should be true also. (§ 62.) 

The first Proposition is called the Major ; the second the 
Minor ; the third the Conclusion, which last is the essential end 
in view of the .syllogism. (§ 65.) 

Its art consists in causing a consciousness, that in the conclusion 
the idea of the subject comprises the idea of the predicate ; and 
this is done by means of a third idea, called the Middle Term, 
(because it is intermediate between the subject and predicate), in 

VOL. II. Y 


Digitized by Coogic 


3^8 


APPENDIX. 


such sort that it is comprised in the subject, and comprises the pre- 
dicate. (§ 67.) 

If the first thing comprise a second, in which a third is comprised, 
the first comprises the third. If a fluid comprise chocolate, in 
which cocoa is comprised, the fluid itself comprises cocoa. (§ 68.) 

To reach distant conclusions, there is required a plurality of 
syllogisms. (§ 71.) 

Our rule of itself suflBces for all syllogisms ; even for the nega- 
tive ; for every negative syllogism is equivalent to an affirmative. 

(§ 77.) 

Hypothetical syllogisms consist in the enouncement by the 
major premise, that a proposition is true, in case there be found a 
certain condition ; and the minor premise shows that this condition 
is actually found. (§ 79.) 

Disjunctive syllogisms, to admit of an easy verification, ought to 
be reduced to hypothetical.s. (§ 81.) 

Although the single rule, which is proposed for all syllogisms, be 
subject to certain changes of expression, it is nevertheless always 
the most easy ; in fact, all logical laws necessarily suppose this 
condition. (§ 87.) 

The employment of Grammar is essential for the practice of 
Logic. (§ 90.) 

By means of such practice, which enables us to estimate accu- 
rately the value of the terms in every proposition, we shall likewise 
obtain the rule for the discovery of all sophisms, which consist only 
of the mere equivocation of words, and of the ambiguity of propo- 
sitions. (§ 92 et seq.) 

XXII. — ViCTORIN. 

Victorin, Neue natiirlichere Darstellunqder Logik, \ieno&, I83.i. 

IL Simple Categorical Syllogisms. § Oi. The fundamental rule 
of all such syllogi.sms : — 

“ In what relation a concept stands to one of two reci- 
procally subordinate concepts, in the same relation does it 
stand to the other.” 

§ 91. First Figure ; fundamental rule : — “ As a notion deter- 
mines the higher notion, so d(jes it determine the lower of the 
same;’’ or, “ In what relation a notion stands to one notion, in 
the same relation it stands to the lower of the same.” 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


339 


§ 96. Second Figure ; fundamental rule : — “ Wli^n two notions 
are oppositely determined by a third notion, they are also them- 
selves opposed or, “ If two notions stand to a third in op- 
posed relations, they also themselves stand in a relation of 
opposition.” 

§ 98. Third Figure ; fundamental rule : — “ Asa notion deter- 
mines the one of tioo [to it] subordinate notions, so does it de- 
termine the other or, “ In what relation a notion stands to the 
one of tivo [<o ?'<] subordinate notions, in the same relation stands 
it also to the other.” 

§ 100. Fourth Figure ; fundamental rule: — “ As a notion is 
determined by the one of two subordinate notions, notions in 

the relation to each other of subordination], so does it determine 
the other ; ” or, “In what relation one of two subordinated notions, 
[jiotioMs reciprocally subordinate or superordinate], stands as to 
a third, in the same relation stands it also to the other.” 

(b) Fundamental Laws of Syllogism. — References. 

(See Galluppi, Lezioni di Logica e di Metafisica, Lez. xlvii., 
vol. i. p. 345 ct seq . ; Troxler, Logik, i. p. 33 ; Bolzano, IFtssens- 
chaflslehre, Logik, vol. ii. § 263, p. 643.) 

I. Logicians who confound the Nota notse and the Dictum de 
Omni, being ignorant of their several significances ; making them — 

a) Co-ordinate laws without distinction. 

Jager, Handb. d. Logik, § 68, (1839) ; Prochazka, Oesetzb., 
f d., Denken, § 217, (1842); Calker, Denklehre, § 143, (1822). 
Troxler, Logik, ii. p. 40. 

b) Derivative ; the Dictum de Omni, to wit, from the Nota 
not;e. This supreme or categorical. 

Wenzel, Elem. Philos. Log., §§ 253, 256. Canonik, § 64. 
Kant, Die falsche Spitzf, § 3. Logik, § 63. Krug, Logik, § 70. 
Bachmann, Logik, § 123. Jakob, § 262, 4th ed. 1800 ; 1st 
ed. 1788. 

II. Logicians who enounce the law of Identity, (Proportion,) in 
the same third, by the mathematical expression Equality. 

Rcimarus, Vernunfdehre, § 176. Mayer, Vernunftschlusse, 
i. p. 290. Arriaga, In. Sum., D. IIL § 3, p. 23. 

III. Logicians who make the Dictum de Omni the fundamental 
rule of syllogisms in general. 


Digitized by Google 


3i0 


APPENDIX. 


Aristot., An. Prior., L. i. c. ], § 4. "Wolf, Phil. Rat., § 353. 
Sclieibler, Op. P. iv. De Syll. c. ii. § 12. Jac. Thomasius, Erot. 
Log., c. 395. Buttner, Cursus Philos., Log., § 146. Conimbri- 
ceuses, In Arist. Dial, An. Prior., L. L c. 2, p. 204. 

rV. Logicians who confound or make co-ordinate the law of 
Proportion or Analogy, and the Dictum de Omni. 

Wyttcnbach, Priec. Philos. lyog., P. iii. c. 6, § 4. Wliately, Ixigic, 
Intr., ch. II. p. iii., § 2. Leechman, Logic, P. III. ch. 2. Kecker- 
mann, Systema Logicoe Minus, L. iii. a 2. Syst. Log. Majus., 
L. iii. c. 5. 

V. Logicians who make the Law of Identity the one suprema 

Suter, Logica, § 61, calls tliis the principle of Identity and Con- 
tradiction. Aldrich, Comp. L. i. c. 3, § 2, p. 2. Hutcheson, Log. 
Comp., P. iii. c. 2. Arriaga, Cur. Phil, In. Sum., D. iii. §§ 16-22, 
pp. 23, 24. Larroquc, p. 224. Mayer, Vernun/tscklusse, i. 

p. 293. Troxler, Zo^iX-, ii. pp. 33, 40. Heimarus, Veniunftlehre, 
§ 176. Mendoza, Disp. Log. et Met, I. p. 470. Derodon, Log. 
Iiest,De Log. pp. 639, 644. Darje.s, Via., &c., § 271, p. 97. Smigle- 
cius, Logica, D. xiii. p. 517. qu, &c. Fran. Bona; Spei, Com. 
Prim, in Log. Arist, D. vii. d. 2, p. 25. Cursus Complut, De 
Arg., L. iiL c. 4, p. 57. Alstediu.s, Enc., Logica, § ii. c. 10, p. 435. 
Havichorst, Inst. Log., § 323. Poncius, Cursus Philos. In An. 
Prior., D. xx. qu. 5, p. 282. 

VI. Logicians who restrict the Dictum de Omni to the first 
Figure (immediately). 

Aldrich, Comp. L 1, c. 3, § 7. Noldins, Log. Rec-, c. xii. p. 
290. Orosser, Pharus Intellectus, § iii. p. 1, memb. iii. p. 137. 

VII. Logicians who make the Dicta de Omni et NuUo the 
supreme canons for Universal Syllogisms; the law of Proportion for 
Singular Syllogisms. 

Burgersdicius, Inst. Log., L ii. c. 8, p. 171. Melancthon, 
Erot. Dial, De Syll. Erpos., L. iii. p. 172, ed. 1586. Fonseca, 
Instil Dial., L vi. cc. 21, 2t, pp. 3G3, 373. 

VIII. What name given by what logicians to the Law of Pro- 
portion, &c. 

IjOW of PropoHion, or of Analogy, Keckermann, Syst. Log., 
L. iii. c. 5, Op., p. 746. Alstedius, Encyd.,^. 435, to avaXoyias. 
Dictum de Omni et Kullo Majus, Noldius, Log., p. 288. Of 
Identity, Zedler’s Lex. Pr. convenientiw, Daijes, Via ad Verit, § 
270, p. 96. Law of proportional Identity and Non-Identity, Self. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


34t 


IX. Logicians crroneon.sly suppo.sing Aristotle to employ, besiilcs 
the Dictum de Omni, the rule of Proportion as a fundamental law 
of syllogism. 

Rapin, Reflexions sur la I^gique, § 4. 

X. Terms under which the law of Proportion has been enounced. 

Agree with. Coincide with. The same with. Cohere, (Syrbin.s). 

Co-e.vist (bad). Co-identical with. Equal to, (No. ii.) In com- 
bination with, Darjcs, Via ad Ver. p. 97, (includes negative.) 
Convertible. 

(c) Enunciations of the Higher Laws of Syllogis.«. 

Law of Proportion. 

Aristotle, Elench, c. vi. § 8. ' “ Things the same with one and 
the same, are the same with one another.” Compare Topica, L. vii., 
c. 1, § 6. Thus Scotus, In An. Prior., L. i qu. 9, f. 248. 

Some say, “Uni tertio indivisibili” — some others, “Uni tertio 
indivisibili, indivisibiliter .sumiito." Others, in fine, say, “ Uni 
tertio, adequate sumpto.” See Irenasus, Integ. Philos. Log., §§ 3, 
5. Some express it, “ Things that arc equal to the same third are 
equal to each other.” See Irenaius, ib. So Heimarus, Mayer. 

Some expres.s it, “ Quiecuuque com eniuut, (vel dis.sentiunt), in 
uno tertio, eadcm conveniunt, (vel dissentiunt), inter se.” 

“ Qucc duo conveniunt cum uno quodam tertio, eatenus conveni- 
unt inter se ; quando autem duonim ununi convenit cum tertio, 
et alterum huic repugnat, repugnant quoque eatenus sibi inviccin,” 
Wynpei-ssc, Inst. Logicw, 272, Lug. liat. 3d ed. 1806. 

Noldius, {Logica, p. 288), calls these the Dicta de Omni et de 
Nullo. The former is, “ ()mecunque afflrmantur in aliquo tertio, 
(singulari identice, universali et identice et complete distributive), 
affirmantur inter se.” The latter, “ Quorum unum [totaliter] adir- 
matur in aliquo tertio, alterum negatur, ca inter se negautur.” 

Noldius. — “Whatever is affirmed essentially of a subject, is 
affirmed of all that is inferior or reciprocal to that subject. What- 
ever is denied of a subject, is denied of all inferior or reciprocal." 
(See Noldius agauist the universal application of these Dicta, Log. 
Rec. p. 290). 

Reu.sch, {Sgst. Logicum, etl. i. 1734, § .503) makes the Dicta 
de Omni et NuUo the rule of ordinary syllogisms, and thus enunci- 
ates them, “Si quid pnedicatur de omni, illud ctiam pnedicatur de 
aliquo ; et. Si quid prcdicatur de nullo, illud etiam non prmdicatur 


Digitized by Coogle 


312 


APPEXDIX. 


de aliquo. Sensus prions est, Quidquid de genere, vel specie 
Omni pra;dicari potest, illud etiam prajdicatur de quovis sub illo 
genere, vel sub ilia specie, contento ; Item, — Cuicunque coin- 
petit definitio, illi quoque competit dcfinitum : ” (and so vice versd 
of the other). 

Syrbius gives these two rules : — 

1) "If certain ideas cohere with a ouc-third, they also cohere in 
the same manner with each other ; ” 

2) ‘‘ Ideas which do not cohere with the same one-third, these do 
not cohere with each other.” (Given in the original by Waldin, 
Systeina, p. 162. See al,so Acta Eriiditorum, 1718, p. 333.) 
Syrbius things that the law of Proportion, unless limited, is false. 

Darjes, Via ad Veritatem, (175.5), § 270, p. 96, 2d ed. 1764', 
“ Two [things or notions] in combination with the same third, 
may be combined together in the same respect, (ca ratione), where- 
in they stood in combination with that third.” (See further; shows 
that other rules are derived from this.) 

Dictum de Omni, &c. 

Aristotle, Anal. Pr., L. i,, c. i., § 11. 

" To be predicated, de Omni, universally is, when we can find 
nothing under the subject of which the other [that i.s, the predicate] 
may not be said ; and to be predicated de Nullo, in like manner.” 

Jac. Thomasius, Erotemata Logica, 1670. 

“ 40. What do you call the foundation of syllogism ? — The Dic- 
tum de Omni et Nullo. 

“41. What is the Dictum dc Omni ? — When nothing can be sub- 
sumed under the subject of the major proposition of which its pre- 
dicate may not be affirmed. 

“ 42. What is the Dictum de Nullo? — MTien nothing can be sub- 
sumed under the subjectof the major proposition of which its predi- 
cate is not denied.” 

Thomasius notices that the first rule applies only to the affirma- 
tive moods of the first figure, Barbara and Darii ; the second only 
to the negative moods of the same figure, Celarent and Ferio. 

(d) Objection's to the Dictitm de Omni et Nullo. 

I. As a principle of .syllogism in general. 

II. As a principle of the First Figure, as enounced by Aristotle. 

1°, Only ai>plies to syllogisms in extension. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


343 


2°, Does not apply to individual syllogisms ; as, Peter is run- 
ning; but some nuin is Peter ; therefore, some man is running. 

(Arriaga, In. Summ., p. 24.) 

3°, Does not apply in co-extensive reasonings ; as, All trilateral 
is (all) triangular ; but aU tnangular has three angles equal to 
two right angles; ergo, &c. Arriaga, ib. 


Dictum de Omni et Nullo does not apply, 

1°, To the other Figures than the First 

2°, Not to all the moods of First Figure, for in many of these the 
higher class is subjected to the lower. 

3°, The form of the First Figure does not depend upon the 
principle of the Dictum de Omni et Nullo. This imperfect ; not upon 
the thoroughgoing principle, that in this figure one notion is com- 
pared to a second, and this second with a third. 


(e) General Laws of Syllogism in verse. 

(1) Partibus ex puris sequitur nil (2) sive negatis. 

i (3) Si qua praeit partis, sequitur conclusio partis. 

(4) Si qua negata prmit, conclusio sitque negata. 

(5) Lex generalis erit, medium concludere nescit.® 

(6) Univocusque ; (7) triplex ; (8) ac idem terminus esto.fl 

1 (1) Distribuas medium ; (2) nec quartus terminus adsit 
(3) Utraque nec prajmissa negans ; (4) nec particularis. 

(5) Sectetur partem conclusio deteriorem ; 

(6) Et non distribuat nisi cum prsemissa, (7) negetve.i' 

(1) Terminus esto triplex : medius, majorque, minorque: 

(2) Latius hunc quam prasmissae, conclusio non vult, 

(3) Nequaquam medium capiat conclusio oportet 

(4) Aut semel aut iterum medium generaliter esto. 

(5) Nil sequitur geminis ex particularibus unquam. 

(6) Utraque si pnomissa neget, nihil inde sequetur. 

(7) Ambae afl&miantes nequeunt generare negantem. 

^ (8) Est parti similis conclusio deteriori. 

Pejorem sequitur semper conclusio partem. J ® 


a> Petrus Hispanus, Summuke. [Tr. 
iT. c. 3, f. 45 b. — E d.] 

& CampanelU, DiaUct., p. 384. 
y Hutcbeaon, Log. Comp. [P. ill c. 
3, p. 53 .— Ed.] 


i Purchot, with Tariatioos of Scgny, 
Ph. Lugd.f Qalluppi. [Purchot, Jntf. 
Phif.f voL i., Logica^ P. iiL c. 3, p. 171. 
—Ed.] 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


SU 

(1) Terminus est geminus, mediumque accedit utrique. 

(2) Prmmissis dicat iie finis plura, caveto. 

(3) Aut scmel, ant iterum medium genus omne capessat ; 

^ (-t) OfticLique tenax rationem claudere nolit. 

(1) Terminus est triplex. (2) Medium conclusio vitet. 

(3) Hoc ex pm‘tnis.sis altera dlstribuat. 

(4) Si pricmis.sa simul fuit utraquc particularis, 

(.5) Aut utrinque negans, nulla sequela vcnit. 

(6) Particulare prmit ? sequitur conclusio partia 

(7) Ponitur ante negans ? Clausula talis erit. 

. (8) Quod non prsece.ssit, conclusio nulla requirit.“ 

Turn re, turn .sensu, triplex modo terminus esto. 

{ Argumentori non est ex j)articulari. 

Neque negativis rocte coneludere si via 

{ Nunquam complecti medium conclusio debet. 

Quantum praemiss®, refcrat conclusio soliun. 

( Ex falsis falsum verumque aliquando sequctur ; 

\ Ex vcris possunt nil nisi vera sequL^ 

(/) Special Laws of Syllogism in veese. 

1. Fig. Sit minor affirmans, nec major jiarticularia 

2. Fig. Una negans e.sto, major vero generalis. 

3. Fig. Sit minor affirmans, conclu.sio particulari.s. 

4- Fig. a) Jlajor ubi affirmat, generalem sume minorcm. 
b) Si minor affirmat, conclusio sit .specialis. 
c) Quando negans modus est, major generalis hab- 
etur.T' 


B. Ckiticism. 

(a) Criticism of the Special Laws of Syllogism. 

The Special Laws of Syllogism, that is, the nilcs which govern 
the several Figures of Categorical Reasonings, all emerge on the 
suspension of the logical postulate, — To be able to state in language 
what is operative in thought. They all emerge on the refusal or 

a Iw'iidoorn, Loffim, L. iii. c. 8, p. 427, p. 210. 

(1652). ClmuTin and Walch, r. y Uboghs, fA'tgicdE Elementa^ § 225, 
Ei/Uofj. SancniciiiM, t>iaUctica ad MenUm Doct- 

ft Cmkantliorpo, hofjica^ L. ilL c. 15, isubtUU, L. i. c* 3, p. 103. Lond. 1G73. 


Digitized by Goog[e 



APPENDIX. 


345 


neglect to give to the predicate that quantity in overt expression, 
which it possesses in the intenial opt-rations of mind. The logi- 
cians assert, 1“ That in affirmative propositions the predicate 
must be always presumed particular or indc&nitc, though in this 
or that proposition it be known and thought as universal or defi- 
nite ; and, 2°, That in negative propositions this same predicate 
must be always presumed absolutely, (t. e. universally or definitely), 
excluded from the sphere of the subject, even though in this or that 
proposition it be known and thought as partially, (t. e. particularly 
or indefinitely), included therein. The moment, however, that the 
said postulate of Logic is obeyetl, and we are allowed to quan- 
tify the predicate in language, as the predicate is quantified in 
thought, the special rules of syllogism di.sappear, the figures are 
all equalised and reduced to unessential modifications ; and while 
their moods are multiplied, the doctrine of syllogism itself is 
carried up to the simplicity of one short canon. Having already 
shown that the general laws of syllogism are all comprised and 
expressed in this single canon,* it now only remains to point 
out how, on the exclusive doctrine of the logicians, the special 
rules became necessary, and how, on the unexclusive doctrine 
which is now propounded, they become at once superfluous and 
even erroneous. It is perhaps needle.ss to observe, that the follow- 
ing rules have reference only to the whole of Extension. 

The double rule of the First Figure, that is, the figure in which 
the middle term is subject m the sumption, and predicate in the 
subsumption, is , — Sit minor ajjirmans ; nec major particularis. 
Here, in the first place, it is prescribed that the minor premise 
must be affirmative. The reason is manifest. Because if the minor 
premise were negative, the major premise behoved to be affirma- 
tive. But in this figure, the predicate of the conclusion is the 
predicate of the major premise; but, if affirmative, the predicate of 
that premise, on the doctrine of the logicians, is presumed par- 
ticular, and as the concln.sion following the minor premise is 
necessarily negative, a negative proposition thus, contrary to logi- 
cal law, has a particular predicate. But if we allow a negative 
proposition to have in language, as it may have in thought, a 
particular or indefinite predicate, the rule is superseded. 


a See above, p. 28S, and below, p. 3S0.— Eo. 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


.3 to 


The second rule, or second part of the rule, of this First Figure, 
is, that the major premise should be universal. The reason of 
this is equally apparent. For we have seen, that, by the previous 
rule, the minor premise eould not be negative, in which case 
certainly, had it been allowable, the middle term would, as predi- 
cate, have been distributed. But whilst it behoved that the middle 
term should be once at least distributed, (or taken universally), 
and, as being the subject of the major premise, it could only be 
distributed in a universal proposition, the rule, on the hypothesis 
of the logicians, was compulsory. But as we have seen that the 
former rule is, on our broader ground, inept, and that the middle 
term may be universally quantified, as the predicate either of an 
affirmative or negative subsumption, it is equally manifest that tliis 
rule is, in like manner, redundant, and even false. 

In the Second Figure, that is, the figure in which the middle 
term is predicate both in sumption and subsumption, the special 
rule is , — Una negans esto; major vero generalis. 

In regard to the first rule, or first half of the rule, — That one 
or other of the premises should be negative, — the reason is mani- 
fest. For, on the doctrine of the logicians, the predicate of an 
affirmative proposition is always presumed to be particular ; con- 
sequently, in this figure the middle term can, on their doctrine, 
only be distributed, (as distributed at least once it must be), in a 
negative judgment. But, on our doctrine, on which the predicate 
is quantified in language as in thought, this rule is abolished.* 

The second rule, or second moiety of the rule, — That the sump- 
tion should be always universal, — the reason of this is equally 
clear. For the logicians, not considering that both extremes were 
in equilibrio in the same whole of extension, and, consequently, 
that neither could claim [in either quantity] the place of major or 
minor term, and thereby constitute a true major or a true minor 


a [For exanipK's from Ari.stotle of affirm- 
ative concluai<»n« in the Second Figure, 
nee /><¦ Cafo, L, ii., c. 4, § 4, text *23, ibi 
Averroes. Phy$. L. ii., c. 2, § 12, text 
23, tbi AverrocB ; c. 4, § 8, text 33, ibi 
Averroes. Ib. c. 7, § 1, text 42, ibi Aver- 
rtWM. A n./W, L. i. c. 12, § 12, text 92, 
ibi Avcrri>eM et Paciuti. Ai^es himHclf, 
like Ca:oeu8, fn*m two affirmative pro- 


positions in Second Figure, and does 
not give the reason why the inference is 
good or bad in such syllogism. Cf. Am- 
moniua and Philoponus ad. loc. A n. 
Prior, L. ii., c. 22. 7, 8. An. Poit., 

L. L, c. 6, § 1, ibi, Themistius, Pa- 
ciuB, Zabarella. Cf. abo Zabarella, De 
Qaarta Fig. Sgll., c. x.] 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


3+7 


premise ; — the logicians, I say, arbitrarily drew one instead of 
two direct conclusions, and gave the name of major term to that 
extreme which formed the predicate in that one conclusion, and 
the name of major premise to that antecedent proposition which 
they chose to enounce first. On their doctrine, therefore, the 
conclusion and one of the premises being always negative, it 
behoved the sumption to be always general, otherwise, contrary to 
their doctrine, a negative proposition might have a particular pre- 
dicate. On our doctrine, however, this difficulty docs not exist, 
and the nile is, consequently, superseded. 

In the Third Figure, that is, the figure in which the middle 
term is subject of both the extremes, the special rule is , — Sit 
minor ufirmnns; conclnsio paHicularis. 

Here the first half of the rule, — That the minor must not be 
negative, — is manifestly determined by the common doctrine. 
For, (major and minor terms, major and minor propositions, being 
in this figure equally arbitrary as in the second), here the sumption 
behoving to be affirmative, its predicate, constituting the major 
term or predicate of the conclusion, behoved to be particular also. 
But the conclusion following the minor premise would nece.s.sarily 
be negative ; and it would have, — what a negative proposition is not 
allowed on the common doctrine, — an undistributed predicate. 

The second half of the rule, — That the conclusion must be 
particular, — is determined by the doctrine of the logicians, that 
the particular antecedent, which they choose to call the minor 
term, should be affirmative. For, in this case, the middle term 
being the subject of both premises, the predicate of the subsump- 
tion is the minor extreme ; and that, on their doctrine, not being 
distributed in an affirmative proposition, it, con.sequently, forms 
the undistributed subject of the conclusion. The conclusion, 
therefore, having a particular subject, is, on the common doctrine, 
a particular proposition. But as, on our doctrine, the predicate 
of an affirmative proposition may have an universal quantification, 
the reason fails. 

(ii) Laws op Second Fiodrf. — Additional.® 

By designating the quantity of the predicate, we can have the 

a What follows to page 349 was an in Lfctures (vol. i. p. 408), being an ap> 
early written interpolation by the author plication of the principle of a quantified 


Digitized by Google 



348 


APPENDIX. 


middle term, (which in this figure is always a predicate), distributed 
in an afifirmative proposition. Thus : — 

AH P i» all M ; 

All S is some M ; 

Therefore, all S is some. P. 

All the things that are organised are all the things that are endowed 
vnth life; 

But all plants are some things endoxoed with life; 

Therefore, all jdanls are some things organised. 

This first rule (see above, Vol. I. p. 408) must, therefore, be thus 
amplified : — The middle term must be of definite quantity, in 
one premise at least, that is, it must either, 1“, Be a singular, — 
individual, — concept, and, therefore, identical in both premises ; or, 
2°, A universal notion presumptively distributed by negation in 
a single premise ; or, 3°, A universal notion expressly distributetl 
by designation in one or both premises. 

But the second rule, which has come down from Aristotle, anel 
is adopted into every system of Logic, with only one exception, an 
ancient scholiast, is altogether erroneoua For, 1°, There is pro- 
perly no sumption and subsumption in this figure ; for the 
premises cont;dn quantities which do not stand to each other in 
any reciprocal relation of greater or less. Each premise may, 
therefore, stand first. The rule ought to be, “ One premise must be 
definite;” but such a rule would be idle ; for what is here given 
as a special canon of this figure, was alreiuly given as one of the 
laws of syllogism in general 2", The error, in the principle is 
supported by an error in the illustration. In both the syllogisms 
given,® the conclusion drawn is not that which the pi-emises war- 
rant. Take the first or affirmative e.xample. The conclusion here 
ought to have been. No S is some P, or Some P is no S ; for 
there arc always two equivalent conclusions in this figure. In 
the concrete example, the legitimate conclusions, as necessitated 
by the premises, are, — No horse is some animal, and. Some 
animal is no horse. This is shown by my mo<le of explicating 

preilicaU* to sylhtgism. The interpola* probably given still earlier. — E d. 
tion a])|)Cars in siudentH* notes of the a See above, vol. i. p, 409 , — Ed. 
Lectures of session 1841.42 ; and was 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


349 


the quantity of the predicate, — combined with iny symbolical 
notiition. In like manner, in the second or negative syllogism, the 
conclusion ought to have been either of the two following : In the 
abstract formula, — All S are not some P ; or, Some P are not all 
S; — in the concrete example. All topazes are not some minerals, 
i. e.. No topazes are some minerals; or. Some minerals are not 
all topazes, L e.. Some minerals are no topazes. 

The moods Cesare and Camestres may be viewed as really one, 
for they are only the same syllogism, with premises placed first or 
second, as is always allowable in this [Figure], and one of the two 
conclusions, which are always legitimately consequential, assigned 
to each. 

A syllogism in the mood Festino, admits of either premise being 
placed first ; it ought, therefore, to have had another mood for its 
pendant, with the affirmative premise first, the negative premise 
second, if we are to distinguish moods in this figure by the acci- 
dental arrangement of the premises. But this was prohibited by 
the second Law of this Figure, — that the Sumption must always 
be universal. Let us try this rule in the formula of Festino now 
stated, reversing the premises. 

Some S are M ; (L o., tome M.) 

JV’o P M M ; 

( No P is some S. ) 

( Some S ari” no P. J 

Some actions are praiseworthy ; 

No lice is jtraiseworthy ; 

{No vice is some action, ) 

Some action is no vice. ) 

From what I have now said, it will be seen that the Dictum de 
Omni et de Nullo cannot afford the principle of the Second Figure. 

The same errors of the logicians, on which I have already com- 
mented, in supposing that the sumption or major [)remise in this 
figure must always be universal, — an error founded on another 
error, that there is, (properly speaking), either sumption or sub- 
sumption in this figure at all, — this error, I say, has prevented them 
recognising a mood corresponding to Baroco, the first premise 
being a particular negative, the second a universal affirmative, i. e., 
Baroco with its premises reversed. That this is competent is 


Digitized b^Google 


350 


APPENDIX. 


seen from the example of Baroco now given. Reversing it we 
have : 


[Some A are not B ; 
All it are B. 

No a i» some d; 
Some d are no a.] 


Some animals are not (an;/) orijiarous; 
All birds are (some) ovijiaroas. 

No bird is some animal; 

Some animal is no bird. 


(c) Authoe’s Supbe-me Canons of Catecorical Syllogisms. 

[The supreme Canon or Canons of the Categorical Syllogism, 
finally adopted by Sir \V. Hamilton, are as follow : — ] 

I. “ For the Unfigured Syllogism, or that m which the terms 
compared do not stand to each other in the reciprocal relation of 
subject and predicate, being, in the same proposition, either both 
subjects or (pos.sibly) both predicates, — the canon is : — In so far 
as two ywtions, (notions proper, or individuals), either both cujree, or 
one agreeing, the utlur does not, with a common third notion ; in 
so far, these notions do or do not agree with each other." 

II. “ For the Figured Syllogism, in which the terms compared 
are severally subject and predicate, con.sequently, in reference to 
each other, containing and contained in the counter wholes of In- 
tension and Extension ; — the canon is : — What worse relation of 
subject and predicate subsists between either of two terms and a 
common third term, with which one, at least, is positirely re- 
lated; that relation subsists between the two terms themselves. 

“ Each Figure has its own Canon. 

“First Figure ; — What worse relation of determining, (jwedi- 
cate), and of determined, (subject), is held by either of two 
notions to a third, with which one at least is positively related ; 
that relation do they immediately, (directly), hold to each other, 
and indirectly, (mediately), its converse 

“Second Figure ; — What worse relation of determined, (sub- 
ject), is held by either of tiuo notions to a third, with which one 
at least is positively related; that relation do they hold indif- 
ferently to each other 

“ Third Figure; — What worse relation of determining (predi- 
cate), is held by either of two notions to a third, with which one 
at least is positively related; tluit 7-elation do they hold indiffer- 
ently to each other." • 

« pp. C54, 655.“ Ei>. 


Digitized by Google 


APPEXDIX. 


351 


{(1) Ultra-total Quantification of Middle Teem. 

(1.) Lambert’s Doctrine. 

Lambert, Keites Organon. 

Dianoiologie, § 193. “If it be indctennined how far A does, 
or does not, coincide with B, but on the other hand we know that 
A and B, severally, make up more than half, “ the individuals 
under C, in that case it is manifest, that a [linear] notation is 
possible, and that of the two following kinds : — 

C c, 

B b, 

A 

" For since B and A are each greater than the half of C, A is 
con.sequently greater than C less by B ; and in this case, it is of 
necessity that some A are B, and some B are A.^ We may 
accordingly so delineate : — 

C c, 

A a, 

B b, 

.seeing that it is indifferent, whether we commence with A or with 
B. I may add, that the case which we have here considered docs 
not frequently occur, inasmuch as the comparative extension of 
our several notions is a relation which remains wholly unknown.y 
I, consequently, adduce this only as an example, that a legitimate 
employment may certainly be made of these relations.” 


« It is enough if either A or B ex- 
ceed the half ; the other need be only 
hall This, which Lambert here and 
hereafter overlooks, I have elsewhere 
had occasion to show. See below, p. 356. 

3 In the original for A there is, by a 
typographical erratum, C. Sec PA. §208. 

7 In reference Ui this statement, see 
above, Dian. § 179, and below, PK. § 167, 
where it is repeated and confirmed. Lam- 
bert might have added, that, as we rarely 
can employ tills relation of the compara- 
tive extension of our notions, it is still 
more rarely of any import that we should. 
For in the two abstract, or notional, 
wholes, — the two wholes correlative and 


counter to each other, with which Logic 
is always conversant, (the Universal and 
Formal), — if the extension be not com- 
plete, it is of no consequence to note its 
comjmrativo amount. For Logic and 
Philosophy tend always to an unexclu- 
sive generality ; and a general conclu- 
sion is invalidated equally by a single 
adverse instance as by a thousand. It 
is only in the concrete or real whole, — 
the whole quantitative or integrate, and, 
whether continuous or discrete, the 
whole in which mathematics are exclu- 
sively conversant, but Logic and Philo- 
sophy little interested, — that this rela- 
tion is of any avail or significance. 


Digitized by Coogle 



352 


APPENDIX. 


Phdmmenologie, § v. Of the Probable — 

“§ 188. In .so far as such propositions are particular, they may, 
like all other particular propositions, be syllogistically employed ; 
but no farther, unles.s we look to their degree of particularity, or 
other proximate determination, some examples of which we have 
ailduced in the Dianoioloyie, ({} 235 et seq.) Thus the degree of 
particularity may render a syllogism valid, which, without this, 
would be incomiKJtent. For example — 

Thrcr-fuurtlu of A arr B j 

Tivo-thinls of \ are C ; 

Therefore, suvie C are B. 

The inference here follows, because three-fourths added to two- 
thirds are greater than unity ; and, consequently, there must bo, 
at least, five-twelfths of A, which are at once B and C. 

“ § 204. In the Third Figure we have the middle term, subject 
in both preini.ses. and the conclusion, particular. If now, the 
subjects of the two premises be furnished with fractions [i.e. the 
middle tenn on both sides], both premises remain, indeed, parti- 
cidar, and the conclusion, consequently, indetemiined But, inas- 
much as, in l)Oth premises, the degi'ee of particularity is determined, 
there are cases where the conclusion may be drawn not only with 
probability, but with certainty. Such a case we have already 
adduced, (§ 188). For, if both premises be affirmative, and the 
sum of the fractions with which their subjects are furnished greater 
than unity, in that case a conclusion may be drawn. In this sort 
we infer with certainty : — 

Three-fourths of A are B ; 

Two-thirds of A are C ; 

Therefore, some C are B. 

“ 20.1 If, however, the sum of the two fractions be less than 

unity, as — 

One-fourth of A are B ; 

One-third of A are C, 

in that case there is no certainty in any affirmative conclusion, 
[indeed in any conclusion at all]. But if we state the premises 
thus dctenninatcly, — 


Digitized by Google 



API'ENDIX. 


333 


Thrte-fouriht of A are not B ; 

Two-ihird» of A are not 0 ; 

in that case, a negative conclusion may be drawn. For, from the 
propositions, — 

Three-fourths of A are not B; 

One-third of A are C ; 


there follows — Some C are not B. And this, again, because the 
sum of the two fractions, (three-fourths added to one-third), is 
greater than unity.” And so on ; see the remainder of this .section 
and those following, till § 211. 


(2). Authoe’8 Doctrine. 

Aristotle, followed by the logicians, did not introduce into his 
doctrine of syllogism any quantification between the absolutely 
universal and the merely particular predesignations, for valid rea- 
sons. — 1°, Such quantifications were of no value or application in' 
the one whole, (the universal, potential, logical), or, as I would 
amplify it, in the two correlative and counter wholes, (the logical, 
and the formal, actual, metaphysical), with which Logic is con- 
versant. For all that is out of classification, — all that has no refer- 
ence to genus and species, is out of Logic, indeed out of Philosophy ; 
for Philosophy tends always to the universal and necessary. Thus 
the highest canons of deductive reasoning, the Dicta de Omni et 
de Nullo, were founded on, and for, the procedure from the uni- 
versal whole to the subject parts ; whilst, conversely, the principle 
of inductive reasoning was established on, and for, the (real or pre- 
sumed) collection of all the subject parts as constituting the uni- 
versal whole. — 2°, The integrate or mathematical whole, on the 
contraiy, (whether continuous or discrete), the philosophers con- 
temned. For whilst, as Aristotle observes, in mathematics genus 
and species are of no account, it is, almost exclusively, in the 
mathematical whole, that quantities are compared together, through 
a middle term, in neither premise, equal to the whole. But this 
reasoning, in which the middle term is never universal, and the 

VOL. II. Z 


¦ Digitized by Google 


354 . 


AI’PENDIX. 


conclusion always particular, is, — as vagne, partial, and contingent, 
— of little or no value in philosophy. It was accordingly ignored 
in Logic ; and the predesignations more, most, &c., as I have said, 
referred to universal, or (as was most common) to particular, or to 
neither, quantity.® This discrepancy among logicians long ago 
attracted my attention ; and I saw, at once, that the possibility of 
inference, considered absolutely, depended, exclusively on the quan- 
tifications of the middle term, in both premise.s, being, together, 
more than its possible totality — its distribution, in any one. At 
the same time I was impressed — 1°, With the almost utter inutility 
of such reasoning, in a phUosophical relation ; and, 2°, Alarmed with 
the load of valid moods which its recognition in Logic would in- 
troduce. The mere quantification of the predicate, under the two 
pure quantities of definite and indefinite, and the two qualities of 
affirmative and negative, gives (abstractly) in each figure, thirty- 
six valid moods ; which, (if my present ealculation be correct), 
would be multiplied, by the introduction of the two hybrid or am- 
biguous quantifications of a majority and a half, to the fearful 
amount of four hundred and eighty valid moods for each figure. 
Though not, at the time, fully aware of the strength of these ob- 
jections, they however prevented me from breaking down the old 
limitation ; but as my supreme canon of Syllogism proceeds on the 
mere formal possibility of reasoning, it of course comprehends all 
the legitimate forms of quantification. It is ; — What worst 
relation of subject and predicate, subsists between either of two 
terms and a common third term, with which one, at least, is 
positively related ; — that relation subsists between the two terms 
themselves: in other words ; — /n as far as two notions both agree, 
or, one agreeing, the other disagrees, with a common third notion; 
— in so far, those notions agree or disagree with each other. This 
canon applies, and proximately, to all categorical syllogisms, — in 
extension and comprehension, — affirmative and negative, — and of 
any figure. It determines all the varieties of such syllogisms : is 
developed into all their general, and supersedes all their special, 
laws. In short, without violating this canon, no categorical rea- 
soning can, formally, be wrong. Now this canon supposes, that 

a [Cf. Corvinus, Inatit. Phil. c. v. § Wallis, Inaiit. Log. L. U. c. 4, p. 100. 
376, p. 123. Iena>, 1742. Reusch, 5th ed. — En.] 

Wallif*.] [Keuscbf Log. § 860. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


3.').') 


the two extremes are compared together through the same com- 
mon middle ; and this cannot but be, if the middle, whether, sub- 
ject or predicate, in both its quantifications together, exceed its 
totality, though not taken in that totality in either premise. 

But, as 1 have stated, I was moved to the reconsideration of this 
whole matter ; and it may have been Mr De Morgan’s syllogism 
in our correspondence, (p. 19), which gave the suggestion. The 
result was the opinion, that these two quantifications should be 
taken into account by Logic, as authentic forms, but then relegated, 
as of little u.se in practice, and cumbering the science with a super- 
fluous mass of moods.” 


Author’s Docteinb — continued. 

No syllogism can be formally wrong in which, (1°), Both pre- 
mises are not negative ; and, (2°), The quantifications of the middle 
term, whether as subject or predicate, taken together, exceed the 
quantity of that term taken in its whole extent. In the former 
case, the extremes are not compared together ; in the latter, they 
are not necessarily compared through the same third. These two 
simple rules, (and they both flow from the one supreme law), being 
obeyed, no syllogism can be bad ; let its extremes stand in any 
relation to each other as major and minor, or in any relation to 
the middle term. In other words, its premises may hold any 
mutual subordination, and may be of any Figure. 

On my doctrine, Figure being only an unessential circumstance, 
and every proposition being only an equation of its terms, we 
may discount Figure, &c., altogether; and instead of the symbol 
(i ) marking subject and predicate, we might use the alge- 
braical sign of equality (=). 

The rule of the logicians, that the middle term should be once at 
least distributed, [or indistributable], {i. e., taken universally or sin- 
gularly = definitely), is untrue. For it is suificient if, in both the 
premises together, its quantification be more than its quantity as a 
whole, (Ultratotal). Therefore, a major part, (a more or most), in 
one premi.se, and a half in the other, are sufficient to make it effec- 
tive. It is enough for a valid syllogism, that the two extreme notions 

« Extract from A Letter to A. de p. 41. — Eu. 

Mortjany Enq., from Sir W. /familtou^ 


Digitized by Google 



35C 


APPENDIX. 


should, (or should not), of necessity, partially coincide in the third 
or middle notion ; and this is necessarily shown to be the case, if 
the one extreme coincide with the middle, to the extent of a half, 
(Dimidiate Quantification) ; and the other, to the extent of aught 
more than a half, (Ultradimidiate Quantification). The first 
and highest quantification of the middle term ( : ) is suflScient, 
not only in combination with itself, but with any of all the three 
inferior. The second ( . , ) suffices in combination with the high- 
est, with itself, and with the third, but not with the lowest. The 
third ( . ) suffices in combination with either of the higher, but not 
with itself, far less with the lowest. The fourth and lowest ( , ) 
suffices only in combination with the highest. [1. Definite; 2. 
Indefinite-definite ; 3. Semi-definite ; 4. Indefinite.] 


(1st March 1847. — Very carefully authenticated.) 

There are 4 quantities (> | . | ., | : )> affording (4 x 4), 16 pos- 
sible double quantifications of the middle term of a syllogism. 

a 

1 .. V 

Of these 10 are legitimate equivalents, ( : M : | : M. , | . , M . 

9 4 6 

: 11 . I '. M'; I : M , I , M ; 1 . , M. , I . , M . 1 . M . , ) ; and 6 
illegitimate, as not, together, necessarily exceeding the quantity 
of that term, taken once in its full extent ( . , M , | , M . , | . M . | 
¦M, I ,M. I ,M,). 

Each of these 16 quantified middle terms affords 64 possible 
moods; to wit, 16 affirmative, 48 negative; legitimate and ille- 
gitimate. 

Altogether, these 16 middle terms thus give 256 affirmative and 
768 negative moods ; which, added together, make up 1024 moods, 
legitimate and illegitimate, for each figure. For all three figures 
= 3072. 

The ] 0 legitimate quantifications of the middle term afford, of 
legitimate moods, 160 affirmative and 320 negative (=480) i.e. 
each 16 affirmative and 32 negative moods, (=48); besides of 
illegitimate moods, from double negation, 160, f.c., each 16. The 
6 illegitimate quantifications afford, of affirmative moods, 96 ; of 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


357 


simple negative moods, 192 ; of double negative moods, 96 (= 
384). Adding all the illegitinmtes=544. 

The 1024 moods, in each figure, thus afford, of legitimate, 480 
moods, (1440 for all 3 Figs.) ; being of affirmative 160 (480 for 3 
Figs.), of negative 320 (960 for 3 Figs.), of illegitimate 544 moods ; 
there being excluded in each, from inadequate distribution alone, 
(§), 288 moods, (viz. 96 affirmative 192 negative) ; from double 
negation alone, (J), 160 moods ; from inadequate distribution and 
double negation together, (§ J), 96 moods. 


(3). Mnemonic Verses. 

A it affirms of thit, thete, all — 
Whilst E denies of any : 

I, it affirms, whilst O denies. 

Of tome (or few or many). 

Thus A affirms, as E denies, 

And definitely either : 

Thus I affirms, as 0 denies. 

And definitely neither. 

A half, left semi-definite. 

Is worthy of its score ; 

U, then, affirms, as Y denies, 
This, neither less nor more. 

Indefinite definites, 

To UI and YO we come ; 

And that affirms, and this denies, 
Of more, motl, (half plus some.) 


UI and YO may be caUed Indefinito-definite, either, (1°), Because 
they approximate to the whole or defiuite, [forming] more than its 
moiety, or, (2°), Because they include a half, which, in a certain 
sense, may be regarded as definite, and something, indefinite, over 
and above. 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


. S .-)8 


VII.— INDUCTION AND EXAMPLE. 


(See above, vol. I, p. 318.) 

(a) Quotations from Authors. 

L — Aristotle. 

Aristotle, Prior Analytics, B. ii. c. 2.3. After stating that “we 
believe all things either through [deductive] Syllogism or from In- 
duction,” he goes on to expound the nature of this latter process. 

“ Now, Induction, and the Syllogism from Induction, is the 
inferring one extreme, [the major], of the middle through the 
other ; if, for instance, B is the middle of A C, and, through C, 
we show that A inheres in B. Thus do we institute Inductions. 
In illustration : — Let A be long-lived, B, wanting-bile, and C, 
i?idividnal long-lived animals, as man, horse, mule, &c. A, then, 
inheres in the whole of C, (for all animal without bile is [at least 
some] long-lived) ; but B, wanting bile, also [partially, at least] 
inheres in all C.“ If now C reciprocate with B, and do not go 
beyond that middle, [if C and B, subject and predicate, are each 


• I have, however, doubta whether 
the example which now ntanda in the 
Organon, be that which Aristotle him* 
eelf proposed. It appears, at least, to 
have been conaiderably modified, pro- 
bably to bring it nearer to what was 
subsequently supposed to be the truth. 
This 1 infer as likely from the Commen- 
tary of Amraonius on the Prhr ilna- 
occasionally interpolated by, and 
thus erroneously quote<l under the 
name of a posterior critic, — Joannes, 
sumamed Philoponus, Ac. His words 
are, in reference to Aristotle, as follows : 
— He wishes, through an example, to 
illitstrate the Inductive process; it is of 
this intent. Let A bo long-lived; B, 
wanting bile; Q, as erow,and the like. 
Now he says : — that the crow and the stag, 
being animals without bile and long- 
lived; therefore, animal wanting bile is 
long-IivecL Thus, tlirough the last [or 
minor], do we connect the middle term 
with the [major] extreme. For I argue 


thna:^the individual animals wanting 
bile are [all] long-lived; consequently, 
[all] animals wanting bile are long-lived.** 
F. 107, a. ed. Aid. Compare also the 
greatly later Leo Magentinus, on the 
Prior Analytics, f. 41, a. ed. Aid. On 
the age of Magentinus, historians (as 
Saxius and Fabricius,) vary, from the 
seventh century to the fourteenth. He 
was certainly subsequent to Michael 
Psellus, junior, whom he quotes, and, 
therefore, not before the end of the 
eleventh century; W’hilst his ignorance 
of the doctrine of Conversion, introduced 
by Boethius, may show that he could 
hardly have been so recent os the four- 
teenth. 

Aristotle, De Part, Animal, (L. iv, c. 
2), says, ** in some animals the gall 
[bladder] is absolutely wanting, as in the 
horse, mule, ass, stag, and roe.". . . It 
is, therefore, evident that the gall serves 
no useful purpose, but is a mere excre- 
tion. Wherefore those of the ancients say 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


S59 


all the other], it is of necessity that A, [some, at least], should 
inhere in [all] B. For it has been previously shown,® that if any 
two [notions] inhere in the same [remote notion], and if the 
middle ^ reciprocate with either [or with both] ; then will the 
other of the predicates [the syllogism being in the third figure] 
inhere in the co-reciprocating extreme. But it behoves us to con- 
ceive C as a complement of the witole individuals ; for Induction 
has its inference through [as it is of] all. 7 


well, who declare that the cause of Ion* 
gevitjr is the absence of the gall; and this 
from their observation of the solidun- 
gula and deer, for animals of these 
classes want the gall, and are long-lived.’* 
Hiai, An., L. ii. c. 11, Schn. 18, Seal. 15 
?ul. Notices that some animals have, 
others want, the gall bladder, 

Schn. UL p. 106), at the liver. Of the latter, 
among viviparous quadrupeds, he nottcee 
stag, roe, horse, mule, ass, &c. Of birds 
who have the gall-bladder apart from 
the liver and attached to the intestines, 
be notices the pigeon, crow, &c. 

* Aristotle refers to the chapter im- 
mediately preceding, which treats of the 
Reciprocation of Terms, and in that to 
the 6fth rule which he gives, and of the 
following purport “ Again, when A and 
B inhere in all C [Le. all C is A and is B], 
and when C reciprocates [t.e. is of the 
same extension and comprehension] with 
B, it is necessary that A should inhere in 
all B [(.e. that all B should be A] 

$ For &Kpoy, I read fitffoy ; but per- 
haps the true lection is — irpht rovro 
Bdr^pop ainuv iafrtarp4p^ r£y Aitpvy. 
The necessity of an emendation becomes 
manifest from the slightest consideration 
of the context. In fact, the common 
reading yields only nonsense ; and this 
on sundry grounds. — 1% There are three 
things to which Odrtpoy is here appli- 
cable, and yet it can only apply to two. 
But if limited, as limited it must be, 
to the two inherents, two absurdities 
emerge. 2% For the middle, or common, 
notion, in which both the otherv inhere, 
that, in fact, here exclusively wanted, is 
alone excluded. 3®, One, too, of the in- 


herents Is made to reciprocate with either ; 
that is, with itself, or other. 4*, Of the 
two inherents, the minor extreme is that 
which, on Ariatotle’s doctrine of Induc- 
tion, is alone considered as reciprocating 
with the middle or common term. But, 
in Aristotle’s language, iitpoy, The 
Extreme, ” is (like ^ vp^rcurit, The Pre- 
position in the common language of the 
logicians) a synonyme for the major, in 
opposition to, and in exclusion of, the 
minor, term. In the two short corre- 
lative chapters, the present and that 
which immediately follows, on Induc- 
tion and on Example, the expression, be- 
sides the instance in question, occurs at 
least seven times; and in all as the major 
term. — 5*, The emendation is reijuired 
by the demonstration itself, to which 
Aristotle refers. It is found in the 
chapter immediately preceding (§ 5); 
and is as folloH-s : — ** Again, when A and 
B inhere in all C ; and tchen C renpro- 
cates toilh B ; it necessarily follows that 
A should [partially, at least], inhere in 
all B. For whilst A [some, at least], in- 
heres in all C ; and [all] C, by reason of 
their reciprocity, inheres in [all] B ; A 
will also [some, at least], inhere in all 
B.” The mood here given is viiL of our 
Table. (See below, Appendix XI.) 

y This i*equisite of Logical Induction, 
— that it should bo thought as the re- 
sult of an agreement of all the indivi- 
duals or parts, — is further shown by 
Aristotle in the chapter immediately 
following, in which ho treats the reason- 
ing from Example. See passage quoted 
on this page (§ 5). 


Digitized by Google 



SCO 


APPENDIX. 


“ This kind of syllogism is of the primary and immediate pro- 
position. For the reasoning of things mediate is, through their 
medium, of things immediate, through Induction. And in a cer- 
tain sort, Induction is opposed to the [Deductive] Syllogism. For 
the latter, through the middle term, proves the [major] extreme 
of the third [or minor] ; whereas the former, through the tliird, [or 
minor term, proves] the [major] extreme of the middle. Thus, 
[absolutely], in nature, the syllogism, through a medium, is the 
prior and more notorious ; but [relatively] to us, that through In- 
duction is the clearer." 

An. Pr., L. iL c. 24i. Of Example. — § 1. “Example emerges, 
when it is shown that the [major] extreme inheres in the middle, 
by something similar to the third [or minor term] ... § 4. 

'Thus it is manifest that the Example does not hold the relation 
either of a whole to part [Deduction], nor of a part to whole 
[Induction], but of part to part ; when both are contained under 
the same, and one is more manifest than the other. § 5. And 
[Example] differs from Induction, in that this, from all the indi- 
viduals, shows that the [major] extreme inheres in the middle, and 
does not [like Deduction] hang the syllogism on the major ex- 
treme ; whereas that both hangs the syllogism [on the major ex- 
treme], and does not show from all the individuals [that the major 
extreme is inherent in the minor.]’’ 

An. Post., L. i. c. 1, § 3. — “The same holds true in the case of 
reasonings, whether through [Deductive] Syllogisms or through 
Induction ; for both accomplish the instruction they afford from 
information foreknown, the former receiving it as it were from the 
tnulition of the intelligent, the latter manifesting the universal 
through the light of the individual.” (Pacii, p. 413. See the rest of 
the chapter). 

An. Pos., L. i. c. 18, § 1. — "But it is manifest that, if 
any sen.se be wanting, some relative science should be wanting 
likewise, this it being now impossible for us to apprehend. For 
we learn everything either by induction or by demonstration. 
Now, demonstration is from universals, and induction from parti- 
culars ; but it is impossible to speculate the universal unless 
through induction, seeing that even the products of abstraction 
will become known to us by induction.” 


Digitized by Google 


N 


APPENDIX. 361 

A. Aristotle's Errors regarding Induction. 

Not making Syllogism and its theory superior and common to 
both Deductive and Inductive reasonings. 

A corollary of the preceding is the reduction of the genus Syllo- 
gism to its species Deductive Syllogism, and the consequent con- 
tortion of Induction to Deduction. 

B. Omissions. 

Omission of negatives. 

Of both terms reciprocating. 

C. Ambiguities. 

Confusion of Individuals and Particular. See Scheibler, [Opera 
Logica, P. iii. De Prop., c. vi., tit 3, 5 . — Ed.] 

Confusion or non-distinction of Major or Minor extremes. 


The subsequent observations are intended only to show out 
Aristotle’s authentic opinion, which I hold to be substantially the 
true doctrine of Induction ; to expose the multiform errors of his 
expositors, and their tenth and ten times tenth repeaters, would be 
at once a tedious, superfluous, and invidious labour. I shall, first 
of all, give articulately the correlative syllogisms of Induction and 
Deduction which Aristotle had in hLs eye ; and shall employ the 
example which now stands in the Organon, for, though physio- 
logically false, it is, nevertheless, (as a supposition), valid, in illus- 
tration of the logical process. 


ARISTOTLE'S CORRELATIVE SYLLOGISMS. 


(a) Of Induction. 

All C {man, horte, mule, &c.) it 
tame A {long-lived) ; 

All C {man, horte, mule, &c.) it 
all B {icanting-bile) ; 

All "R {wanlintf-bile) it tome A 
{long-lived). 

A , — : C (p, q, r, &c.) : :B 


{b) Of DEDUimoN. 

AllR {wanting-bile) it tome A 
{long-lived) ; 

AllC {man, horte, mule, &a) it 
all B {wanting-bile) ; 

AllC {man, horte, mule, &c.) it 
tome A {long4ived). 



Digitized by Google 



362 


APPENDIX. 


These syllogisms, though of different figures, fall in the same 
mood ; in our table they are of the eighth mood of the third and 
first Figures. Both unallowed. (See Ramus, quoted below, p. 363). 

The Inductive syllogism in the first figure given by Schegkius, 
Pacius, the Jesuits of Coimbra, and a host of subsequent repeaters, 
is altogether incompetent, so far as meant for Aristotle’s correla- 
tive to his Inductive syllogism in the third Neither directly nor 
indirectly does the philosopher refer to any Inductive reasoning 
in any other figure than the third. And he is right ; for the third 
is the figure in which all the inferences of Induction naturally 
run. To reduce such reasonings to the first figure, far more to the 
second, is felt as a contortion, as will be found from the two fol- 
lowing instances, the one of which is Aristotle’s example of In- 
duction, reduced by Pacius to the first figure, and the other the 
same example reduced by me to the second. I have taken care 
also to state articulately what are distinctly thought, — the quanti- 
fications of the predicate in this reasoning, ignored by Pacius and 
logicians in general, and admitted only on compulsion, among 
others, by Derodon, (below, p. 363), and the Coimbra commen- 
tator.o 


Aristotle’s inductive syllogism in figures. 


(c). Fig. I. 

AllC {man, hone, mule, &c.) is 
tome A {long-lived) ; 

All B {wanting-bile) it all C 
{man, hone, mule, &c.) ; 

All B {wanting-bile) is tome A 
{long-lived). 


{d). Fig. II. 

Some A {long-lived) it all C 
{man, hone, mule, Ac.) ; 

All 'B {wanting-bile) is all C 
{man, horse, mule, &c.)/ 

All B {wanting-bile) it tome A 
{long-liveif). 


II. — PACHTMEREa 

Pachymeres, Epitome of Aristotle’s Logic, (Title viii. ch. 3, 
c. 1280). — “ Induction, too, is celebrated as another instrument 
of philosophy. It is more persuasive than Deductive reasoning ; 
for it proposes to infer the universal from singulars, and, if 
possible, from all. But as this is frequently impossible, indivi- 


a [/» An. Prior., L. ii. p. 403. Cf. (1644). Toaca, Comp. Phil. Loffira, t. 
PerioniuB, DiaUctira, L. iii. p. 366 I. 1. iii. c. 1, 116.] 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


363 


duals being often in number infinite, there ha.s been found a 
method through which we may accomplish an Induction, from 
the observation even of a few. For, after enumerating as many 
as wc can, we are entitled to call on our adversary to state on 
his part, and to prove, any opposing instances. Should he do 
this, then [for, ‘data instantia, cadit inductio’] he prevails; but 
should he not, then do we succeed in our Induction. But Induction 
is brought to bear in the third figure ; for in this figure is it origi- 
nally cast Should, then, the minor premise be converted, so that 
the middle be now predicated of all the minor extremes, as that 
extreme was predicated of all the middle ; in that case, the con- 
clusion will be, not of some, but of all. [In induction] the first 
figure, therefore, arises from conversion, — from conversion of the 
minor premise, — and this, too, converted into all, and not into 
some. But [an inductive syllogism] is drawn in the third figure, 
as follows : — Let it be supposed that we wish to prove, — every 
animal moves the lower jaw. With that intent, we place as 
terms : — the major, moves the under jaw ; the minor, [aZf] ani- 
mal ; and, lastly, the middle, all contained under aninud, so that 
these contents reciprocate with all animal. And it is thus perfected 
[?] in the first figure, as follows ; — To move the lower jaw is predi- 
cated of all individual animals ; these all are predicated of all 
animal; therefore, moving the lower jaw is predicated of all ani- 
mal. In such sort induction is accomplished.” 

III. — Ramus. 

Ramus, Scholm Dialecticce, L. viiL c. 11. “Quid vero sit in- 
ductio perobscure [Aristoteli] declarator : nec ab interpretibus intel- 
ligitur, quo modo syllogismus per medium concludat majus extre- 
mum de minore : inductio majus de medio per minus." Ramus has 
confirmed his doctrine by his example. For, in his expositions, he 
himself is not correct. 


rv. — D ebodom. 

Derodon, Logica Restituta, 1659, p. 602. Philosophia Con- 
tracta, 1664', Logica, p. 91. “Induction is the argumentation in 
which, from all the particulars, their universal is inferred ; as — 
Fire, air, water, earth, are bodies ; therefore, every element 


Digitized by Google 



3G4 


APPENDIX. 


is body. It is recalled, however, to syllogism, by assuming all 
the particulars [including singulars] for the middle term, in this 
manner : — Fire, air, water, and eaiih are bodies ; hut fire, air, 
water, and earth are every element ; therefore, every element is 
body. Again : — The head, chest, feet, dec., are diseased ; but 
the head, chest, feet, dec., are the whole animal ; therefore, the 
whole animal is diseased. Thus Induction is accomplished, when, 
by the enumeration of all the individuals, we conclude of the 
species what holds of all its individuals; as — Peter, Paul, James, 
dec., are rational; therefore, all man is rational; or when, by the 
enumeration of all the species, we conclude of the genus what bolds 
of all its species ; as — Man, ass, horse, dec., are sensitive; there- 
fore, all animal is sensitive ; or when, by the enumeration of all 
the part.s, we conclude the same of the whole ; as — Head, chest, 
feet, dc., are diseased; therefore, the whole animal is diseased." 

V.— The College of Alcala. 

A curious error in regard to the contrast of the Inductive and 
the Deductive syllogism stands in the celebrated Cursus Complu- 
tensis, — in the Disputations on Aristotle’s Dialectic, by the Car- 
melite College of Alcala, 1624, (L. iiL c. 2). We there find sur- 
rendered Aristotle’s distinctions as accidental. Induction and 
Deduction are recognised, each as both ascending and descending, 
as both from, and to, the whole ; the essential difference between 
the processes being taken, in the existence of a middle term for 
Deduction, in its non-existence for Induction. The following is 
given as an example of the descending syllogism of Induction : — 
All men are animals; therefore, this, and this, and this, dc.,man 
is an animal. An ascending Inductive syllogism is obtained from 
the preceding, if reversed Now all this is a mistake. The syllo- 
gism here stated is Deductive ; the middle, minor, and major 
terms, the minor premise and the conclusion being confounded 
together. Expre.sscd as it ought to be, the syllogism is as follows: — 
All men are (some) animals ; this, and this, and this, d-c., are 
(cotistitute) all men ; therefore, this, and this, and this, d'c., are 
(some) animal. Here the middle term and three propositions re- 
appear ; whilst the Deductive syllogism in the first figure yields, of 
course, on its reversal, an Inductive syllogism in the third. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


365 


The vulgar errors, those till latterly, at least, prevalent in this 
country, — that Induction is a syllogism in the Mood Barbara of 
the first figure, (with the minor or the major premise usually sup- 
pressed) ; and still more that from a eome in the antecedent, we 
can logically induce an all in the conclusion ; — these, on their own 
account, are errors now hardly deserving of notice, and have been 
already sufficiently exposed by me, upon another occasion, {Edin- 
burgh Review, LVII. p. 224 et seq.) [Discussione, p. 158 et seq. 
—Ed.] 


VI. — Facciolati. 

Facciolati, Rudimenta Logica, P. iii. c. 3, defines Induction 
as “ a reasoning without a middle, and concluding the universal 
by an enumeration of the singulars of which it is made up.” His 
examples show that he took it for an Enthymeme. — “ Prudence, 
Temperance, Fortitude, &c., are good habits, [these constitute all 
virtue] ; therefore, [tdl] virtue is a habit" 


VII. — Lahbebt. 

Lambert, Neues Organon, L § 287. "When, in consequence of 
finding a certain attribute in all things or cases which pertain to a 
class or species [genus (?)], we are led to affirm this attribute of 
the notion of the class or genus ; we are said to find the attribute 
of a class or genus through induction. There is no doubt that 
this succeeds, so soon as the induction is complete, or so soon as we 
have ascertained that the class or species A contains under it no 

other cases than C, D, E, F, M, and that the attribute B occurs 

in each of the cases C, D, E, F, M. This process now pre- 

sents a formal syllogism in Caspida. For we thus reason — 

C, at well at D, E, F M are all B-, 

But A it either 0, or D, or E, or F or M ; 

Coniequently, all A are B. 

“The example previously given of the syllogistic mood Cas- 
pida, may here serve for illustration. For, to find whether every 
syllogism of the Second Figure be negative, we go through its seve- 
ral moods. These are Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco. Now 


Digitized by Google 



3GG 


APPENDIX. 


both the first conclude in E, both the last in O. But £ and 0 are 
negative, consequently all the four, and herewith the Second Figure 
in general, conclude negatively.a As, in most cases, it is very diffi- 
cult to render the minor proposition, which has the disjunctive 
predicate for its middle term, complete, there are, therefore, com- 
petent veiy few perfect inductions. The imperfect are [logically] 
worthless, since it is not in every case allowable to argue from 
some to all. And even the perfect we eschew, whensoever the 
conclusion can be deduced immediately from the notion of the 
genus, for this inference is a shorter and more beautiful” 


Strictures on Lambert’s doctrine of Induction. 

1°, In making the minor proposition disjunctive. 

2°, In making it particular. 

3°, In making it a minor of the First Figure instead of the 
Tliird. 

Better a categorical syllogism of the Third Figure, like Aris- 
totle, whom he does not seem to have been aware of. Refuted by 
his own doctrine in § 230. 


The recent German Logicians,S following Lambert, (N. Org. 
L § 287), make the inductive syllogism a byeword. Lambert’s 

example : — “ C, as well as D, E, F M, all are B ; but A 

is either C, or D, or E, or F, or M ; therefore, all A is B.” 

Or, to adapt it to Aristotle’s example : — Man, as well as horse, 
mule, &c., all are long-lived animals ; but animal void of gall is 
either man, or horse, or mule, &c. ; therefore, all animal void of 
gall is long-lived. 

Tliis, I find, was an old opinion ; and is well invalidated by the 
commentators of Louvain.7 


• It is giren in | 285, aa follows : — 
a$ tttll in Cemre <u in 
Camestrtt^ Fe$tinOj and Jiaroco, are all 
ne ff atilt ; 

“ iVotc every eylloyiem of the Second 
Figure. U either in Ceeare, or Camestres, 
or FeetinOy or Baroco; 

** Coneequently every tyllogiwtn in the 
Second Figure it negative'* 

$ As Herbart, Lehrbuch der Logil', § 
6S#. Twesten, Drobisch, H. Ritt«r, 
y**l am aware of the oitiiiion of many, 


that the singulars in the Inductive syllo* 
gism should be enumerated hy a disjunc* 
live conjunction, in so much that the 
premises of such a syllogism are com* 
monly wont to be time cast : — What- 
toever is John, or Peter, or Paul, dr., it 
capable of instruction. But they err, 
not observing that the previous proposi- 
tion is manifestly equivalent to the fol- 
lowing, — John, and Peter, and Paul, 
dr,, are caftablc of instruction** (Lo- 
vanicnses, Com. !•* An. Pr., L. ii. tr. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


367 


The only inducement to the disjunctive form is, that the predicate 
is exhausted without the predesignation of universality, and the 
First Figure attained. But as these crotchets have been here 
refuted, therefore, the more natural, &c. 

Some logicians, as Oxford Crakanthorpe, {Logica, 1. iii., c. 20, 
published 1 622, but written long before), hold that Induction can 
only be recalled to a Hypothetical syllogism. As, — 1/ Sopftocles 
be risible, likeivise Plato and all other men, then all man is risible; 
but Socrates is risible, likewise Plato and all other men; therefore, 
all man is risible. Against the Categorical syllogism in one or 
other figure he argues ; — “ This is not a universal categorical, because 
both the premises are singular ; nor a singular categorical, because 
the conclusion is universal” It is sufficient to say, that, though 
the subjects of the premises be singular, (Crakanthorpe does 
not contemplate their being particular), as supposed to be all the 
constituents of a species or relatively universal whole, they are 
equivalent to that species ; their universality, (though contrary to 
Aristotle’s canon), i.s, indeed, overtly declared, in one of the pre- 
mises, by the universal predesignation of the predicate. Our 
author further adds, that Induction cannot be a categorical syl- 
logism, because it contains four terms; this quatemity being 


3, c. 2, p. 286, e<L 1547 ; 1st ed«, 
1555). ThU here said of Uie major 
is true of Lambert *s minor. The Lou- 
vain masters refer probably (to Ver- 
sor, &c.] This doctrine, — that the 
Inductive syllogism should be drawn 
in a disjunctive form, — was commonly 
held, especially by the scholastic com- 
mentators on Petrus Hispanus. Thus 
Versor, (to take the books at hand), 
whose Ex]p09iti(m first appeared in 1487, 
says — “ In the fourth place, Induction 
is thus reduced to syllogism, seeing that, 
in the conclusion of the Induction, there 
are two terms of which the subject forms 
the minor, and the predicate the major, 
extreme in the syllogism ; whilst the 
singulars, which have no place in the 
conclusion, constitute the middle term. 
Thus the Induction — Socraie$ miw, 
Plato run4, {and $o of other men); there' 
fore, all man mns, — is thus reduced : 


All that it Socrateiy or Plato, {and to 
of oihert), runs ; hut all man it Socrates, 
or Plato, (and so of otheri); therefore, all 
fnan runt. And these singulars ought 
to be taken disjunctively, and disjunc- 
tively, not computatively, verified of 
their universal" — {In. Ilitp. Summul, 
Tr. V.) 

The same doctrine is held in the Re- 
parationet of Amoldus de Tungeri and 
the Masters Regent in the Burse (or 
College) of St Lawrence, in Ologne, 
1496. (Tr. iii., c. ii.. Sec. Pri.) 

It is also maintained in the Copulata 
of Lambertus de Monte, and the other 
Regents in the Bursa Montis of Cologne, 
1490. They give their reasons, which 
are, however, not worth stating and re- 
futing. 

But Tartaretus, neither in bis Com- 
mentaries on Hispomis nor on Aria* 
totle, mentions this dootrinsi 


Digitized by Google 



368 


APPENDIX. 


made by the “ all men’' (in his example), of the premises being 
considered as different from the “all man" of the conclusion. 
This is the veriest trifling. The difierence is wholly factitious : 
all man, all men, &c., are virtually the same ; and we may in- 
difierently use either or both, in premises and conclusion. 

(6) Material Induction. 

Material or Philosophical Induction is not so simple as com- 
monly stated, but consists of two syllogisms, and two deductive 
syllogisms, and one an Epicheirema. Thus : — 

I. — What is found true of some constituents of a natural class, 
is to he presumed true of the whole class, {for nature is always 
uniform) ; a a' o" are some constituents of the class A ; therefore, 
what is true of a a' a" is to he presumed true of A. 

II. — What is true of a o' a," ie to he presumed true of A; 
hut z is true of a a' a" ; therefore, z is true of A. 

It will be observed, that all that is here inferred is only a pre- 
sumption, founded, 1°, On the supposed uniformity of nature ; 
2°, 'That A is a natural class ; 3°, On the truth of the observation 
that a a' a" are really constituents of that class A ; and, 4°, That 
z is an essential quality, and not an accidental If any be false, 
the reasoning is naught, and, in regard to the second, a o' o," (sone), 
cannot represent A, {alt), if in any instance it is found untrue. 
" Data instantia cadit inductio.” In that case the syllogism has 
an undistributed middle. 


Di.jin^™: by Google 


APPENDIX. 


3G9 


VIII. 


HYPOTHEl’ICAL AND DISJUNCTIVE REASONINC— 
IMMEDIATE INFERENCE. 


A-AUTHOR’S DOCTRINE-FRAGMENTS. 


(See above, Vol. I. p. 326.) 


All Mediate inference is one ; that incorrectly called Categori- 
cal ; for the Conjunctive and Disjunctive forms of Hyiiothetical 
reasoning are reducible to immediate inferences. 



Immediate j 
of which some 
kinds are 


Recognised, 
as Propositional. 
(Various.) 


Not recognised, 
as Syllogistic, 


Disjunctive, 


Coiuunctive, 


Hypo- 

thetical. 


I A) Analytic. 
B) Synthetic. 


a) Unfigured. 


h' Figured, 
(Intensive 
or E.vten- 
sive) in 


F. I. 
F. II. 
F. III. 





^ 1. Reasoning is the showing out explicitly that a proposition, 
not granted or supposed, is implicitly contained in something 
different, which is granted or supposed. 

§ 2. What is granted or supposed is either a single proposition, 
or more than a single proposition. The Reasoning, in the former 
case, is Immediate, in the latter, Mediate. 

§ 3. The proposition implicitly contained, may be stated first 
or last. The Reasoning, in the former case, is Analytic, in the 
latter, Synthetin 

Observations . — § I. “A proposition,” not a truth ; for the pro- 
jwsition may not, absolutely con.sidered, be true, but relatively 
to what is supposed its evolution, is and must be necessary, 
All Reasoning is thus hypothetical ; hypothetically true, 

a Reprinted from DltcutsiotUf j>. 656 . — Kd. 

VOIu II. 2 A 


Digitized by Google 



370 


APPENDIX. 


though absolutely what contains, and, consequently, what is 
contained, may be false.® 

Observations. — § 2. Examples : Immediate — 1/ A is B, then 
B ts A ; Mediate — 1/ A. is B, and B is C, then A is C. 

Observations. — § 3. Examples : Analytic — B is A, for A w B ; 
A is C, for A is B, and B is C. Synthetic — A is B ; there- 
fore, B is A ; A is B, and B is C ; therefore, A is C. 


On the Natuke and Divisions of Inference or Syllogism 
IN general. 


(November ISIiS.) 

I. Inference, what 

II. Inference is of three kinds ; what I would call the — 1°, Com- 
mutative ; 2°, Explicative ; and, 3°, Comparative. 

1°, In the first, one proposition is given ; and required what are 
its formal commutations ? 

2°, In the second, two or more connected propositions are given, 
under certain conditions, (therefore, all its species are conditionals) ; 
and required what are the formal results into which they may be 
explicated. Of this genus there are two speeies, — the one the Dis- 
junctive Conditional, the other the Conjunctive Conditional. In 
the Di.sjunctive, (the Disjunctive also of the Logicians), two or 
more propositions, with identical subjects or predicates, are given, 
under the di.sjunctive condition of a counter quality, i. e. that 
one only shall bo affirmative ; and it is required what is the 
result in case of one or other being affirmed, or one or more denied. 
(Excluded Middle.) In the Conjunctive, (the Ilypotheticals of 
the logicians), two or more propositions, convertible or contradic- 
tory, with undetermined quality, are given, under the conjunctive 
condition of a correlative quality, i. e. that the affirmation or 


a That all logical reasoning U hy|>o* 
thctical, and that Categi>rical Syllogiam 
is really, and in a higher aigniflcation, 
hypothetical, see Maitnon, Versvfh finer 
neuen Loffih, § ri. 1., pp. 82, 88. E. Rein- 
hold, Lotjikf § 109, p. 253 et »eq. Smig- 
lecius, l/Mjica, Disp. xiii., q. 5, p. 495dlst 
ed. 1616). 

On the nature of the Necessity in Syl- 
logistic Inference; distinction of Formal 
and Material Necessity, or of neceuita* 


eonteqncntiiT and neeenitan con^cquentiif 
see Scotua, Quregtioneiy Super Elaichon, 
qu. iv,, p, 227, ed. 1639, and that all 
inference hypothetical, In An. Prior., 
L. ii. qu. i. p. 331. Apuleiua, De IJah, 
Doct. plat., p. 34. Aristotle, A n. Prior, 
i. 32, § 6. Smiglecius, Logica, loc. cit, 
Balforeus, In Ari*t. Org., An. Prior., i., 
t. 8, p. 454, 1616. [See alto Ditciwiont, 
p. 146, note. — E d.] 


Digitized by Googic 


APPENDIX. 


371 


negation of one being determined, determines the corresponding 
affirmation or negation of the other or others ; and it is required 
what is the result in the various possible cases. (Identity and 
Contradiction, not Sufficient Reason, which in Logic is null as a 
separate law). 

3°, In the third, three terms are given, two or one of which are 
positively related to the third, and required what are the relations 
of these two terms to each other? “ 

III. All inference is h3q)otheticaL 

IV. It has been a matter of dispute among logicians whether 
the class which I call Explicative, (viz. the Hypothetical and Dis- 
junctive Syllogisms), be of Mediate or Immediate inference. The 
immen.se majority hold them to be mediate ; a small minority, of 
which I recollect only the names of Kant, [Fischer, Weiss, Bouter- ' 
wek, Herbart],^ hold them to be immediate. 

The dispute is solved by a distinction. Categorical Inference is 
mediate, the medium of conclusion being a term ; the Hypothetical 
and Disjunctive syllogisms are mediate, the medium of conclusion 
being a proposition, — that which I call the Explication. So far 
they both agree in being mediate, but they differ in four points. 
The first, that the medium of the Comparative syllogism is a term ; 
of the Explicative a proposition. The second, that the medium of 
the Comparative is one ; of the Explicative more than one. The 
third, that in the Comparative the medium is always the same ; in 
the Explicative, it varies according to the various conclusion. The 
fourth, that in the Comparative the medium never enters the con- 
clusion ; whereas, in the E.xplicative, the same proposition is reci- 
procally medium or conclusion. 

V. Logicians, in general, have held the Explicative class to be 
composite syllogisms, as compared with the Categoric ; whilst a 


• A belter statement of the three dif- 
ferent processes of Reasoning. 

I. Given a proposition; commutative; 
—what are the inferences which its com- 
mutations afford ? 

II. Given two or more propositions; 
related and conditionally; — what arc 
the inferences which the relative pro- 
positions, explicated under these con- 
ditions, afford ? 

TIL Given three notions ; two re- 
lated, and at least one positively, to a 


third; — what are the inferences afforded 
in the relations to each other, which this 
comparison of the two notions to the 
third determines? 

[0 Kant, § 76. Bouterwek, 

Ltkrbuch dtr philoiophitichtn Vorkennt- 
niMe,§100, p. 158, 2ded. 1820. Fischer, 
I/xjih, c. V. §§ 99, loo, p. 137. Weies, 
Logih, §§ 210, 251. Herbart, Lthrhuch 
zur FinUi'tunff in die PhHoiophie^ § 64, 
p. 87, 1834.] 


Digitized by Google 



372 


APPENDIX. 


few have held them to be more simple. This dispute arises from 
each party taking a partial or one-sided view of the two classes. 
In one point of view, the Explicative are the more complex, the 
Comparative the more simple. In another point of view, the 
reverse holds good. 


Our Hypothetical and Disjunctive Syllogisms may be reduced 
to the clas.s of Explicative or Conditional. The Hypotheticals 
should be called, as they were by Boethius and others, Con- 
junctive, in contrast to the co-ordinate specie.s of Disjunctive. 
Hypothetical, as a name of the species, ought to be abandoned. 

The Conjunctives are conditional, inasmuch as negation or affir- 
mation is not absolutely asserted, but left alternative, and the quality 
of one proposition is made dependent on another. They are, how- 
ever, not properly stated. The first proposition, — that contain- 
ing the condition, — which I would call the E.rplicand, should be 
thus enounced : .4s B, so A ; — or, As B is, so is A ; or. As C is 
B, so is B A. Then follows the proposition containing the expli- 
cation, which I would call the Explicative ; and, finally, the 
proposition embodying the result, which I would call the Ex- 
plicate. 

They are called Conjunctives from their conjoining two con- 
vertible propositions in a mutual dependence, of which either may 
be made antecedent or consequent of the other. 

Di.sjunctive Syllogisms are conditional, inasmuch as a notion is 
not absolutely asserted as subject or predicate of another or others, 
but alternatively conjoined with some part, but only with some 
part, of a given plurality of notions, the affinnation of it with one 
part involving its negation with the others. The first proposition, 
containing the condition, I would call the Explicand, and so forth 
as in the Conjunctives. They are properly calleil Disjunctives. 

DiSTEIBUTION of EEASONINCa 

(Nov. 1848.) — Inference maybe thus distributed, and more fully 
and accurately than I have seen. It is either, (I.) Immediate, that 
is, without a middle term or medium of comparison ; or (II.) Me- 
diate, with such a medium.^ 

a [Cf. Fonseca, /Mtit. Dial,, L. vi. PhiI^*sophi(g Quadrijxirtita, 
c. 1., 1st od. 1564. Eustachius, •Sum»kx P. ilL tract, i., p. 112. Quoniam 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


373 


Both the Immediate and the Mediate are subdivided, inasmuch 
as the reasoning is determined (A) to one, or (B) to one or other, 
conclusion. (It is manifest that this latter division may constitute 
the principal, and that immediate and mediate may constitute 
subaltern cla.sses.) 

All inference, I may observe in the outset, is hypothetic, and 
what have been called Hypothetical Syllogisms are not more hypo- 
thetic than others. 

I. A — Immediate Peremptory Inference, determined one con- 
clusion, contains under it the following species : — a 

I. B — Immediate Alternative Inference contains under it these 
five species, — 

1°, Given one proposition, the alternative of aflSrmation and nega- 
tion. As — A. either is or is not ; but A is; therefore A is not not. 
Or, A is or is not B ; but A ts B ; therefore, A is not not-B. 

This species is anonymous, having been ignored by the logi- 
cians; but it requires to be taken into account to explain the 
various steps of the process. 

2°, Given one proposition, the alternative between difierent pre- 
dicate.s. This is the common Disjunctive Syllogism. 


argiimentAtio e«t qtiaxlam confloquentia, 
(lutius enim patet consequontiA quam 
argumentatio), prius do couAoqueiitia, 
quam do argumentatione dicendum eat. 
Coimoquentia igitur, sivo connocutio, eat 
omtiu in qua exaliquo aliquidcolligitur; 
ut, Omnis homo est animal, i/jitur aliquis 
homo (At animat.** — Kn.] [Whether Im* 
meiliate Inference really immetliate, see, 
on the affirmative, E. Reinhold, Loqik, 
§106; on the negative, Wolf, Phil. Pat., 
§ 461. Krug, Ltxjik., § 94, p. 287. 
Schulze, Ijogik, §§ 85-90, (§ 80, 5th e<l.). 
Cf. Maimon, einfr neuen Ijogik, 

Sect. V. § 2, p. 74 tt F. Fiacher, 
Ijogik, p. 104 tt $tq. Bachmann, Logik, 
§ 105, p. 154 tt $tq. Reimania, Ver- 
minftlthrt, § 159 tt $tq. {1765). Bolmio, 
WiitfntchafUlthrt, Lf^jik, vol. ii. § 255 
tt ttq. Tweaten, Logik, xnsbtMondtre die 
Analyiik, § 77, p. 66. Reeling, Die 
Lthrtn der rtintn Logik, § 130, p. 391. 
Scheibler, Op, Log,^ De Propotit. Con- 


ttrutione, p. 492 ei $tq.] 
a [Kindii of Immetiiate Inference. — 
1. Subaltemation. II. Convention. III. 
Opposition — (a) of Contradiction— (b) of 
Contrariety^(c) of Subcontrariety. IV. 
Equij)ollence. V. Modality. VI. Con- 
trapositioa VII. Correlation. VIII. 
Itlentity. 

Fonseca (IV),(T),(IT). Eustachlua (I), 
(IV), (II), (VIII). Wolf. (IV), (VII), 

(III) , a, b, c, (II). SUttler, (I), (IV), 
(II), (III). Kant, (I), (III), a, b, c), (II), 
<V1). E. Reiuhold, (I), (II), (VI), (VII). 
Rosling. (I), (IV), (II), (III), a, b, c, (V). 
Krug, (IV), (I), (HI), a, b, c, (II). (V). 
O. E. Schulze, (IV), (1), (III), (II), S. 
Maimon, (I),(III),(II),(VI). Bachmann, 

(IV) , (I), (III), a. b, c, (II), (VI). (V). 
Platner, (I), (II), (III), (IV). F. 
cher, (V), (I), (III), (II), (VI). Reimanu, 
IV., (I), (III), a, b, (II , Tweaten, I), 

(V) , (III), (IV), (II), (VI). See above 
pp. 283, 284.] 


Digitized by Google 



374 


APPENDIX. 


3°, The previous propositions conjoined, given one proposition, 
&C. As, A either is or is not either B or C or D; but A ts B ; 
therefore it is not not B, it is not C, it is not D. 

Alias, A is either B or non-B, or C or non-C, or D or non-D; 
but A isB; therefore it is not non-B, and it is non-0, and it is 
non-D. 

4°, Given two propositions, second dependent on the first, and in 
the first the alternative of affirnnation and negation. This is the 
Hypothetical Syllogism of the logicians. It is, however, no more 
hypothetical than any other form of reasoning ; the so-called 
hypothetical conjunction of the two radical propositions being 
only an elliptical form of stating the alternation in the one, and 
the dependence on that alternation in the other. For example, — 
//A is B, B is C ; this merely states that A either is or is not B, 
and that B is or is not C, according as A is or is not B. In 
short — As A is or is not B, so B is or is not C. 

(Errors, — 1°, This is not a mediate inference. 

2°, This is not more composite than the categorical. 

3°, The second proposition is not more dependent upon the first, 
than the first upon the second.) 

5", Given two propositions, one alternative of affirmation and 
negation, and another of various predicates ; the Hypothetico- 
disjunctive or Dilemmatic Syllogism of the logicians. 

IL A — Mediate Peremptory Inference. This is the common 
Categorical Syllogism. Three propositions, three actual terms, 
one primary conclusion, or two convertible equally and coiijunctly 
valid. 

II. B — Mediate Alternative Syllogism. Three proposition;?, 
three possible terms, and conclusions varying according . . . . 

2°, The Disjunctive Categorical. 

4", The Hypothetical Categorical 

5°, Hypothetico-Disjunctive Categorical. 


Hypothetical Syllooism.— Canon. 

(Oct. 1848). — Canon — Two or more propositions thought as in- 
determined in quality, but as in quality mutually dependent, the 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


375 


determination of quality in the one infers a determination of the 
corresponding quality in the other. 

This canon embodies and simplifies the whole my.stery of Hy- 
pothetical Syllogisms, which have been strangely implicatetl, muti- 
lated, and confusetl by the logicians. 

1°, What are called Hypothetical Propositions and Syllogisms 
are no more hypothetical than others. They are only hypothetical 
as elliptical. When we say, If A is, then B is, we mean to say 
the proposition, A is or is not, and the proposition, B is or is 
not, are mutually dependent, — that as the one so the other. If here 
only means taking for the nonce one of the qualities to the exclu- 
sion of the other; I, therefore, expre.ss in my notation the connec- 
tion of the antecedent and consequent of a hypothetical proposition, 
thus : — 


2°, The interdependent propositions are erroneously called Ante- 
cedent and Consequent. Either is antecedent, either is consequent, 
as we choose to make them. Neither is absolutely so. This error 
arose from not expressing overtly the quantity of the subject of the 
second proposition. For example. If man is, then animal is. In 
this proposition, as thus stated, the negation of the first does not 
infer the negation of the second. For man not existing, animal 
might be realised as a consequent of dog, horse, &c. But let us 
consider what we mean ; we do not mean all animal, but some 
only, and that some determined by the attribute of rationality or 
such other. Now, this same some animal depends on man, and 
man on it ; expressing, therefore, what we mean in the proposition 
thus : — If all nuin is, then some animal is, — we then see the mutual 
dependence and convertibility of the two propositions.® For to say 
that no animal is, is not to explicate but to change the terms. 

3°, The interdependent propositions may be dependent through 
their counter qualities, and not merely through the same. For 
example, As our hemisphere is or is not illuminated , so the other 
is not or is ; but the other is not illuminated ; therefore ours is. 
Another, If A. is, then B is not ; but B is ; therefore A is not. 


• Cf. Titiua, Art Cogitandi, c. xii. § lis, (1) potlto antecedente,ponitur cw»«- 
26. “ In specie falsum quoque arbitror, non vero remote antecnlentet re- 

quixl SjUogismi Conditiunales dx\aa ha- mor«/«rcoH<€9uene,(2)remoio 
beant figuras, qu» his muniantur regu- remore^ur antecedent, non autozn potito 


Digitized by Google 



37G 


APPENDIX. 


Disjunctive and Hypothetical Syllogisms Proper. 

Aristotle ignores the,se forms, and be was right.® His followers, 
Tlieoplirastus and Eudenius, with the Stoics, introduced them into 
Logic as coordinate with the regular syllogism ; and their views 
have been followed, with the addition of new errors, up to the pre- 
sent hour. In fact, all that has been said of them has been wrong. 

1 ", These arc not composite by contrast to the regular syllogism, 
but more simple. 

2°, If inferences at all, these arc Immediate and not mediate. 

3°, But they are not argumentations but preparations (explica- 
tions) for argumentation.^ They do not deal with the quresitum, — 
do not settle it ; they only put the question in the state required 
for the .syllogistic process ; this, indeed, they are frequently u.sed 
to supersede, as placing the matter in a light which makes denial or 
doubt impo.ssible ; and their own process is so evident that they 
might, except for the sake of a logical, an articulate, development 
of all the steps of thought, be safely omitted, as is the case with the 
quajsitum itself. For example : — 


consrquentff ponilur autfccdaiit . . 

§ 28. VideAmua apecialiua ; contra 
primam regiilam aic pcccatur : 

Si Chtnensfg sunt AMidiometani, sunt 

At won tunf Mahomrianif 
Ergo non sunt infidelfS^ 

“ nam conclusio hie eat abaurda ! Ve- 
mm ai praxiicatum concluaionia aumatur 
particulariter, nulla eat abaurditaa, ai 
autom generaliter, turn evadunt quatuor 
termiuL § 9. Kodem exemplo aecunda 
regula etlam illustratur, aed RHsumemua 
aliud ex Weiaio, d. 1. 

Si miUs fst dortus, novit Ubros (nempo 
flicut eruditi aolent). 

Sfd novit lihros (acil. lit alii bominea, 
etiam indocti, noHae aolent). 

Ergo milfs doetus. 

“ Hicc concluaio itidem pro falaa babe- 
tur ! Sc<l jam indii^vimua in addita 
parcnthcai veram cauaam, nempo qua- 
tuor terroinos, quodai aiitem medius 
torminua codem aenau aedpiatur, ac in 
ayllogismo formalitcr propoaito queat 
minor probari, turn concluaio erit veria- 


aima, idque virtute pitomiasarum. § 30. 
Omnia igitur error exinde babet ori- 
ginem, quod quantitatem pnwlicati rid 
non intelligant, vel non obaen*ent ; ai 
igitur hunc lapaum erites, objecta ox- 
empla omnia, quolia etiam Weisiua d. 1. 
commemorat, facile diluea.” — E d. 

a Cf, Titiua, Ars Cogitandi^ c. xii. § 7. 
" SyllogismuBDifljunctivua eat enthymo- 
ma aine inajorc, bla, orationc diajuncta 
ct poaitiva, propositum, . . . § 17. 
Conditionalia ecu Hypotheticua nihil 
aliud eat quam enthymeina vel aine 
majore, vel minore, bU, priroa acil. vice, 
conditionalitor, aecunda, pure, propoai- 
tum. § 20. Sequitur nullum pcculiaro 
concludendi fundamentum vol formam 
circa Sylk>gi8mo8 Conditionales occur* 
ren*, nam argumentationea imperfectaa, 
Rfleoque materiam ayllogiamorum regu- 
larium iUi continent." — E d. 

$ Tbia I any, for, notwitbatanding 
what M. St Hilaire ho ably atates in re- 
futation of my ftaradox, I muat adhere 
to it aa imdiaproved. — Seo bla TranaU- 
tion of the Organon, vol. iv., p. 55. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


377 


1. Hypothetical (so called) Syllogism. Let the qumsitum or pro- 
blem be, to take the simplest instance, — Doen animal exist I Tliia 
que.stion is thus hypothetically prepared — If vian is, animal is. 
But [as is conceded] man is ; therefore, animal is. But here the 
question, though prepared, is not solved ; for the opponent may 
deny the consequent, admitting the antecedent. It, therefore, i.s 
incumbent to show that the existence of animal follows that of 
7nan, which is done by a categorical syllogism. 

Animal, — : Man :¦ , Existent. 


2. Disjunctive (so called) Syllogi.sm. Problem — Is John mortal? 
Disjunctive syllogism — John is either mortal or immortal; but 
he is not immortal ; ergo, [and this, consequently, is admitted as a 
neec.ssary alternative], he is mortal. But the [alternative ante- 
cedent] may be denied, and the alternative con.sequent falls to the 
ground. It i.s, therefore, necessary to show either that he is not 
immortal, or, — the neces.sary alternative, — that he is mortal, which 
is done by categorical syllogism. 

John , Man ; » | : Immoiial, 


John » , Man ; ^ , Mortal. 


Hypothetical Inference. 

Inasmuch as a notion is thought, it is thought either as existing 
or as non-existing ; and it cannot be thought as existing unless it be 
thought to exist in this or that mode of being, which, consequently, 
affords it a ground, condition, or reason of exi.stence. This is 
merely the law of Reason and Consequent ; and the hypothetical 
inference is only the limitation of a suppo.sed notion to a certain 
mode of Ijcing, by which, if posited, its existence i.s affirmed ; if 
sublated, its existence is denied. For examj)le. If K is, it is B ; hut 
A is, &c. 

Again, we may think the existence of B (consequently of A B) 
as dependent upon C, and C as dependent upon D, and so forth. 
We, accordingly, may reason. If A. is B, and B is C, and C is D, &c. 

Disjunctive Syllogism Proper. 

(October 1818.) — Inasmuch as a notion is thought, it is thought 


Digitized by Google 



378 


APPENDIX. 


as determined by one or other, and only by one or other, of any 
two eontradietory attributes ; and in as mueh as two notions are 
thought as contradictory, the one or the other, and only the one 
or the other, is thought as a determining attribute of any other 
notion. This is merely the law of Excluded Middle. The dis- 
junctive inference is the limitation of a subject notion to the one or 
to the other of two predicates, thought as contradictories ; the 
affirmation of the one inferring the negation of the other, and 
vice verstl. As, A is either B or not B, &c. Though, for the 
sake of brevity, we say A is either 'B or C or D, each of these 
must be conceived as the contradictory of every other ; as, B = | 
C I D, and so on with the others. 

Hypothetic.u.s (Conjunctive and Dis.tunctive Syllogism). 

(April 30, 1849). — These syllogisms appear to be only modifica- 
tions or corruptions of certain immediate inferences ; for they have 
only two terms, and obtain a third jiroposition only by placing 
the general rule of inference, (stating, of course, the possible alter- 
natives,) disguised, it is true, as the major premise. It is manifest 
that we might prefix the general rule to every mediate inference ; 
in which case a syllogism wotdd have four propositions ; or, at 
least, both premises merged in one complex proposition, thus — 

If A and C br either subject or predicate, \of the same term 7] they are 
both stibject or jrredicate of each other ; 

But B is the subject of A and predicate of B [C 1] ; 

.'. A is the predicate of C-“ 

Thus, also, a common hypothetical should have only two proposi- 
tions. Let us take the immediate inference, prefixing its rule, and 
we have, in all essentials, the cognate hypothetical syllogism. 

] . — Conjunctive Hyjjothetical. 

Alt B it {some 07- all) A ; A U men are {some) animals ; 

Home or all B exists; (A ll or some) men exist ; 

Therefore, some A exists. Therefore, some animals exist. 

a There iieeins to be an error here in hut B it A, and C B; therefore, Cit A. 
the authors M.S. It ie obvious that a This ia apparently what the author 
mediate inference may be exprcfwd in meana to express in a somewhat differ* 
the form of a hypothetical syllogism, ent form. — Ed. 

1 hue : If U ia A, and C it B, then C ta A ; 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


379 


Here it is evident that the first proposition merely contains the 
general rule, upon which all immediate inference of inclusion 
proceeds; to wit, that, the subjective part being, the subjective 
whole is, &C. 

Now, what is this but the Hypothetical Conjunctive ? 


// B w, A M ; 
Bui B My 
Therefort, A is. 


If man is, animal is ; 
But man is ; 
T/urffore, animal is. 


2. — Hypothetical Disjunctives. 


B is either A or nol A y 
But B is A y 

Therefore, B is not not-K. 


Man is either animal or non- 
animal y 

But man is animal ; 

Therefore, is not non-animal. 


Stating this hypothetically, we may, of course, resolve the for- 
mal contradictory into the material contrary. But this is wholly 
extialogical. 


Hypothetical and Disjunctive Syllogisms. 

(1848 or 1849.) — The whole antecedent must be granted ; and 
there cannot be two propositions inferred. In Categorical Syllo- 
gisms, the antecedent is composed of the major and minor premises, 
and there is only one simple conclusion, (though this may, in the 
second and third figures, vary). So in Hypothetical and Disjunc- 
tive Syllogisms the whole antecedent is the two clauses of the 
first proposition ; and the whole inference is the first and second 
clauses of the second proposition, erroneously divided into minor 
proposition and conclusion. 

(January 1 850.) — The Medium or Explicative may be indefinitely 
various, according to the complexity of the Explicand ; and so may 
the Explicate. The explicative and the explicate change places 
in difl’erent explications. There is, in fact, no proper medium- 
explicative or conclusion-explicate. 

(January 1850.) — In Disjunctives there is always at lea.st double 
the number of syllogisms (positive and negative) of the di.sjunct 
members ; and in all syllogisms where the disjunct members are 
above two, as there is thus afiforded the possibility of disjunctive 


Digitized by Google 



3S0 


APPENDIX. 


explicates, there is another half to be added. Thu.s, if there be 
two di.sjiinct members, as A — x B C, there are four syllogisms, 
but all of an absolute conclusion, — explicate. But if there be three 
disjunct members, as A — x B C D, in that case there are six 
absolute explicates, three positive and three negative, and, more- 
over, three disjunctive-positive conclusions, — explicates, after a ne- 
gative explicative, and so on. 

Hvpothetical Syllogism. — Canons. 

(February 1 8.50). — I. For Breadth, — The extensive whole or class 
being universally posited or sublated, every subjacent part is posited 
or sublated ; or for Depth, — All the comprehensive wholes being 
posited or sublated, the comprehended parts are universally posited 
or sublated. 

II. For Breadth, — Any .subjacent part being posited or sublated, 
the extensive whole or class is partially posited or sublated ; or 
for Depth, — Any comprehensive whole being posited or sublated, 
the comprehended parts (or part) are, pro tanto, posited or sub- 
lated, — Conversion and Eestrietion. 

III. If one contradictory be posited or sublated, the other is 
sublated or posited, — Contradiction. 

IV. If some or a part only of a notion be posited or sublated, 
all the rest (all other some) is sublated or posited — Integration. 

V. If the same under one correlation be posited or sublated, so 
under the other, — Equipollence. 

VI. Iaw of Mediate Inference,® — Syllogism. 

Mem. — The some in the cxplicand is, (as in the Conversion of 
proposition.s), to be taken in the explicative as the same some. 
There is thus an inference equally from consequent to antecedent, 
as from antecedent to consequent.^ 

HYPOTHETICALS OR ALTERNATIVE!?. 

Conjunctive, (HvroTiiETicAiA emphatically), and Disjunctive, 
(Ai.teknatives emphatically.) 

(August 1852.) 

Quantification, — A ny. 

Affirmative, — Any, {Anything, Aught), contains under it every 
a See above, p. 285 . — Kd. B See above, p. 375 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


.381 


positive quantification, — All or Ecery, — Some at least, — Sovie 
only, — This, These. (Best.) 

Negative, — Not any, None, No, {Nothing, Naught), is equiva- 
lent to the most exclusive of the negations. All not; All, or every 
not; Not one, and goes beyond the following, which are only partial 
negations, — Not all; Not some; Some not. (Worst.) 

Affirmative, — Any, a highest genus and best; not so Negative 
— Not any, — a lowest species, and worst. Therefore can restrict, — 

subalternate in the former, not in the latter. 

1 2 

— .*'1 ny, (all or every, — some). Some not, or not some, or not all — 

Pure affirmative. ' . so; ne only, (.lef) 

Mixed affirmative and negative. 

3 

All or every not, not one, not any. 

Pure negativa 

If any {every) M be an {tome) A, and any {every) A an {tome) S, then it 
any {every) M an S ; and v. v., if no {not any) A be any S, and any M 
tome A, then u no M any S. 

(On one alternative), tome M being some A, and all A tome S, tome 
M it tome S. 

(On the other), no A being any S, and every M tome A, no M it any S. 

If, (on any possibility), M it, some A it; or, v. v., if no A it, no M it. 

.’. (on one alternative), (in this actuality), tome M being, tome A it. 
on the other), no A being, no M it. 

Possible M : ,¦ , A or A: ¦ : M. Supposition of universal Pos- 

sibility. In any cate. 

Actual M , A or A : — ; A. Assertion of particular Actuality. 

In this case. 

From Possible, wo can descend U> Actual ; from Any, to Some ; 
but Not any being lowest or worst, we can go [no] lower. 

Tlie Possible indifferent to Affirmation or Negation, it contains 
both implicitly. But when we descend to the Actual, (and Poten- 
tial I), the two qualities emerge. This explains much in both 
kinds of Hypotheticals or Alternatives, — the Conjunctives and 
Disjunctives. 

Higher classes, — Possible, Actual — Semper, quandocunque, 
tunc, nunc — Ubicunque, ubique, ibi, hoc — Any, all, some, — In all, 
every, any, case, in this case — Conceivable, real. 


Digitized by Google 



382 


APPENDIX. 


Rules of Hypothetical Syllogisms. 

1. Universal Rule of Restriction. — What is thought of all is 
thought of some, — what is thought of the whole higher notion, 
(genus), is thought of all and each of the lower notions, (special or 
individual). 

2. General Rule of both Hypotheticals. — What is thought (im- 
plictly) of all, the Possible, (genus), is thought (explicitly) of all 
and each, the Actual, (spwcies). 

3. Special Rule of Conjunctives. — What is thought as consequent 
on every Possible, is thought as consequent on every Actual, ante- 
cedent. 

4. Special Rule of Disjunctives. — Wliat is thought as only Pos- 
sible, (alternatively), is thought as only Actual, (alternatively). 

5. Most Special Rule of Conjunctives 

6. Most Special Rule of Disjunctives 

Hypotheticals— Examples Unquantified. 

(Higher to Lower.) 

Affirmative. Negative. 

If tht genut is, the sjiecift it. If the genus is not, the species is not. 

If the stronger can, the weaker can. If the stronger cannot, the weaker 

cannot. 


(Lower to Higher.) 

If the species is, the genus is. If the species is not, the genus is not. 

If the weaker can, the stronger can. If the weaker cannot, the stronger 

cannot. 


(Equal to Equal.) 


If triangle, to trilateral. 

Such poet Homer, such poet Virgil. 

Where {when) the carcase is, there 
{then) are the flies. 

If Socrates Ije the son of Sophronis- 
cus, Sophroniscus is the father 
of Socrates. 

If equals he added to equals, the 
wholes art equal. 


If A he father of B, B is son of A ; 

.'. A being father of B, B is son of A ; 

.•. B not being son of A, A is not 
father of B. 

If the angles be proportional to the 
sides of a A; 

.•. An equiangular will be an equi- 
lateral A. 

If wheresoever the. carcase is, there 
will the eagles he gathered to- 
gether. (Mattb. xxiv. 28 ). 

.'. If here the carcase is, here, ic. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


383 


a)— Conjunctive Hypothetical. 

I). Ij kbeT), it u^¦,. -A ^ ^ 

( A, not being A, is not D ; 

Jn other words, A is either D or not A D. 
Identity and Contradiction. 


2). If ^ be k, t< it not non-k ; .% 


B, being A, it not non-k ; 
B, being non-k, it not A ; 
In other words— B it either A or non-k. 
Excluded Middle. 


'S). If Bhe not A, it it non-k ; | . 


B not being k, it non-k ; 
B being non-k, it not A ; 
In other words — B it either not A or not non-k. 
Excluded Middle. 


4X If Bhe not B, it it not ^ not A ; 

¦' ’ ' ) E fertn</ A,wD ; 

/ n other tvordt — E i* either not D A, o>' A D. 
Contradiction and Identity. 


b).— Disjunctive Hypotheticals. 

If Bhe either k or non-k ; 1 ® “ "“f ^ 

) B being non-k, it not A. 

Excluded Middle. 


" If” me&ns suppose that, — in case that, — on the supposition — 
— hypothesis — under the condition — under the thought that, — it 
being supposed possible ; 

&c., means then, — therefore, — in that case, &c., &c. — in 
actuality either. 

Only, properly, in both Conjunctives and Disjunctives, two con- 
tradictory alternatives. For contrary alternatives only material, 
not formal, and, in point of fact, either A or B or C means A or 
non-k, B or non-B, C or non-G. 

The minor premise, on the common doctrine, a mere materi- 
ality. Formally, — logically, it is a mere differencing of the conclu- 
sion, which is by formal alternative afforded. 


Digitized by Google 



38+ 


APPENDIX. 


1.) In Hypotheticals, (Conjunctive and Disjunctive), two or three 
hypotheses. Tlie first is in the original supposition of possibi- 
lity. {If B he A, it is not non- A. — If B be either A or non- A). 
The second (and third) is in the alternative suppositions of actua- 
lity (.•. either if B be A, it is not non-A, or if B be non-A, it is 
not A — If B be A, it is 7iot non-A, or if B he non-A, it is not 
A). (Possibly, — by possible supposition) If man is, animal is; 

(actually) Man being, animal is; (or) animal not being, man 
is not. 

1) . Possibility — a genus indifferent to negative and affirmative. 
These two species of Possibility, to wit two Actuals, — an actual yes 
and an actual no. The total formal conclusion is, therefore, of 
tw'o contradictories. This e.xplains why, in Conjunctive and Dis- 
junctive Hypotheticals, there are two alternative consequents, and 
only one antecedent 

2) . In Hypotheticals (Conjunctive and Disjunctive) a division of 
genus in the first supposition into two contradictories, — species. 
The inference, therefore, one of subaltemation or restriction. 

3) . In Hypotheticals, (Conjunctive and Di.sjunctive), two alter- 
native contradictory conclusions — the fonn giving no preference 
between the two, the matter only determining, (other immediate 
inferences have only one determinate conclusion, and all mediate 
syllogism has virtually only one). Formally, therefore, we cannot 
categorically, detenu inatcly, assert, and assert exclusively, either 
alternative, and make a minor separate from the conclusion. This 
only materially’ possible; for we know not, by the laws of thought, 
whether a certain alternative is, knowuig only that one of two 
alternatives niu.st be. Formally, therefore, only an immediate 
inference, and that alternative double. 

4) . Hypothetical, (Conjunctive and Disjunctive), reasoning more 
marking out, — predetermining, how a thing is to be proved 
than proving it. 

5) . Thus, three classes of inference : 1“ Simple Immediate In- 
ference. — 2°, Complex Immediate Inference, (Hypotheticals Con- 
junctive and Di.sjunctive). — 3°, Syllogisms Proper, Mediate Infer- 
ence. 

6) . If we quantify the terms, even the formal inference breaks 
down. 

7) . The only difference between the first propo.sition and the 


Digitized by Google 



Al’PENDIX. 


385 


two latter, is the restriction or subaltemation. These last should, 
therefore, be reduceil to one, and made a conclusion or restriction. 
The genera and species are of the most common and notorious 
kind.s, as Pos.nble and Actunl , — WhereiTr, Here, &c. — Whenever, 
Nmo, — All or Evcr>/, Some, This, &c. The commonness and noto- 
riety of this subordination is the cause why it has not been sig- 
nalised ; and if signalised, and overtly expressed, Hypotheticals 
might be turned into Categoricals. It is better, however, to leave 
them as immediate inferences. For it would be found awkward 
and round-about to oppose, for example, the Possible to the 
Actual, as determining a difference of term.s. (See IMolinajus, Elem. 
Log., L. i. tr. iii. p. 95, and Pacius, In Org., Be Sgll. Hgp., p. 533.) 
The example of the Cadaver there given, shows the approximation 
to the ordinary Hypotheticals. They may stand, in feet, either for 
Categoricals or Hypotheticals. 

8) . Disjunctives — (Possibly) A is cither B or noiv-'R ; (Actu- 
ally) A M either, &c. 

9) . The doctrine in regard to the Universal Quantity, and the 
Affirmative Quality (.see Krug, Logik, §§ 57, 83, 86, pp. 171, 264, 
275), of the supposition, proposition, of Conjunctive (?) and Dis- 
junctive Hypotheticals, is solved by my theory of Possibility. In 
it is virtually said, (whatever quantity and quality be the clauses) — 
“ on any possible supposition." (On the Quality v. Knig, Logik, 
57, p. 172. Pacius, In Org., p. 533. Molinreus, Elem. Log., 1. c.) 

10) . Possibly, — problematically includes as species the actual 
affirmative, and the actual negative. It will thus be superfluous 
to enounce a negative in opjwsition to an affirmative alternative ; 
for thus the possible would be brought down to the actual ; and 
the whole syllogism be mere tautological repetition. 

11) . The quantified terms, if introduced, must either be made 
determinate, to suit the Hypotheticals, or must ruin their infer- 
ence. For example — If all or some man be some animal, we 
must be able to say. But some animal is not, therefore man 
{any or some) is not. But here some animal, except definiti.sed 
into the same some animal, would not warrant the required infer- 
ence. And so in regard to other quantifications, which the logicians 
have found it necessary to annul. 

12) . The minor proposition may be either categorical or hypo- 
thetical. (Sec Krug, Ijogik, § 83, p. 264. Heerebord, Instil. 

VOL. II. 2 B 


Digitized by Google 



38U 


APPENDIX. 


Logicar. Synopsis, L. ii. c. 1 2, pp. 266, 2C7-) In my way of stat- 
ing it : — If man is, animal is, If man is (or man being), 
animal is. 

13). Of notions in the relation of sub-and-superordination, (as, 
In opposite ways Depth and Breadth, Containing and Contained), 
absolutely and relatively, the lower being afidnned, the higher are 
(partially) affirmed ; and the higher being (totally) denied, the 
lower are (totally) denied. A, E, I, 0, U, Y may represent the 
descending series. 

The 6rst proposition is conditional, complex, and alternative ; 
we should expect that the second should be so likewise. But this 
is only satisfied on my plan ; whereas, in the common, there is a 
second and a third, each categorical, simple, and determinate. 

The subaltemation is frequently double, or even triple, to wit, 
1 ”, From the Possible to the Actual. 2°, (for example) From every- 
where to het'e, or this place, or the place by name. 3°, From all 
to some, &c. — in fact, this inference may be of various kinds. 

The peTd\r)\fn^ of Aristotle may mean the determination, — the 
subaltemation ; the Kara noiortp’a may refer to the specification 
of a particular quality or proportion under the generic ; and the 
npocrkg^is of Theophrastus (for the reading in Aristotle should 
be corrected) may correspond to the Kara TioioTrpra. 

There is no nece.ssary connection, formally considered, between 
the anteccdetit and consequent notions of the H}qK)thetical major. 
Tliere is, consequently, no possibility of an abstract notation ; their 
dependence is merely supposed, if not material. Hence the logi- 
cal rule, — Propositio comlitionalis nihil ponit in esse. (See Krug, 
Logik, § 57, j). 166.) But on the formal supposition, — on the ca.se 
thought, what are the rules ? 

We should distinguish in Hyjwtheticals between a propositional 
antecedent and consequent, and a syllogistic A and G ; and each 
of the latter is one proposition, containing an A and C. 

The antecedent in an inference .should be that which enables u.s 
formally to draw the conclusion. Show in Catcgoricals and in 
Immediate liiferciices. On thi.s princqdc, the conclusion in a 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


387 


Hypothetical will contain what is commonly called the minor 
proposition with the conclusion proper ; but it will not be one and 
determinate, but alternative. 

If there were no alternation, the inference would follow imme- 
diately from the fundamental proposition ; and there being an al- 
ternative only makes the conclusion alternatively double, but does 
not make a mediate inference. 

To make one alternative determinate is extralogical ; for it is 
true only as materially proved. 1°, The splitting, therefore, of the 
conclusive proposition into two, — a minor and a conclusion proper, 
is wholly material and extralogical ; so also, 2°, Is the multiply- 
ing of one reasoning into two, and the dividing between them of 
the alternative conclusion. 


Errors of logicians, touching Hypothetical and Disjunctive Rea- 
sonings : — 

1“, That [they] did [not] see they were mere immediate infer- 
ences, 

2°, Most modems that both Hypothetical 

3^ That both alternative reasonings in one syllogism. 

4°, Mistook a part of the alternative conclusion for a minor 
premise. 

6°, Made this a distinct part, (minor premise), by introducing 
material considerations into a theory of form. 

6°, Did not see what was the nature of the immediate inference 
in both, — how they resembled and how they differed 

B.-HISTORICAL NOTICES. 

(CONJUNCnVB AND DISJUNCTIVE.) 

I. Aristotle. 

(August 1852.) 

Aristotle, {Anal. Pr. L. i. c. 32, § 5, p. 262, Pacii,) describes the 
process of the Hypothetic Syllogism, (that called by Alexander 
St 5\o)v), but denies it to be a syllogism. Therefore his syllogisms 
from Hypothesis are something different This has not been no- 
ticed by Mansel, Waitz, 

Thus literally ; — “ Again, if man existing, it be necessary that 


Digitized by Google 



388 


APPENDIX. 


animal exist, and if animal, tliat substance; man existing, it is 
necessary tliat substance exLst. As yet, there is, liowever, no syl- 
logistic proces.s ; for the propositions do not stand in the relation 
we have stated. But, in such like cases, we are deceived, by reason 
of the necessity of something resulting from what has been laid 
down ; whilst, at the same time, the syllogism is of things neces- 
siiry. But the Necessary is more extensive than the Syllogism ; 
for though all syllogism be indeed necessary, all necessary is not 
syllogism.” Why not? 1°, No middle. 2°, No quality, — affirmor- 
tion or negation ; problem, also not assertor}’, — hypothetical not 
syllogistic. 3’, No quantity. Compare also An.Pr. K i. c. 24. 

Aristotle, {Anal. Post., L. I c. 2, § 15, p. 418 ; c. 10, §§ 8, 9, 
p. 438) makes Thesis or Position tlie genus opposed to Axiom, 
and containing under it, as .specie.s, V , U tjpothesis or Supposition ; 
and, 2°, Definition. Hypothesis is that thesis which assumes 
one or other alternative of a contradiction. Definition is that 
thesis which neither affirms nor denies. Hypothetical, in Aris- 
totle’s sense, is thus that which affirms or denies one alternative 
or other, — which is not indiflerent to yes or no, — which is not 
possibly either, and, consequently, includes lx>th. Hypotheticals, 
as involving a positive and negative alternative, are thus, in Aris- 
totle’s sense, rightly named, if divided ; but, in Aristotle’s sense, 
as complete, they are neither propositions nor syllogisms, as not 
affirming one alternative to the exclusion of the other.“ 


II. — Ammonius Hkrmi^ 

I. Ammonius Hermiae, on Aristotle Of Enouncement, Intro- 
duction, f 3. ed. Aid. 154G, f 1. ed. Aid. 1503. After dlstingui.sh- 


ing the five sjxxies of Speech, 

o [Whether the fx Ilifpo- 

thfgi of Ariatotle are corrcMpomlcnt to 
the orrliuarj' HyjK^thetical Sylh*git^uj. 

For the aftirmntive, see PaciuK, Com, 
in Onj. An. /*Wor., L. i. cc. 23, 29, 44, 
I«p. 153, 177, 194. St Hilaire, Transla- 
tion of Onjanonf voL ii. pp. 107, 139, 
178. 

For the uegative, »ee PiccartuB, In 
Ortj. A a. /'nor, L. i. cc. 40, 4 1 , 42, p. 500. 
NeltloliuH, De Cttu Ortj. Arist. P, iii. c. 2, 
pp. 38, 45., (1607.) Kt.HikeimauD, Oyxm, 
pp. 766, 767. Scheibler, 0}>cra Lo>jica 


according to the Peripatetics, — 

Tract, P. ir. c. x. tit. 2, p. 548. Bura- 
gerstliciuB, Ltnj. L. ii. cc. 12, 14, 

pp. 263, 270, 275. Bitter, iittch. lUr 
Phil. iii. p. 96. (Kng. Tr., ]>. 80), 
Bnimm, Dial. L. vii. cc. 12, 13, 

pp. 492, 503. Molioicua, Elrmtnta IjO- 
fpea, p, 95 et wq. Waitz, Org. i. pp. 
427, 433. Cf. Alexander, In A n. Prior., 
fl'. 88, 109. PhilopunuB, In An. Prior., 
ff. 00‘, 60'\ S7^ 88. Anonymua, Dc 
Sgllogirmo, i. 44^ M.u'tmtiuuft, /a 
Prior., f. 17^ Ammonius, Indc InterjK, 
S**. Blvinmidiw, Epit. Log. c. 36.) 


Digitized by Google 


AI’PENDIX. 


389 


the Vocative, the Imperative, the Interrogative, the Optative, and 
the Enunciative or lissertive, — having further stated the corres- 
ponding division by the Stoics, ami having finally shown tliat 
Aristotle, in this book, limited the discussion to the last kind, that 
alone being recipient of truth and falsehood, he thus proceeds : — 
‘‘Again, oi Assertive speech, (airoffiavTiKOv Xoyov), there are two 
species ; the one called Categoric [or Predicative}, the other 
II gpothetic [or Suppositive}. The Categoric denotes, that some- 
thing does or does not belong to something : as when we say^ 
Socrates is walking, Socrates is not walking ; for we predi- 
cate walking of Socrates, sometimes affirmatively, sometimes nega- 
tively. Tlie Hypothetic denotes, that something being, .something 
[else] is or is not, or something not being, something [else] is 
not or is : As wlien we .say. If man be, animal also is, — If he 
be man, he is not stone, — If it be not dag, it is night, — If it be 
not day, the sun has not risen. 

“ The Categoric is the only species of Assertive speech treated 
of by Aristotle, as that alone perfect in itself, and of utility in 
demonstration ; whereas Hypothetic syllogisms, usurping [usually] 
without demonstration the [minor] proposition, called the Tran- 
sumption, or Assumption, and sometimes even a [major premise] 
Conjunctive or Di.sjunctive, requiring proof, draw their persuasion 
from hypotheses, sliould any one [I read ii Ti? for '^ti?,] con- 
cede their primary siippositioms. If, then, to the establishment of 
such suppositions, we should employ a second hypothetic syllo- 
gism, — in that case, we should require a further establislimcnt 
for confirmation of the suppositions involved ui it ; for this 
third a fourth would again be necessary ; and so on to infinity, 
should we attempt by hypotheses to confirm hypothese.s. But 
to render the demonstration complete and final, it is manifest 
that there is needed a categoric syllogism to prove the point in 
question, without any foregone supposition. Hence it is, that 
Categoric [reasonings] are styled Syllogisms absolutely ; whereas 
Hypothetic [reasonings] of every kind are always denominated 
Syllogisms from hypothesis, and never Syllogisms simply. Add 
to this, that Hypothetic enouncements are made up of Categoric. 
For they express the consequence or opposition {a.Ko\ov6Lav rj 
Staoraaiv) of one Categoric propisition and another, uniting 
them with each other, by either the Conjunctive or Disjunctive par- 


Digitized by Google 



390 


APPENDIX. 


tide, ((TVfnrXeKTiKu ^ Sui^evKTiKw OTn'Secr/xo)), in order to 
show that they constitute tof^ether a single enouncement. For 
these reasons, therefore, Aristotle has only considered, in detail, 
the Categoric species of Assertive speech.” 

III. — Anonymous Scholion.“ 

In Hypothetic Syllogi.sms, the first [I] are those of two terms, 
[a] Conjunctive, or [b] Disjunctive, (opoi ot onnoj/i/icpoi ^ Sia- 
XfXvfievoi) ; then follow [II] the two [classes of] syllogisms with 
three, and these conjunctive terms. 

[I. a], “ There are four syllogisms through the Return (17 in- 
duoBoi) on the prior (o irporepo’;, 6 trpo}To<;) [or antecedent clause 
of the hypothetical proposition], and four through it on the pos- 
terior (6 Bevrepo^, 6 eo^oTO?). For the terms are taken, either both 
affirmatively or both negatively. And the return upon the prior is 
ponent (Kara ffecriu) upon the posterior tollent (Kara dvaipeau'. 
For example [the return upon the prior] : — 

(C. 1/ U; (Return) but Ait; (Conclusion, Mrrc/or(, 

Bit. 

(2) . 1/ A is, B is not ; but A is ; thn-rfore, B is not. 

(3) . 1/ A is not, B is ; but A is not, thersfore, B is. 

(4) . It A is not, B is not : but A is not ; therefore, B is not. 

“ The return upon the posterior : — 

(1) . If A is, B is ; but B is not ; therefore, A is not. 

(2) . If A is, B is not ; but B ; therefore, A is not. 

(3) . If A is not, B is ; but B is not ; therefore, A is. 

(4) . If A is not, B is not; but B is; therefore, A too is. 

[b.] "Following those of conjunctive, are .syllogisms of di.sjunc- 
tive, terin.s. In these, the return is upon either [clause] indifferently. 
For example : If it must he that either A is or B is ; [in the one 
case], B is not, therefore, A is ; or, [in the other], A is not, there- 
fore B is. 

[II.] “ Of three conjunctive terms, there are [in the figures taken 
together] eight syllogisms, through a return on the prior, and eight 
[sixteen] P through a return on the posterior [clause]. For the 

o In WaitK, Org. j., pp. 9, 10. placed first, acconling to the common 

/B It would seem U)al the author here, practice of the Greeks, or the major 
and in the last sentence, disct>unta alto- prior, in Aristotelic theory), he should 
gethcr the first figure, jmzrled, appa* accord the designation of first, 
renlly, to which iiremisc, (the minor 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


391 


three terms are correlated {(rwriOei/raC), either all affirmatively, 
or some ; and here either the third alone, or the third and second, 
or the second alone, negatively. Again, either all are negatively 
correlated, or some ; and here either the third alone, or the third 
and second, or the second alone, affirmatively. In this manner 
the correlation [in each figure] is eightfold ; taking for exemplifi- 
cation only a single mood [in the several figures] : — 

//¦ A w, B w : 
i/B is, C is ; 

If A is, therejors, C is. 

This is of the first figure. For the middle cnllative term 
(6 (Tvvaymv opo^ pecro<i) is twice taken, being the consequent 
(6 \Tjyci)v) in the former conjunctive [premise] (to irporepov 
(Twr)pp€vov), the antecedent (6 Tjyovpevo<;) in the latter. Where- 
fore, these syllogi.sms are indemonstrable,” not requiring reduction 
(17 ai'dXva’is:) for demonstration. Tlie other moods of the first 
figure are, as has been said, similarly circumstanced. 

“ The second figure is that in which the collative term [or 
middle] (o crvvdyoiv) holds the same relation to each of the col- 
lated [or extreme] terms, inasmuch as it stands the antecedent of 
both the conjunctive [premises], except that in the one it is affirm- 
ative; in the other, negative. Wherefore, when reduced to the 
first figure, they demonstrate, as is seen, through the instance of a 
single mood composed of affirmative collated terms. As : — 

1/ A is, B is ; 

If A is not, C is ; 

IfB is not, therfjore, C is. 

“ This is reduced to the first figure in the following manner : — 
Whether it has the collated terms, both affirmative, or both nega- 
tive, or both dissimilar to the reciprocally pl.iccd collative term, 
there is taken in the reduction the opposite [and converse] of the 
prior conjunctive [premise] ; and the latter is applied, in order 
that the opposite of the consequent in the former conjunctive [pre- 
mise] may find a place in the foresaid mood. As : — 

¦ If Bis not, A is not ; 

If X is not, G is; 

IfB is not, therefore, C is. 

“ This it behoved to show. 

• Vido Apuleiu*. [De. Doyrn. Plat. iii. p. 37. Eim. Cl. Discussions, p. 838. — Ed.] 


Digitized by Coogle 



392 


APPENDIX. 


“ The third figure is that iii 'whicli the collative tenn holds the 
same relation to each of the collated teims, being the consequent 
in either conjunctive [premise] affirmatively and negatively, as in 
the example of a single mood again consisting of affirmative col- 
lated terms. Tlius ; — 

If A »>, B w ; 

ifG is, B i* nut ; 

If A u, therefore, C is not. 

“ The reduction of this to the first figure is thus effected. The 
opposite [a converse E] of the second conjunctive [j>remise] is 
taken along with the first conjunctive [premise], and the ante- 
cedent of the former is applied to the opposite of the latter’s con- 
sequent ; as in the foresaid mood. Thus : — 

//'A is, B is ; 

Ij B is, C is not ; 

If K is, therefore, C is 7tot. 

“ All this requires to be shown concretely. As in the first figure 
[first mootl] ; — 

1/ dny is, Nf/ht is ; 

If I it/ht is, visible objects are seen ; 

If day is, therefore, visible objects are seen. 

“ Second figure, first mood : 

If day is, liyhi is ; 

If day is not, the sun is tinder the earth ; 

If light is not, the sun is \therefore\ under the earth. 

“ Keduction : 

If light is not, day is not ; 

If day is not, the sun is under the eatth ; 

If light, therefore, is not, the sun is under the earth. 

" Third figure, first mood : 

If day is, light is; 

If things visible are unseen, light is not ; 

If day, therefore, is, things visible are not unseen. 

“ Tliere arc eight moods of the second figure, and eight of the 
third ; two composed of affirmatives, two of negatives, four of dis- 
similars, with a similar or dissimilar collative. 

“ End of Aristotle’s Analytics.” 


Digitized by Google 


Al'l'EKDTX. 


393 


Relative to the translation from the Greek interpolator on 
Hypothetical Syllogisms, in Waitz, {Org. L, pp. 9, 10); and in 
particular to the beginning of [II.] 

Better thus : — In all the Figures : — the quality of the syllogism 
is either Pure , — and here two, viz., one affirmative and one nega- 
tive ; or Mixed , — and here six, viz., three in which affirmation, and 
three in which negation, has the preponderance. 

The following are thus arranged ; — 



First Figure. 

Second Figure. 

Third Figure. 

/ All 

// A is, B in; 

// B M, A it ; 

If A it. B IJ ; 

i A 

I/n w, Cu; 

If B it, C it ; 

IfC it. Bit; 

a 

V 

"3 

.*. 1/ A w, C it. 

,\ If A it, C it. 

If A it, C IJ. 

o 

^ 1,2 

If A M, B M ; 

If B it, A w ; 

If A it, B IJ ; 

S. B 

If H i*y C it not ; 

If B it, C it not ; 

If C it not, B iff ; 

i 

.*. If A itf C it not. 

If A it, C M n^)t. 

,\ If A it, C it not. 


If A it, B iJ not ; 

If Bit not, A it ; 

If A it, B IJ not : 

•1 ^ 

If Vt it not, C it ; 

If B it not, C it ; 

If C IJ, B IJ not ; 

(S 

1 

If A it, C it. 

If A IJ, C it. 

.*. If A it,C it. 

t5 




¦< 2,3 

If A it not, B w ; 

If B IJ, A tJ not : 

If A it not, B it ; 

D 

If Hit, C it: 

//B«, Cij; 

// C «, B IJ ; 


If A it not, C it. 

, \ If A it not, C it. 

If A iJ not, C if. 

All 

If A it not, B it not. 

If B IJ not, A it not ; 

If A it not, B if not 

E 

If B it not, C it not ; 

If B IJ not, C it not ; 

If C it not, B it not ; 

i‘ 

If A it not. C it not. 

If Bit not, C it not; 

,\ If A it not, C it not. 

£ t 1.2 

ns o ' 

If A it not, B it not ; 

If B IJ not, A it not. 

If A IJ not, B it not. 

sap 

£. a. 

If B it not, C it : 

If B IJ not, C IJ ; 

If C if, B IJ not ; 

t s 

If A it not, C it. 

If A ij not, C it. 

,\ If A it not, C iJ. 

i s 1,3 

If A it not, B M/ 

If B ij, A it not ; 

If A it not, B IJ / 


If B it, C it not : 

If B IJ, C IJ not ; 

If C IJ iio(, B IJ ; 

: *§ 
.2 •** 

/. If A it not, C it not. 

/. If A it not, C it not. 

If Ait iiofjC it not. 

§> “ 2,3 

// A a, B it not ; 

IfBit not, A it ; 

If A it, B IJ not ; 

» H 

IfHit not, C it not; 

If B f J not, C f J not ; 

If C IJ not, B IJ not ; 


If A it, C it not. 

If A ij, C IJ 110/. 

,\ If A it, Q it not. 


Tliese eight syllogisms are all affirmative, the negation not being 
attiiched to the principal copula® If, therefore, the negation be 


a See Lovaaicnaes, In Arist. Dial,, Tract, de Jlypotheticic Syllogitmit, p. 299. 


Digitized by Coogle 



394 


APPENDIX. 


attached to one or other premise, there will be sixteen negative 
syllogisms, in all twenty-four. The negatives are, however, awk- 
ward and uselesa — (See Lovanienses, p. 301.) 

But each of these twenty-four syllogisms can receive twelve 
different forms of predesignation, corresponding to the twelve moods 
of the simple categorical ; according to which they are arranged 
and numbered. It is hardly necessary to notice that the order 
of the premises is in Comprehension, after the Greek fashion of the 
scholiast. 



This is exemplified in the Syllogism E of the preceding table, 
thus : 

1. 1/ all A tj! not, all B M not ; if all B it not, all C ii not ; .'.if all A 

is not, all B is not. 

2. If soms A is not, all B is not ; if all B is nrtt, some C is not ; .*. if 

some A is not, some C is not. 

3. If some A is not, all B is not ; if all B is not, all C is not ; .'. if some 

A is not, all C is not. 

4. If all A is not, all B is not ; if all B is not, some C is not ; if all 

A is not, some C is not. 

6. If all A is not, some B is not ; if all B is not, all C is not ; .'. if all 
A is not, all C is not. 

6. If some A is not, all B is not ; if some B is not, all C is not; if 

some A is not, all C is not. 

7. If all A is not, some B is not ; if all B is not, some C is not ; .'. if all 

A is not, some C is not. 

8. If some A is not, all B is not / if some B is not, all C is not ; .'. if some 

A is not, all G is not. 

9. If some A w not, some B is not ; if all B is not, all G is not ; if 

some A is not, all C is not. 

10. If all A is not, all B is not ; if some B is not, some G is not ; .'. if all 

A is not, some G is not. 

11. If some A is not, some B is not ; if all B is not, some C is not ; .'. if 

some A is not, some C is not. 

12. If some A is not, all B is not ; if some B is not, soms G is not ; .'. if 

some A is not, some C is not. 


Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX. 


395 


IX. 

SORITES. 

See above, Vol. I., p. 385.) 

(Without order.) 

All logicians have overlooked the Sorites of Second and Third 
Figures. 

In Sorites of the Second or Tliird Figure, every tenn forms a 
syllogism with every other through the one middle tenn. In 
Sorites of the First Figure, every Second term at most forms a 
syllogism with every other, through its relative middle term. 

No subordination in Sorites of Second or Third Figure, ergo 
no one dominant conclusion. 

Alias In First Figure, there being a subordination of notions, 

there may be a Sorites with different middles, (all, however, in a 
common dependency). In Second and Third Figures, there being 
no subordination of terms, the only Sorites competent is that by 
repetition of the same middle. In First Figure, there is a new 
middle term for every new progress of the Sorites ; in Second and 
Third, only one middle term for any number of extremes. 

In First Figure, a Syllogism only between every second term of 
the Sorites, the intermediate term constituting the middle term. 
In the others, every two propositions of the common middle term 
form a syllogism. 

Alias — There being no subordination in Second and Third 
Figures between the extremes, there, consequently, are — 

1°, No relations between extremes, except through the middle 
term. 

2°, There is only one possible middle term ; any number of others. 

3°, Every two of the terms, with the middle term, may form a 
syllogism. 

4’, No order. 

Before concluding this subject, I would correct and amplify tho 
doctrine in regard to tlie Sorites.- 

1°, I would state that, by the quantification of the Predicate, (of 

• InterpoLitiun in Lecturts. See above, Vol. I., p. 3S5 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



396 


APPENDIX. 


•which we are hereafter to treat, in reference to reasoning in 
general), there are two kinds of Sorites ; the’one descending from 
whole to part, — or ascending from part to whole ; the other pro- 
ceeding from whole to whole ; of which last it is now alone reciui- 
site to speak. It is manifest, that if we can find two notions 
wholly equal to a third notion, these notions will be wholly 
equal to each other. Thus, if all trilateral figure be identical ¦with 
all triangular figure, and all triangular figure -with all figure the 
sum of whose internal angles is equal to two right angles, then all 
figure, the sum of whose internal angles is equal to two right 
angles, and all trilateral figure, will also be identical, reciprocating, 
or absolutely convertible. We have thus a siinjile syllogism of 
absolute equation. On the same principle, if A and B, B and C, 
C and D, are absolutely e<juivalent, so also will be A and D. We 
may thus, in like manner, it is evident, have a Sorites of absolute 
equivalence. It is not, indeed, very easy always to find four or 
more terms or notions thus simply convertible. In geometry, we 
may carry out the concrete syllogism just stated, by adding the 
three following propositions ; — All figure, the sum of whose inter- 
nal angles is equal to two right angles, is all figure which can he 
bisected through only one angle ; — All figure which canbe bisected 
through only one angle, is all figure which, bisected through an 
angle and a side, gives two triangles ; and All figure which, thus 
bisected, gives two triangles, is all figure which, bisected through 
two sides, gives a triangle and a quadrangle, and so forth. In 
theology, j)erhaps, however, these series are more frequently to be 
found than in the other sciences. The following twelve ecjuivaleiit 
concepts constitute at once a good example of .such a Sorites, and 
at the same time exhibit a compendious view of the whole Calvin- 
istic doctrine. Tliese are, — 1. Elected — 2. Eedeemcd — 3. Called — 
4. Graced with true repentance — 5. With true faith — 6. With 
true personal assurance — 7. Pardoned — 8. Justified — 9. Sancti- 
fied — 10. Endowed with perseverance — 11. Saved — 12. Glorified, 
This series could indeed be amplified ; but I have puqjosely re- 
stricted it to twelve. Now, as All the elect are all the redeemed, 
all the redeemed all the ctdled, all the called all the [truly'] 
penitent, all the [trtdy] j>enitent all the [truly] believing, all the 
[<r«/y] believing all the [truly] assured, all the [truly] assured 
all the pardoned, all live pardoned all live justified, all the justi- 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


397 


ficd all the sanctified, all the sanctified all the persererant, all 
the perseverant all the saved, all the saved all the glorified, 
all the glorijied all the blest with life eternal ; it follows, of ne- 
cessity, that all the blest rvith life eternal are all the elect. To 
tnm this affirmative into a negative Sorites, we have only to say, 
cither at the beginning, — None of the reprobate are any of the 
elect, and, consequently, infer, at the end, that none of the blessed 
with eternal life are an y of the reprobale ; or at the end, — None of 
the blessed with eternal life are any of the punished, and, conse- 
quently, infer that none of the punished are any of the elect. Per- 
haps the best fonnula for this kind of Sorites is to be found in the 
letters a, b, c. This will afford us a Sorites of six terms, viz., a, 

b, c — a, c, b — b, a, c — b, c, a — -c, a, b — c, b, a — which are all vir- 
tually identical in their contents. If there be rtspiired a formula 
for a longer Sorites, we may take the letters a, b, c, d, which will 
afford us twenty-four terms. Perhaps the best formula for a de- 
scending or ascending Scjritos is, for example, a, b, o, d, e, f — a, b, 

c, d, e, — a, b, c, d, — a, b, c, — a, b, — a. 


I. — COMPREHENSIVE SORITES — PROGRESSIVE AND REGRESSIVE. 



Digitized by Google 



' 308 


APPENDIX. 


X. 

SYLLOGISM. 

A-ITS ENOUNCEMENT-ANALYTIC AND SYNTHETIC- 
ORDER OF PREMISES. 

(See above, VoL L, p. 39.';.) 

(«) ENOUNCEMENT OF SYLLOGISM. 

(Nov. 1848.) — There are two orders of enouncing the Syllogism, 
both natural, and the neglect of these, added to the not taking 
into account the Problem, or Question, ha-s been the ground why 
the doctrine of syllogism has been attacked as involving a petitio 
prindpii, or as a mere tautology. Thus, Buffier cites the defi- 
nition the art of confessing in the conclusion what has been al- 
ready avowed in the premises.^ This objection has never been 
put down. 

The foundation of all syllogism is the Problem. But this may 
be answered either Analytically or Synthetically. 

I. Analyticedhj (which has been wholly overlooked) thus, — Pro- 
blem or qiuesitum, 7s P C ? Answer, P is C ; for P is M, and 
M is C. This in the reasoning of Depth. More explicitly : — Does 
P contain in it Cl P contains i?i it C ; for P contains in it M, 
and M contains in it C. But it is wholly indifferent whether we 
cast it in the reasoning of Breadth. For example : — Does C con- 
tain under P ? C contains under it P ; for C contains under 
it M, and M contains under it P-^ 

Here all is natural ; and there is no hitch, no transition, in the 
order of progressive statement. The whole reasoning forms an 
organic unity ; all the parts of it being present to the mind at 
once, there is no before and no after. But it is the condition of a 
verbal enouncement, that one part should precede and follow 
another. Here, accordingly, the proposition in which the reason- 

aSeconde Logique, Art. iii. § 126.-— then the minor, m?n #o /Aiwir); 

Ed. lastly the major, the pretenthnentM 

/3 Plato, in a letter to DionysiuB, (A'/jiW. of dicinemmarcof hightM authority). 
2), revereea the common order of Syllo- Platoni* Opera, Bekker, ix. p. 74. Cf. 
giam, placing the conclusion first, {that Melanchthon, UvxUcticaj L. iii., Dt Fig' 
he thinJe* there is tome sente in the dead) ; uratione, p. 93, ed. 1642. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


399 


ing is absolveil or realised, and which, from the ordinary mode of 
enouncement, has been styled the Conclusion, Ls stated first ; and 
the grounds or reasons on which it rests, which, from the same cir- 
cumstance, have been called the Premise or Antecedent, are stated 
last. This order is Analytic. We proceed from the effect to the 
cause, — from the principiatum to the principia. And it is evident 
that this may be done indifferently either in Depth or Breadth ; 
the only diflerence being that in the counter quantities the grounds 
or premises naturally change their order. 

II. Synthetically ; — the only order contemplated by the logicians 
as natural, but on erroneous grounds. On the contrary, if one 
order is to be accounted natural at the expense of the other, it is 
not that which has thus been exclusively considered. For — 

1°, It is full of hitches. There is one great hitch in the separa- 
tion of the conclusion from the question ; though this latter is 
merely the former pro|X)sition in an assertive, instead of an inter- 
rogative, form. There is also at least one subordinate hitch in 
the evolution of the reasoning. 

2°, The exclusive consideration of this form has been the cause or 
the occasion of much misconception, idle disputation, and ground- 
less objection. 


(On the two Methods ; tumultuary observations, to be better 
arranged, and corrected.) 

1°, In the first or analytic order, what is principal in reality and 
in interest, is placed first, that is, the Answer or Assertion, called on 
the other order the Conclusion. 

2°, In this order all is natural ; there is no hitch, no saltus, no 
abrupt transition ; all slides smoothly from first to last. 

a) The question slides into its answer, interrogation demands 
and receives assertion. 

b) Assertion requires a reason and prepares us to expect it ; 
and this is given immediately in what, from the other order, has 
been called the A ntecedent or Premises. 

c) Then the first term, either in Breadth or Depth, is taken first 
in the ground or reason, and compared with M ; then M is com- 
pared with the other. As in Breadth ; — Does C contain under it 
r ? C contains F ; for C contains under it M, and M contains 
under it F. — In Depth — Does F contain in it Cl T contains in 


Digitized by Google 


400 


APPENDIX. 


it C ; for r contains in it M, and M contains in it C. This is the 
first Figure. — Second Figure, using common language : — Is F C ? 
F is C {and C is F) ; for F and C are both the same M. Here 
the two extremes taken together are compared with M. — In the 
Third Figure M is compared with both extremes — Is F C ? F is 
C {and M is F) ; for the same hi is both F and C. 

3°, In this order there is nothing pleonastic, nothing anticipated. 

4°, Nothing begged. 

5°, In this method the process is simple. Thought is one ; but 
to be enounced it must be analysed into a many. This order 
gives that necessary analysis, and nothing more. 

G'’, In this order, when assertive, answer is limited by ques- 
tion ; good reason why, in Second and Third Figures, one answer 
should be given. 

7°, This order is the one generally used by the mathematicians. 
(See Twesten, Logik, insbesondere die Anali/tik, ^ 117, p. 105, 
and below, p. 405. Plato also). 

8°, If the Qumsitum be stated as it ought to be, this order 
follows of course; and the neglect of the qumsitum has followed 
from the prevalence of the other. If the qumsitum be stated in 
using the common form, we must almost of course interpolate a 
yes or a no before proceeding to the premises in the common 
method ; and, in that case, the conclusion is only a superfluous 
recapitulation. 

In the Synthetic, or common order, all is contrary. (The num- 
bers correspond.) 

1°, In this order, what is first in reality and interest, and in 
and for the sake of which the whole reasoning exists, comes last ; 
till the conclusion is given we know not, (at least we ought not to 
know), how the question is answered. 

2°, In this order all is unnatural and contorted by hitches and 
abrupt transitions. There is no connection between the question 
and what prepares the answer, — the premise. (Show in detail.) 

3°, In this order all is pleonastic and anticipative. The pre- 
mi.ses stated, we already know the conclusion. This, indeed, in 
books of Logic, is virtually admitted, — the conclusion being com- 
monly expressed by a therefore, &c. Ancient doctrine of Enthy- 
meme, (Ulpian,&c.), unknown to our modem logicians; among their 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


401 


Other blunders on the Enthymeme. On the common doctrine, 
Logic, — Syllogistic, — is too truly defined the art of confessing in 
the conclusion what had been already avowed in the premises. 

4°, On this order the objection of petitio principu stands 
hitherto unrefuted, if not unrefutable, against Logic.* 

5°, In this order the process is complex. The simple thought 
is first mentally analysed, if it proceed, as it ought, from the quse- 
situm ; but this analysis is not expressed. Then the elements are 
recomposed, and this recomposition affords the synthetic an- 
nouncement of the syllogism, — the syllogism being thus the super- 
fluous regress of a foregone analysis. Aristotle’s analytic is thus 
truly a synthetic ; it overtly reconstructs the elements which had 
been attained by a covert analysis.^ 

6°, In this method, the problem hanging loose from the syllo- 
gism, and, in fact, being usually neglected, it does not determine 
in the Second and Third Figures one of the two alternative con- 
clusions, which, ex facie srjUogismi, are competent in them. The 
premises only being, there is no reason why one of the conclu- 
sions should be drawn to the preference of the other. Mem. 
Counter-practice old and new. The logicians ought not, however, 
to have ignored this double conclusion. 

T, See corresponding number. 

8°, See corresponding number.7 

(6) OBDEB OF PBEHISES. 

Aristotle places the middle term in the first Figure between the 
extremes, and the major extreme first ; — in the second Figure before 
the extremes, and the major extreme next to it; — in the third 
Figure, after the extremes, and the minor extreme next to it. 


a [Stewart {ElerntnUj voL ii. ch, 3, § 2, 
Work$, vol. Ui.| p. 202, et alibi) makes 
this objection. Refuted by GaUuppi 
Lti, di Logica e di Metc^fi$icay Lez. i. p. 
242, et §eq.) 

$ [Aristotle's Analgtia are in syn- 
thetic order; they proceed from the 
simple to the compound ; the elements 
they commence with are gained by a 
foregone analysis, which isnotexinessed. 
They are as synthetic as a grammar 

VOL. II. 


commencing with the letters. The mean- 
ing of the term is the doctrine showing 
how to analyse or reduce reasonings to 
syllogisms ; syllogisms to figure ; figure 
to mood; second and third figures to 
first ; syllogisms to propositions and 
terms ; propositions to terms ; for of all 
these analysis is said. See Patii Or- 
ganon. An, Pri&r.^ i. cc. 2, 32, 42, 44, 
46, pp. 128, 261, 273, 275, 278, 280.] 
y Comiiare IHscu4$ions, p. 662 . — Ed. 

2 G 


Digitized by Google 



402 


APPENDIX. 


In his mode of enouncement this relative order is naturally 
kept; for he expresses the predicate first and the subject last, 
thus : A ts in all B, or A is predicated of all B, instead of 
saying AW B ts A 

But when logicians came to enounce propositions and syllogisms 
in conformity to common language, the subject being usually first, 
they had one or other of two difficulties to encounter, and submit 
they must to either ; for they must either displace the middle term 
from its intermediate position in the first Figure, to say nothing 
of reversing its order in the second and third ; or, if they kept it 
in an intermediate position in the first Figure, (in the second and 
third the ArLstotelic order could not be kept), it behoved them to 
enounce the minor premise first. 

And this alternative actually determined two opposite procedures, 
— a difference which, though generally distinguishing the logicians 
of different ages and countries into two great classes, has been 
wholly overlooked. All, it must be borne in mind, regard the 
syllogism in Figure exclusively, and as figured only in Extension. 

The former difficulty and its avoidance determined the older 
order of enouncement, that is, constrained logicians to state the 
minor premise first in the first Figure ; and, to avoid the discre- 
pancy, they of course did the same for uniformity in the second 
and third. Such is the order. 

The latter difficulty and its avoidance determined the more 
modem order of enouncement, that is, constrained logicians to 
surrender the position of the middle term as middle, in following 
the order of the major premise first in all the Figures. 

Philoponus on the First Book of the Prior A nalytics, c. iv. § 4, 
(Pacian Division), f. xx. ed. Trincavelli. — “ Tiiis definition ap- 
pears to be of the extremes and of the middle term ; but is not. 
It behoves, in addition, to interpolate in thought an 'only;’ and 
thus will it be rightly enounced, as if he had said • — Bid the ex- 
tremes are both that which is only in another, and that in which 
another only is. For if A is [predicated] of all B, and B is [pre- 
dicated] of all C, it is necessary that A should be predicated of all 
C. This is the first syllogistic mood. Two universal affirmatives, 
inferring an universal conclusion. For if B is in all C, conse- 
quently C is a part of B ; but again B is a part of A ; consequently. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


403 


A is in all C, inasmuch as C is a part of B. But what is here 
.said will appear more clearly from a concrete example — Sub- 
stance oj all animal ; animal of all man ; (there follows), sub- 
stance of all num. And backwards, {avanaXtv'j, All man ani- 
mal; all animal substance; all man therefore substance. In 
regard to this figure, it is plain how we ought to take the terms 
of the first mood. Tlie first [major] is most generic ; the second 
[middle] is a subaltern genus ; and the third [minor] is a species 
more special than the middle. But a conclusion is here always 
necessary. Thus, following the synthetic order, that is, if we start 
from the major term, substance begins, beginning also the con- 
clusion. Substance of all animal, (substance stands first); animal 
of all man ; (finally the conclusion commences with substance ), — 
substance of all man. But if [on the analytic order] we depart 
from the minor term, as from man, in this case the conclusion 
will, in like manner, begin therewith: All man animal; all 
animal substance; all man substance." 

This is the only philosophic view of the matter. His syllogisms 
really analytic ( = in Depth.) 

Analytic and Synthetic ambiguous. Better, — order of Breadth 
and Depth.’^ 


a [Instances and authorities for the 
enouncement of Syllogism, with the 
Minor Premise stated first : — 

Ancients. 

Qrttic$\ — Gregory of Kyssa, t. 

iL p. 612, in bis 12 (not 10) Syllogisms 
against Manicbeaus, variety. These very 
corrupt. Joannes Datnascenus, I)iaUc‘ 
tica, c. 64, Opau ed. Lequien, Pjiris, 
1712, t i. pp. 65, 66), gives two Syllo- 
gisms, one with minor first. Alcinous, 
Ut Voct. Plat. L. i. cc, 5 and 6. Aris- 
totle often places minor first. See Za- 
barellu, Opera Logica^ De Quarta Pvfura^ 
p. 124. Vallius, Lwjica,X. ii., pp. 72, 76. 
Aristotle and Alexander not regular in 
stating major propositions. See in 
First Figure, An. Pr, i. c. 4. Aristotle 
used the ** tchoU ” only of the predicate. 
See Zaborella, TtUtul<e, In An. Prior., p. 
149. (But see aboTe, p. SOI.) Boethius, 
Opera, pp. 662, 683. Aristotle, An. Pr, 


i c. 1, <u6 Jine, ubi Alexander, f. 9 a. 
PhilupoDUS, f. 17 a. fill b. Alexander 
Aph. In An Pr. i. ff. 9 a, 15 b. Philo- 
ponus, In An. Pr. i. flF. 11 b, 20 a* 
explains the practice of Greek Peripa- 
tetics in this matter. See also ff 1 7 a, 
18 a; and 11 a, 21 a — these in i. Fig. — 
in ii. Fig. 23 b. The same In Phytica^ 
L. c. 1, f. 2. Themistius, In An. Pott. 
ii. c. 4. Anonymus, De Sylloffimo, {. 
43 a. Gregorius Aneponymus, Corn- 
jtend. PhilotophUe i^yntagma. L. v. cc. 
1, 6, pp. 58, 70. Georgius Diaconus 
Paebymerius, EpU.Log. tit. iv. cc. 1 — 4. 
Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrh. Hypotypo*., 
L. iL cc. 13, 14, pp. 103, UO. Clemens 
Alex. Strom. L. viii. Opera, p. 784, (ed, 
SylburgiL) Blemmidas, i^ 7 >i<ome Ao^a, 
c. 31, p. 219. Gregorius Trapesun- 
tius, Dialectioif De Syti. p. 30. “ Prima 
(Figura) est in qua medius terminus 
subjicitur in majore, et in minore 
prscdicatur : Tvamrif conim ^eri et toUai 


Digitized by Google 



404 


APPENDIX. 


R FIGURE-UNFIGURED AND FIGURED SYLLOGISM. 

(1853) (o) Contrast and Comparison of the various 
KINDS OF Formal Syllogism — Difference of 
Figure Accidental. 

A). Unjigured Syllogism — One form of syllogism : for here there 
is abolished, 1°, The difference of Breadth and Depth, for the terms 


et A Greek, he wrote in Italy 

for the Latina; but refers here to the 
practice of his countrymen. 

Latins : — Cicero, De Fin. iii. 8 ; iv. 18. 
TtifC. Ditp. iii. 7 ; v. 15, Opera Phil. pp. 
885, 903, 981, 1029, ed Verburgii. Mac- 
robius. Opera, p. 181, ZeuniL Seneca, 
Epiat. 85, p. 368. Apuleius, De Habit, 
DiKt. Plat. L. iii. p. 36, ed. Elmenhoret. 
Isidorus, in Gothofr. AuetareSf p. 878. 
Casaiodorus, Dialectica, Opera, p. 556, 
Qenev. 1650, gives alternative, but in 
Psalm xxxi. ?. 16, gives a syllogum with 
minor first. Martianus Capella, De Sep- 
tem Artibue LiberalibuB, allows both 
forms for first Figure ; generally makes 
the minor first {see below, p. 424). Boe- 
thius, (origo mali), t. Opera, p. 594 et 
Beq, 

Oriektals. 

Makommtdan/t .* — Averroes (enouncing 
OB we) in all the Figures, has minor first. 
(See below, p. 425.) 

Jetet: — Rabbi Simeon [truly Mumon* 
ides] (in Hebrew,) Logica, per S. Mun* 
Btenim, cc. 6, 7, Basil, 1627. 

Modem anticipations of the doctrine 
that the Minor Premise should precede 
the Mi\jor. Valla, Dialectica, f. 60 b, Ac. 
Opera p. 733, 736. Joannes Neomagus, 
Jn Trapezuntium, i, 38 b, (only adduces 
examples.) Caramuel, Rat. et RealU Phi- 
lotophia, Logiea, Disp. ix. xvL Aquinas, 
Opuse. 47. (Camerarius, Ditp. Phil. P. L 
qu. 13, p. 117.) Alstedius, Enegclopee- 
dia, p. 487. Gasseudi, Ojtera, ii. p. 413 ; 
i. p. 107. Camerarius, Ditp. PhU. P. i, 
qu. 13, p. 117. Leibnits, Opera ii. Pars. 


i. p. 356, Diuert. de Arte Comhinatoria, 
(1666), ed Putens, who refers to Ramus, 
Gassendi, Alcinous, Ac. Cf. Noureaux 
Ettait, L. iv. § 8, p. 454, ed. Raspe; and 
Locke’s Ettay, ibid, Buffier, Logique, 
§ 68. Cnsarius, Dialectica, Tract, v. De 
Syll. Cat, p. 158, (first ed. 1532). J. C.E. 
iVora Detecta Veritat, Ac., see Reusch, 
Syttema Logicum, § 547, p. 626. Chau- 
vin. Lexicon Philotophicum, v. Figura, 
Hobbee, Computatio, o. iv. prefixes the 
minor, (see Hallam, Lit. of Europe, vol. 
iii. c. 3, p. 309, ed. 1839.) Lambert, 
Seuet Organon, i. 136, § 225. Bachmann, 
Logik, g 133, pp. 202, 226. Hollznan, 
Logica, § 454. Esser, Logik, § 107» p- 
210. Krug, § 114, p. 408. Beneke, 
Syttem der Logik, c. v. p. 210 rf teq. 
Stapulensis, in Sergeant’s Method to 
Science, p. 127. Facciolati, (though he 
errs himself), Rudimenta Logica, p. 86, 
P. iii. c. 8, note 4, where Boethius, Sex- 
tus Empiricxis, Alcinous, Ac. Ch. Mayne 
Ettay on Natural Notiont, p. 122 et teq. 
Lamy, Acta Enid., 1708, p. 67- 

Who liave erred in this subject, — 
making our order of enunciation the 
natural and usual. Vives, Centura Veri. 
Opera, t. i. p. 606. J. O. Vossius, De 
Nat. Art. Liberal., Logica, c. riii. § 9. 
J. A. Fabricius, Ad. Sext. Emp. 103. 
Facciolati, Rudtmenta Logierr, p. 86. 
Wait*. In Org. Comm., pp. 380, 386, 
That Reasoning in Comprehensive 
Quantity most natural. Wolf, Phil. 
Rat. % 399, p. 327. Reusch, Syttema 
Logicum, § 547. Schulze, Logik, | 77 of 
old, (1817) § 72 of last (1831) edition. 


Digitized by Googl* 


APPENDIX. 


405 


are both Subject or both Predicate, and may be either indifferently; 
2°, All order of the terms, for these may be enounced first or second 
indifferently ; 3°, All difference of major or minor term or propo- 
sition, all duplicity of syllogism ; 4°, All difference of direct and 
indirect conclusion. 

B). Figured Syllogism — Two forms of syllogism by different 
orders of terms : — 

First Figure . — Here the two forms of syllogism are possible, 
each with its major and minor terms, each with its direct or 
immediate, its indirect or mediate, conclusion. These two various 
forms of syllogism are essentially one and the same, differing only 
accidentally in the order of enouncement, inasmuch as they seve- 
rally depart from one or from the other of the counter, but corre- 
lative, quantities of Depth and Breadth, as from the containing 
whola But in fact, we may enounce each order of syllogism, 
[in] either quantity, the one is the more natural 

Second and Third Figures . — In each of these figures there are 
possible the two varieties of syllogism ; but not, as in the first 
figure, are these different forms variable by a counter quantity, and 
with a determinate major and minor term ; for in each the ex- 
tremes and the middle term (there opposed) are necessarily in the 
same quantity, being either always Subject or always Predicate 
in the jugation. They differ only as the one extreme, or the other, 
(what is indifferent), is arbitrarily made the Subject or Predicate 
in the conclusion. Indirect or Mediate conclusions in these 
figures are impossible ; for the indirect or mediate conclusion of 
the one syllogism is in fact the direct conclusion of the other. 

Thus difference of Figure accidental. 


holds that dieium de omni, eTolved 
out of nota ncta, for mere subordinatioD 
eyIlogismB. Haiischius, in Acta Erud. 
1728, p. 470. Lamy (B.) in Acta Erud, 
1708, p. 67. Oldfield, E$»ay on Bea- 
ton, p. 246. Valla, Dialectica, L. iii. c. 
46. Hoffbauer, AnalytiJc der Urtheile 
und SchliUte, § 152, p. 108. Mayne's Ra- 
tional Notion*, p. 123 teq» Mariotte, 
Logique, Part ii., disc. iii. p. 161. Paris, 
1678. Chladenus, Phil. D^. p. 18, (in 
Wolf, PkiL RaU § 551.) CastUlon, Mem, 


de Berlin, 1802. Hallam, Lit. of Europe, 
Tol. iii. p. 309. Thomson (W.), Ouilinee 
of the Lava of Thought, p. 39. In refer- 
ence to the above, the mathematicians 
usually begin with what is commonly 
called the Minor Premise, (as A « B, 
B =5 C, therefore A = C) j and frequently 
they state the Conclusion first, (as A s 
B, for A as H, and K = B), or Ac., see 
Wolf, Phil. Rat. § 651, and Twesten, 
Logik,% 117, p. 105 ; and Lambert, Ncuee 
Org. i. g 225.] 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


•4-06 


If rule true, it will follow that it is of no consequence whether : — 

1 The middle one or any other of the three terms be, in any 
proposition, subject or predicate, if only either. Hence difference 
of Figure of no account in varying the syllogism. Thus, (retain- 
ing the subordination of temi.s), convert major proposition in Ex- 
tension of first Figure, and you have second Figure ; convert 
minor proposition, and you have third Figure ; convert both pre- 
mises, and you have fourth Figure. 

2°, Whether one of the extremes, one or other of the premises, 
stand first or second, be, in fact, major or minor term of a propo- 
sition ; all that is required is, that the tenns and their quantities 
should remain the same, and that they should always bear to each 
other a relation of subject and predicate. Thus, if [in] any of the 
Figures, the major and minor terms and propositions interchange 
relation of subordination ; when, in the first Figure, you convert 
and transpose ; and when [in] the other three Figures (fourth ?), 
you simply transpose the premises. 

Indifferent (in first Figure) which premise precedes or follows. 
For of two one not before the other in nature. But not indiffer- 
ent in either whole, which term should be subject and predicate 
of conclusion.* 

(6) Double Conclusion in Second and Third Figuee.s. 

My doctrine is as follows : — 

In the Uvfffured Syllogism there is no contrast of terms, the 
notions compared not being to each other subject and predicate ; 
consequently, the conclusion is here necessarily one and only one. 

In the Figured Syllogism we must di.scriminate the Figures. 

In the First Figure, where the middle term is subject of the one 
extreme and predicate of the other, there is of course a determinate 
major extreme and premise, and a determinate minor extreme and 
promise ; consequently, also, one proximate or direct, and one remote 
or indirect, conclusion, — the latter by a conversion of the former. 

• Compare Diiriuvioni , p. 653 . — BId. 


Digitized by Google 



Al’PENDIX. 


407 


In the Second and Third figures all this is reversed. In these 
there is no major and minor extreme and premise, both extremes 
being either subjects or predicates of the middle ; consequently, 
in the inference, as either extreme may be indifterently subject or 
predicate of the other, there are two indifl’erent conclusions, that 
is, conclusions neither of which is more direct or indirect than the 
other. 

This doctrine is oppo.sed to that of Aristotle and the logicians, 
who recognise in the Second and Tliird Figures a major and minor 
extreme and premise, with one determinate conclusion. 

The whole question in regard to the duplicity or simplicity of 
the conclusion in the latter figures depends upon the distinction 
in them of a major and a minor tenu ; and it must be peremp- 
torily decided in opposition to the universal doctrine, unless it can 
be shown that, in these figures, tliis distinction actually subsists. 
This was felt by the logicians ; accordingly they applied themselves 
with zeal to establish this distinction. But it would api)ear, from 
the very multiplicity of their opinions, that none proved satisfac- 
tory ; and this general presumption is shown to be correct by the 
examination of these opinions in detail, — an examination which 
evinces that of these opinions there is no one which ought to 
satisfy an inquiring mind. 

In all, there are six or five different grounds on which it has 
been attempted to establish the discrimination of a major and 
minor term in the Second and Third Figures. All are mutually 
subversive ; each is incompetent. Each following the first is in 
fact a virtual acknowledgment that the reason on which Aristotle 
proceeded in this establishment, is at once ambiguous and insuffi- 
cient. I shall enumerate the.se opinions as nearly as possible in 
chronological order. 

1. TJuit the major is the extreme which lies in the Second 
Figure nearer to, in the Third Figure farther from, the middle . — 
This is Aristotle’s definition, (An. Fr., L. i., cc. 5, 6). At best it 
is ambiguous, and has, accordingly, been taken in iliflerent senses 
by following logicians ; and in treating of them it will be seen 
that in none, except an arbitrary sense, can the one extreme, in 
these figures, be considered to lie nearer to the middle term than 
the other. I exclude the supposition that Aristotle spoke in 
reference to some scheme of mechanical notation. 


Digitized by Google 


408 


APPENDIX. 


2. That the major term in the antecedent is that which is pre- 
dicate in the conclusion. — This doctrine dates from a remote an- 
tiquity. It is rejected by Alexander; but, adopted by Ammonius 
and Philoponus, (f. 17 b, 18 a, ed. Trina), has been generally 
recognised by subsequent logicians. Its recognition is now almost 
universal. Yet, critically considered, it explains nothing. Educing 
the law out of the fact, and not deducing the fact from the law, it 
does not even attempt to show why one being, either extreme may 
not be, predicate of the conclusion. It is merely an empirical, — 
merely an arbitrary, assertion. The Aphrodisian, after refuting 
the doctrine, when the terms are indefinite (preindesignate), justly 
says; — “Nor is the case difierent when the terms are definite 
[predesignate]. For the conclusion shows as predicate the term 
given as major in the premises ; so that the conclusion is not itself 
demonstrative of the major ; on the contrary, the being tsiken in 
the premises as major, is the cause why a term is also taken as 
predicate in the conclusion.” — {An. Pr. f. 24 a, ed. Aid.) 

3. That the proximity of an extreme to the middle term, in 
Logic, is to be decided by the relative proximity in nature, to the 
middle notion of the notions compared. This, which is the inter- 
pretation of Aristotle by Herminus, is one of the oldest upon re- 
cord, being detailed and refuted at great length by the Aphrodi- 
sian, (f 23 b, 24 a). To determine the natural proximity re- 
quired is often difficult in affinnative, and always impossible in 
negative, syllogism ; and, besides the objections of Alexander, it is 
wholly material and extralogical It is needless to dwell on this 
opinion, which, obscure in itself, seems altogether unknown to our 
modern logicians. 

4. That the major term in the Syllogism is the predicate of 
the problem or question. This is the doctrine maintained by 
Alexander, (f. 24 b) ; but it is doubtful whether at first or second 
hand. It has been adopted by Averroes, Zabarella, and simdry of 
the acuter logicians in modem time.s. It is incompetent, however, 
to establish the discriminatiom Material, it presupposes an inten- 
tion of the reasoner ; does not appear ex facie syllogismi; and, at 
best, only shows which of two possible qumsita, — which of two 
possible conclusions, — has been actually carried out. For it as- 
sumes, that of the two extremes either might have been major in 
the antecedent, and predicate in the conclusion. If Alexander 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


409 


had applied the same subtlety in canvassing his own opinion, 
which he did in criticising those of others, he would not have 
given the authority of his name to so untenable doctrine. 

5. That the major extreme is that contained in the major pre- 
mise, and the major premise that in the order of enouncement 
first. This doctrine seems indicated by Scotus, (An. Pr., L. L, 
qu. xxiv. §§ 5, 6) ; and is held explicitly by certain of his fol- 
lowers. This also is wholly incompetent. For the order of 
the premises, as the subtle Doctor himself observes, (76., qu. 
xxiii. § 6), is altogether indifferent to the validity of the con- 
sequence ; and if this external accident be admitted, we should 
have Greek majors and minors turned, presto, into Latin minors 
and majors. 

6. That the major extreme is that contained in the major pre- 
mise, and the major premise that itself most general. All oppo- 
site practice originates in abuse. This opinion, which coincides 
with that of Herminus, (No. 3), in making the logical relation of 
terms dependent on the natural relation of notions, I find ad- 
vanced in 1614, in the Disputationes of an ingenious and inde- 
pendent philosopher, the Spanish Jesuit, Petrus Hurtado de Men- 
doza, (Disp. Log. et Met., L, Disp. x. §§ 50 — 55). It is, however, 
too singular, and manifestly too untenable, to require refutation. 
As material, it is illogical ; as formal, if allowed, it would at best 
serve only for the discrimination of certain moods ; but it cannot 
be allowed, for it would only subvert the old without being ade- 
quate to the establishment of aught new. It shows, however, how 
unsatisfactory were the previous theories, when such a doctrine 
could be proposed by .so acute a reasoner, in substitution. This 
opinion has remained unnoticed by posterior logicians. 

The dominant result from this historical enumeration is, that, 
in the Second and Third Figures, there is no major or minor term, 
therefore no major or minor premise, therefore two indifferent 
conclusiona 

This important truth, however natural and even manifest it may 
seem when fully developed, has but few and obscure vaticinations 
of its recognition during the progress of the science. Three only 
have I met with. 

The first I find in the Aphrodisian, (f. 24 b) ; for his expres- 
sions might seem to indicate that the opinion of there being no 


Digitized by Google 



410 


APPENDIX. 


major and minor term in the second figure, (nor, by analogy, in the 
third), was a doctrine actually held by some early Greek logicians. 
It would be curious to know if these were the “ ancients," assailed 
by Ammonius, for maintaining an overt quantification of the pre- 
dicate. The words of Alexander are ; — “ Nor, however, can it be 
said, that in the present figure there is no major. For this at least 
is determinate, — that its major must be universal ; and, if there be 
in it any .syllogistic combination, that premise is the major, which 
contains the major term ; ’’ (£ 24 a.) Demurring to this refuta- 
tion, it i.s, however, evidence suflficient of the opinion to which it 
is opposed. This, as it is the oldest, is, indeed, the only authority 
for any deliberate doctrine on the point. 

The second indication dates from the middle of the fifteentli 
century, and is contained in the Dialecttca of the celebrated Lau- 
rentius Valla (L. iiL c. 8 [51]). Valla abolishes the third figure, and 
his opinion on the question is limited to his observations on the 
second. In treating of Cesare and Camestres, which, after a host 
of previous logicians, he considers to be a single mood ; there is 
nothing remarkable in his statement ; “ Neque distincUe sunt pro- 
positio et assumptio, ut altera major sit, altera minor, sed quodam- 
modo pares ; ideoque sicut neutra rindicat sibi prinium aut secun- 
dum locum, ita utraque jus habet in utraque conclusione. Verum 
istis placuit, ut id quod secundo loco poneretur, vendicaret sibi con- 
clusionem ; quod verum esset nisi semper gemina esset conclusio. 
Sed earum dicamus alteram ad id quod primo loco, alteram ad id 
quod secundo loco positum est referri.” We, therefore, await the 
development of his doctrine by relation to the other moods, Festino 
and Banco, which thus auspiciously begins : — “Idem contingit in 
reliquis duobus : qui tamcn sunt magis distincti.” We are, how- 
ever, condemned to disappointment. For, by a common error, 
excusable enough in this impetuous writer, he has confounded sin- 
gulais (definites) with particulars (indefinites) ; and thus the ex- 
amples which he adduces of these moods are, in fact, only examples 
of Cesare and Camestres. The same error had also been previ- 
ously committed (L. iii. c. 4.) The whole, therefore, of Valla’s 
doctrine, which is exclusively founded on the.se examples, must go 
for nothing ; for we cannot presume, on such a ground, that he 
admits more than the four common moods, identifying, indeed, the 
two first, by admitting in them of a double conclusion. We can- 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


411 


not, certainly, infer, that he ever thought of recognising a par- 
ticular, — an indefinite, predicate in a negative projiosition. 

The third and last indication ¦which I can adduce is that from 
the Method to Science of John Sergeant, who has, in this, as 
in his other books, (too successfully), concealed his name under 
the initials “ J. S.” He was a Catholic priest, and, from 16G5, an 
active religious controversialist : whilst, as a philosopher, in his 
Idea PhilosophicB Cartesianm, a criticism of Descartes, in his 
Solid Philosophy, a criticism of Lockc,“ in his Metaphysics, and in 
the present work, he manifests remarkable eloquence, ingenuity, 
and independence, mingled, no doubt, with many untenable, not to 
say ridiculous, paradoxes. His works, however, contain genius 
more than enough to have saved them, in any other country, from 
the total oblivion uito which they have fallen in this, — where, in- 
deed, they probably never were appreciated. His Method to Sci- 
ence, (a treatise on Logic), was published in 1C9G, with a “ Preface, 
dedicatory to the learned students of both our Uni vcrsitie.s,” ex- 
tending to sixty-two pages. But, alas ! neither this nor any other 
of his philosophical books is to be found in the Bodleian. 

In the third book of his Method, which treats of Discourse, 
after speaking of the first, or, as he calls it, " only right figure of a 
syllogism,” we have the following observations on the second and 
third: — “ § 14. Wherefore the other two figure.s, [he does not recog- 
nise the fourth], are unnatural and monstrou.s. For, since nature 
has shown us, that what conjoins two notions ought to be placed 
in the middle between them ; it is against nature and reason to 
place it either above them both, as is done in that they call the 
second figure, or tinder them both, as is done in that figure they 
call the third. 

"§ 15. Hence no determinate conclusion can follow, in either of 
the last figures, from the dis{K>sal of the parts in the syllogisms. 
For since, as appears, (§ 13), the extreme which is predicated of 
the middle term in the major, has thence a title to be the predi- 
cate in the conebtsion, because it is above the middle term, which 
is the predicate, or above the other extreme in the minor, it fol- 

• Sergeant 18 an intelligent antagonUt certain tIcws he anticipates Kant; and 
of both these phUoeophera, and I have Pope has evidently taken from bis bro- 
elsewhere had occasion to quote him as ther C«atholic tlie hint of some of his 
the first and one of the ablest critics of most celebrated thoughts, 
the Ettayon Human Cndenianding. In 


Digitized by Google 



412 


APPENDIX. 


lows, that if the middle term be twice above or twice bdow the 
other two terms in the premises, that reason ceases ; and so it is 
left indifferent which of the other terms is to be subject or predi- 
cate in the conclusion ; and the indeterminate conclusion follows, 
not from the artificial form of the syllogism, but merely from the 
vuUerial identity of all the three terms ; or from this, that their 
notions are fomid in the same Em. Wherefore, from these pre- 
mises, [in the second figure], 

Some laudable thing is \all\ virtue, 

[All] courtesy is a virtue ; 

or, from these, [in the third], 

[Alt] virtue is [some"] laudaMe, 

Some virtue is \_cUt\ courtesy ; 

the conclusion might either be. 

Therefore, [aW] courtesy is [some] laudable. 

Or, Some laudable thing is [all] courtesy. 

So that, to argue on that fashion, or to make use of these awk- 
ward figures, is not to know certainly the end or conclusion wo 
aim at, but to shoot our bolt at no determinate mark, since no 
determinate conclusion can in that case follow.” (P. 232). 

Extremes, it is said, meet. Sergeant would abolish the second 
and third figures, as petitory and unnatural, as merely material 
corruptions of the one formal first. I, on the contrary, regard all 
the figures as equally necessary, natural, and formal. But we 
agree in this : both hold that, in the second and third figures, there 
is a twofold and indifferent conclusion ; howbeit, the one makes 
this a monstrosity of the syllogistic matter, the other, a beauty of 
the syllogbtic form. Therefore, though I view Sergeant as wrong 
in his premises, and “ shooting his bolt at no determinate mark,” 
I must needs allow that he has, by chance, hit the bull’s eye. I 
have inserted, within square brackets, the quantifications required 
to restore and show out the formality of his examples ; on my 
scheme of notation, they stand as follows : — 

C,- :M, — :r C, -:M,— :r 



Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


413 


C.-HISTORICAL NOTICES REGARDING FIGURE OF 
SYLLOGISM. 

I. — Aristotle. 

Aristotle; Figures and Terms of Syllogism, Pnor Analytics 
B. I. eh. iv. 

First Figure, ch. iv. — § 2. “ When three terms [or notions] hold 
this mutual relation, — that the last is in the whole middle, whilst 
the middle is or is not in the whole first, — of these extremes 
there results of necessity a perfect syllogism.* 

§ 3. “ By middle term, [B (B)], I mean that which itself is in 
another and another in it ; and which in position also stands in- 
termediate. I call extreme both that which is itself in another 
[the minor], and that in which another is [the major]. For if A 
be predicated of all B, and B of all C, A will necessarily be pre- 
dicated of all C. 

§ 10. “I call that the major extreme [A (A)] in which the 
middle is ; the minor [r (C)] that which lies under the middle.” 


Second Figure, ch. v. — § 1. " When the same [predicate notion] 
inheres in all of the one and in none of the other, or in all or in 
none of both [the subject notions], — this I denominate the Second 
Figure. 

§ 2. " The middle [M (M)] in this figure I call that which is 
predicated of both [notions] ; the extremes, the [notions] of which 
the middle is said. The major extreme [N (N)] is that towards 


a Ch. iv. $ 2. — This definition of the 
First Figure, (founded on the rules De 
Omni and de NuUo), applies only to the 
universal moods, but, of these, only to 
those Intimate and nseful, — Barbara 
and Celarent. It, therefore, seems in* 
adequate, but not superfluous. 

Aristotle uses the phrase ** to be in 
all or in the whole,'* both with reference 
to extension , — for the lower notion B, 
as contained under the all or whole of 


the higher notion A : and with reference 
to comprehension, — for the higher no- 
tion A as contained in the all or whole 
of the lower notion B. In the former 
sense, which with Aristotle is the mure 
usual, and, in fact, the only one con- 
templated by the logicians, there is also 
to be observed a distinction between 
the inhesion and the predication of tbo 
attribute. 


Digitized by Google 


4U 


APPENDIX. 


the middle ; the minor [w (0)], that from the middle more 
remote. 

§ 3. “ The middle is placed out [from between] the extremes, 
the first in position” — * 

[So, M M 

N _N 

H 0 

Third Figure, ch. vi. — § 1. “When in the same [subject notion] 
one [predicate notion] inheres in all, another in none of it, or 
when both inhere in all or in none of it, such figure I call the 
Third. 

§ 2. " In this [figure] I name the middle, that of which both 
[the other terms] are predicated ; the extremes, the predicates 
themselves. The major extreme [n (P)] is that farther from, the 
minor [P, (Q)], that nearer to, the middle. 

§ 3. “ The middle [2 (R)] is placed out [from between] the 
extremes, the last in position," 



»*»•*»* 

Aristotle, Prior Annhjtics, B. i. c. 23, § 7. 

General Theory of Figure. — " If, then, it be necessary [in reason- 
ing] to take some [term] common [or intermediate] to both [e.x- 
treme tenn.s] ; this is possible in three ways. For we predicate 
either [the extreme] A of [the middle] C, and [the middle] C of 
[the extreme] B ; or [the middle] C of both [extremes] ; or both 
[extremes] of [the middle] G. These are the [three] Figures of 
which we have spoken ; and it is manifest, that through one or 
other of the Figures every syllogism must be realised.'’" 

a Aristotle here varies the notation tion might appear to indicate), that tho 
by letters of the three syllogidtic terma middle term was a notion in tiie First 
making C (F) stand for the middle Figure, necessarily intermediate be- 
tenn, A and B for the two extremes, tweeu the two extremes, in the Se* 
This he did, jwrhaps, to prevent it be- toud superior, in the Third inferior, to 
ing supposed, (what his previous nota< them. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


415 


II. AND III. — Alexander and Herminus. 

Alexander, In An. Pr.y f. 23 b. 

Second Figure, c. v. Aristotle. — “ ‘ The middle extreme is that 
which lies towards the middle.’ 

§ 2. “ But it is a question, whether in the Second Figure there 
be by nature any major and minor extreme, and if there be, by 
what criterion it may be known. For if we can indifferently con- 
nect with the middle term whichsoever extreme we choose, this 
we may always call the major. And as negative conclusions only 
are drawn in this figure, univer.sal negatives being also mutu- 
ally convertible, it follows, that in universal negatives the one 
term has no better title to be styled major than the other, seeing 
that the major term is what is predicated, whilst both are here 
indifferently predicable of each other. In universal affirmatives, 
indeed, the predicate is major, becau.se it has a wider extent ; and 
for this rea.son, such propositions are not [simply] convertible ; 
so that here there is by nature a major term which is not to be 
found in universal negatives. 

“ Herminus is of opinion that, in the Second Figure, 

[1°.] “ If both the extremes, of which the middle is predicated, 
be homogeneous [or of the same genus], the major term is that most 
proximate to the genus common to the two. For example : — 
If the extremes be bird and man ; bird lying nearer to the com- 
mon genus [animat] than man, as in its first division, bird is 
thus the major extreme ; and, in general, of homogeneous terms, 
that holding such a relation to the common genus is the major. 

[2°.] “But if the tenus be equally distant from the common genus, 
as horse and man, we ought to regard the middle predicated of 
of them, and consider of which [term] it is predicated through 
[that term] itself, and of which through some other predicate ; 
and compare that through which it is predicated of another with 
that through which it is predicated of [the term] itself And if 
that through which [the middle] is predicated of another, (viz. 
the one extreme), be nearer [than the other extreme] to the 
common genus, that [extreme] of which [for tovtow ov, I read 
TovTOi> ouj, the middle is [mediately] predicated, from its closer 
propinquity to the common genus, rightly obtains the title of 
major. For example : If the extremes be horse and man. 


Digitized by Google 



416 


APPENDIX. 


rational being predicated of them, — negatively of horse, aflSrnia- 
tively of man ; seeing that rational is not of itself denied of 
horse, but because horse is irrational, whereas rational is of 
itself afiBrmed of man, horse is nearer than man to their common 
genus animal ; horse will, therefore, be the major extreme, though 
man be no further removed than horse ftom its proper genus. 
And this, because that through which the predicate [t.e. the middle] 
is predicated of this last, as being irrational, is greater ; for ra- 
tional is not denied of horse qua horse, whilst it is affirmed of 
man qua man. 

[3°.] “ But if the extremes be not homogeneous, but under diffe- 
rent genera, that is to be considered the major term, which of the 
two holds the nearer of its own genus. For instance : If aught be 
predicated of colour and man, colour is the major extreme ; for 
colour stands closer to quality, than man to substance : as man 
is an individual [or most special] species, but not colour. 

[4°.] “Finally, if each be equally remote from its proper genus, 
we must consider the middle, and inquire of which term it is pre- 
dicated through [that term] itself, and of which through some- 
thing else ; and if that, through which the middle is predicated 
of another, [ic. one extreme], be nearer to its proper genus, and if 
through that the middle be actually predicated of this term, this 
term is to be deemed the major. For example ; If the terms bo 
white and man, the one being an individual species in quality, the 
other in substance ; and if rational be affirmatively predicated of 
man, negatively of white ; the affirmation is made in regard 
to man as man, whereas the negation is made of white, not as 
white, but as inanimate. But since inanimate, through which 
rational is denied of white, is more common, more universal, and 
more proximate to substance inanimate than man to [substance'\ 
animate, on that account, white is the major term in preference to 
man.” [So far Herminus.] 

“ But to reason thus, and to endeavour to demonstrate a major 
term by nature, in the Second Figure, is a speculation which may 
be curious, but is not true. [I read irpo$ tw.] 

[1°]. “For, in the first place, if we consider the given terms, 
not in themselves, but in relation to others, in which the predi- 
cated term does not inhere ; the major term will be always found 
in the negative proposition. For, in this case, the major is always 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


417 


equal to the middle terra ; since whether it be thus or thus taken 
from the commencement, or be so made by him who denies it, the 
negative major will still stand in this relation to the middle term. 
For the middle does not inhere, where it is not supposed to inhere. 
Wherefore, its repugnant opposite inheres in the subject, but the 
repugnant opposite of the middle is equal to the middle. And 
this, either through the middle itself, or through another notion of 
wider extent ; as when rational is denied of something through 
inanimate. For there is here an equalLsation through irrational, 
through which rational is negatively predicated of horse. For 
either the middle is equal to this of which it is denied, or [I read, 
17 for o] it is less ; as when, through inanimate, rational is de- 
nied of aught. For inanimate is equal to animate, under which 
is rational, a notion greater than that other of which it is affirmed. 
For since the affirmative predicate is greater than its subject, of 
which the middle is denied or not affirmed ; and since the reason 
why the middle is denied, is equal to or greater than the middle 
itself, which middle, again, in an affirmative proposition, is greater 
than its subject ; — on these accounts, a negative proposition is 
always greater than an affirmative. Nevertheless, Aristotle him- 
self says that a negation is to be placed in the minor [proposi- 
tion] ; for the second syllogism in this figure [Caniestres] has as 
its minor premise an universal negative. 

[2°]. “ Further, why in the case of negatives alone should explan- 
ation or inquiry be competent, in regard to the reason of the nega- 
tive predication, seeing that in the case of affirmatives the reason 
is equally an object of inquiry? For rational is predicated of 
man, of itself, indeed, but not primarily, that is, not inasmuch as 
he is man, but iua.smuch as he is rational ; so that if rational 
[be denied] of horse through irrational, still these are both 
branches of the same divLsion. By this method, assuredly, no 
major can be ever found. Wherefore, we ought not, in this way, 
to attempt a discrimination of the mqjor of affirmative syllogisms 
in the Second Figure. For in this figure affirmation and negation 
are equally compatible with the major term ; so that whatsoever 
term has by the forementioned method been found mqjor, the same, 
taken either as major or minor, will effectuate a syllogistic juga- 
tion ; which being competent, there is no longer any major [or 
minor] in this figure. For the problem is to find not a mqjor 

VOL. II, 2 D 


Digitized by Google 



418 


APPEKDIX. 


term absolutely, but one of this figure.” [So much touching Her- 
minus.] 

[3°]. “ Nor, on the other hand, as is thought by some, is that un- 
conditionally to be called the major term, which stands predicate 
in the conclusion. For neither is this manifest ; if left indefinite 
[preindesignate], the same term will hold a dififerent relation, 
though a conversion of the universal negative ; so that what is 
now the major, may be anon the minor ; we may, in fact, be said to 
constitute the same terra both major and minor. Naturally there 
is in negative propositions no major notion, nor, from the conclu- 
sion, ought we to make out the major at all. Nor is the case 
different when the term is defined [predesignate]. For the con- 
clusion shows, as predicate, the term given as major in the pre- 
mises ; so that the conclusion is not itself demonstrative of the 
major; on the contrary, the being taken in the premises as 
major is the cause why a term is also taken as predicate in the 
conclusion. 

“ Nor, however, can it be said that in this figure there is no major. 
For this at least is determinate, — that its major must be universal ; 
and, if there be [in it] any syllogistic combination, that premise is 
the major wliich contains the major tenn. 

[4°] “ But, in the Second Figure, which of the terms is to be 
deemed the major ? That is to be deemed the major, and to be 
placed first, which in the problem [question or qumsitum] we intend 
to demonstrate, and which we regard as predicate. For every one 
who reasons, first of all determines with himself, what it is he 
would prove ; and to this end he applies his stock of suitable pro- 
positions ; for no one stumbles by chance on a conclusion. The 
notion, therefore, proposed as predicate in the problem to be 
proved, is to be constituted the major term ; for although the pro- 
position be converted, and the notion thereby become the subject, 
still in what we proposed to prove, it [actually] was, and, there- 
fore, [virtually] remains, the predicate. Hence, even if there be 
drawn another conclusion, we convert it ; so that, to us who prove 
and syllogise and order terms, that always stands as the major. 
For major and minor are not, in negative syllogisms, regulated by 
their own nature, but by the intention [of the reasoner] to con- 
clude. Thus it is manifest, that what is the predicate in the pro- 
blem, is also the predicate in the conclusion.” 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


419 


Alexander on Prior A nalytics, L. i. c. vi., f. 30 a. ed. Aid. 

(Third Figure.) . . . This is the Third Figure, and holds the 
last place because nothing universal is inferred in it, and because 
sophistical syUogisms chiefly affect this flgure with their indefinite 
and particular conclusions. But the sophistical are the last of all 
syllogisms. . . . Add to this, that while both the Second and 

Third Figures take their origin from the First of the two, the 
third is engendered of the inferior premise. For the minor, qua 
minor, is the inferior premise, and holds reasonably a .secondary 
place, [the conversion of the minor proposition of the first figure 
giving the third figure]. 

F. 30 b. (Darapti.) “ The first syzygy in this figure is of two 
universal affirmatives [Darapti.] But it may be asked — Why, 
whilst in the second figure there are two syllogistic conjugations, 
having one of the premises an universal affirmative, the other an 
universal negative, (from having, now their major, now their 
minor, as an universal negative proposition converted) ; — why, in 
the third figure, there is not, in like manner, two syllogistic com- 
binations of two universal aflSrmative.s, since of these, either the 
major or the minor proposition is convertible ? Is it that in the 
second figure, from the propositions being of diverse form [quality], 
the commutation of a universal negative into something else by 
conversion is necessaiy, this being now the major, now the minor, 
and it not being in our power to convert which we will ? In the 
third figure, on the other hand, there being two universal affirma- 
tives, the position [relation] of the propositions, (for they are simi- 
lar in character and position), is not the cause of one being now 
converted, now another ; the cause lying in us, not in the jugation. 
Wherefore, the one or other being similarly convertible, inasmuch 
as the position [relation] of the two propositions is the same ; the 
one which affords the more important probation is selected, and 
hereby is determined the syllogistic jugation. Moreover, the dif- 
ferences of syllogism [moods] in each figure are effected by the 
differences among their jugations, not by those among their proba- 
tions. Thus that the combination of propositions is syllogistic [or 
valid], is proved by conversion and reductio ad impossibile, also by 
exposition. But from this circumstance there does not emerge a 
plurality of syllogisms [moods]. For the different probations [are 
not valid from such plurality, but] from the unity of the jugation 


Digitized by Google 



420 


APPENDIX. 


from which they are inferred, so that one jugation of two universal 
affirmatives may constitute, in the third figure, a single syllogism 
[mood], howbeit the probations are different ; inasmuch as now 
the one, now the other, of the propositions can be converted.” 


IV.— PniLOPOirDS. 

Philoponus (or rather Ammonius) on Aristotle, An. Pr., i. 4, 
§ L f. 17 a. ed. Trincavelli, 1536. 

“ The Predicate is always better than the Subject, because the 
predicate is, for the most part, more extensive (ctti nXeoi') than the 
subject, and because the subject is analogous to the matter, the 
predicate to the form ; for the matter is the subject of the forms. 
But when the middle term is predicated of the two extremes, or is 
the subject of both ; in this case, it is not properly intermediate. 
But, howbeit, though in position external to the middle, it is still 
preferable to be the predicate than to be the subject. On this 
ground, that is called the first figure, the middle term of which 
preserves its legitimate order, being subject of the one extreme, 
and predicate of the other. The second figure is that in which the 
middle is predicated of both extremes, and in which it occupies 
the better position of those remaining. Finally, the third figure 
is that in which the middle term is subjected to the two extremes ; 
here obtaining only the lowest position. Wherefore, in the first 
figure the middle term is delineated on a level with the extremes ; 
whereas in the second it is placed above, and in the third below, 
them.”® 


Philoponus (or rather Ammonius) on Aristotle, An. Pr., £ 17 
a, ed. Trincavelli, 1 636. 


a Ammoniufl, or Philoponus, here ma* 
nifestly refers to the diagrams represent* 
ing the three figures, and accommodated 
to Aristutle*s tliree sets of letters, noting 
the three terms in each of these; thus:*-® 
tt y fi r p 



Whether these diagrams ascend higher 


than Ammonius does not appear ; for 
they are probably not the constructions 
referred to by Aristotle ; and none are 
given by tlie Aphrotlisian in his original 
text, though liberally supplicfl by his 
Latin translator. Tlie diagrams of Am* 
monius were long generally employed. 
By Neomagus 1533 {In Tra/tezuntii Dia~ 
Uet,, f. 35), they are most emmeoualy 
referred to Faber StapiilcDHis. [Soo 
further, Di9nu$ion$, p. 670. — En.] 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


421 


Syllogistic Figures in general. — “ We must premise what 
is the Major Proposition of the Syllogism, and what the Minor. 
But to understand this, we must previously be aware what are 
the Major and Minor Terms. And it is possible to define 
these, both, in common, as applicable to all the three figures 
and, in special, with reference to the first alona In the latter 
relation, that is, regarding specially the first figure, the Major 
term is that which constitutes the Predicate, the Minor that 
which constitutes the Subject, of the Middle, so far as Limited 
to the first figure. But since in neither of the other figures do 
the extremes reciprocally stand in any definite (?) relation to the 
middle term ; it is manifest that this determination is inapplicable 
to them. We must, therefoi-e, employ a rule common to all the 
three figures ; to wit, that the major term is that predicated, the 
minor that subjected, in the conclusion. Thus, the Major Proposi- 
tion is the one containing the Major Term ; the Minor Propo- 
sition the one containing the Minor Term. Examples ; Of the 
First Figure, — Man [is] animal; animal, substance ; therefore, 
man, substance Of the Second, — Animal [is predi- 

cated] of all man; animal of no stone ; man, therefore, of no 
stone. ... Of the Third, — Some stone is white ; all stone 
is inanimate ; cansequently, some white is inanimate." . . . 

First Figure. — F. 19 b. 59 ; Aristotle, 1. c. § 3. ‘“But I call 
that the middle term which itself is in another, and another in it ; 
and which in position lies intermediate.’ 

“ This definition of the middle term is not common to the three 
figures, but limited to the middle of the first figure only. For, 
&C. .... But, if there be a certain difference in species 

between the middle terms of the three figures, they have likewise 
something in common ; to wit, that the middle term is found 
twice in the premises, throughout the three figures ; which also in 
position is middle For Aristotle wishes in the Diagraph (iu airg 
rg Karaypaxlyg) to preserve the order of intermediacy, so that, 
placing the three terms in a straight line, we assign the middle 
place to the middle term. [?] 

Aristotle, 1. c. § 4. " ‘ But [I call] the extremes both that which 
is in another, and that in wliich another is. For if A be predi- 
cated of all B, and B of all C, it is necessary that A should also be 


Digitized by Google 


422 


APPENDIX. 


predicated of all C. We have previously said what we mean by 
the expression [predicated] of all.’” 

“ It may seem perhaps that this is a [perfect] definition of the 
extremes and of the middle term. But it is not ; for it behoves 
us to sub-understand, in addition, the word only; and thus the 
definition will rightly run, — But [I call] the extremes, both that 
which is in another [minor], and that in which another is [major] 
For if A bo predicated by aU B, and B of all C, it is necessary 
that A be predicated of all C. 

" This the first syllogistic mood is of two affirmative universals, 
collecting an affirmative conclusion. For if B inhere in all C, C is, 
consequently, a part of B. But B is a part of A ; A therefore, 
also, inheres in all C, C being a part of B. The reasoning will be 
plainer in material examples — as substance [is predicated] of all 
animal; animal of all man ; and there is inferred sw6s<ancc of aU 
man; and conversely, aW man [isjani'mai; all animal substance ; 
therefore, all man substance. 

“ But it is manifest how, in this figure, the terms of the first mood 
[Barbara] ought to be taken. The first is the most general, and the 
second the subaltern, genus ; whilst the third is a species more spe- 
cial than the middle. The conclusion ought always to be drawn. 
Thus, if, proceeding synthetically, we commence by the major term 
[and proposition], substance begins ; wherefore it also leads the 
way in the conclusion. [There is predicated] substance of all 
animal (here commences) ; animal of all man; whilst 

the conclusion again commences with substance, — substance of all 
man. But if we start from the minor term [and proposition], as 
from man, with this also the conclusion will commence : all man 
[is] ammaZ; all animal substance ; all man substance. 

“ Aristotle takes the terms A, B, C ; and, from the relation of the 
letters, he manifests to us the order of the first figure. The major 
terra he calls A, because A stands first in order ; the minor tenn, 
C ; and the middle term B, as B, in its order, follows A, and pre- 
cedes C. 

“ It is plain that the terms may possibly be coadeqnate [and 
therefore reciprocating] ; as receptive of science — risible — man; 
for all man is risible ; all risible is receptive of science ; therefore, 
all man is receptive of science.” 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


423 


F. 23 b, Aristotle ch. 5, § 2, Second Figure. “ ‘ The major ex- 
treme is that which lies nearer to the middle ; the minor, that 
which lies farther from the middle.’ 

“ In place of more akin and more proximate to the middle ; not 
in position, but in dignity. For since, of the terms, the middle is 
twice predicated, while, in the conclusion, the major is once pre- 
dicated, but the minor not even once predicated ; [consequent- 
ly], that which i.s once predicated will be the more proximate to 
that which is twice predicated, that is, to the middle, than that 
which is not even once predicated. Wherefore, we shall hear him 
[Aristotle], in the 'Third Figure, calling the minor the term more 
proximate to the middle on account of their affinity, for they are 
both subjects, while he calls the major term the more remote. 
Perhaps, also, he wishes that in the diagraph (rg KaTaypa<j>ff), 
the major term should be placed closer to the middle, and the 
minor farther off. But the major extreme in this figure, the two 
premises being universal, exists not by nature but by position, for the 
first of the extremes which you meet with as a subject in the second 
figm-e, — this is the minor extreme, the other is the major. So in 
the example — All man an animal ; no plant animal ; therejore, no 
man plant. In like manner, if we take the commencement from 
plant, this becomes the minor term, and man the major ; as no 
jdant animal ; all man animal ; no plant, therefore, man. Con- 
sequently, the major and minor terms exist in these examples, only 
by position, not by natura If, indeed, one or other of the proposi- 
tions be particular, the major and the minor terms are then determin- 
ed ; for we hold that in this figure the universal is the major.” 
Aristotla — § 3. “ ‘The middle is placed external to, [not between], 
the extremes, and first in position.’ 

" The middle term passes out of what is properly the middle 
position ; it is also placed out of or external to the extremes ; but 
either above these or below. But if it be placed above, so as to bo 
predicated of both, it is called first in position ; if below, so as to 
be subjected, it is called second. Wherefore, here, as predicate 
of both premises, he styles the middle term the first ; for if it 
be placed above, it is first in position, and, in being apart from the 
extremes, it is placed without them.” 

Aristotle, ch. 6, § 2. Third Figure, f 27, b. " ‘ The major ex- 


Digiiized by Google 


424 


APPENDIX. 


treme is that more remote from, the minor is that more proximate 
to, the middle.’ 

“ The major term in this figure is twice predicated of the middle, 
and in the conclusion ; but the minor once only, and that of the 
middle, for it is subjected to the major in the conclusion ; the 
middle is alone subjected, never predicated. When he, therefore, 
says that the major term is more remote from the middle, he means 
the term always pretlicate is in affinity more remote from that 
which is never predicate, but always subject. And that which is 
never subject is the major and more proximate term ; that again, 
which is now subject, now predicate, is the minor.” 

V. — Martianus CAPELLA-O 

Martianus CapeUa, De Septevi Artibus Liberalibm, L. iv. De 
Diulectica, in capite. Quid sit Predicativus Syllogismvs, p. 127, 
ed Grotii ; p. 83, ed Basil. 1532. 

“ Hujus generis trcs formte [figurse] sunt. 

“ Prima est, in qua declarativa [prtedicatum] particula superioris 
sumpti, sequentis eflScitur subjective [subjectum] ; aut subjectiva 
superioris, declarativa sequentis. Declarativa superioris fit subjec- 
tiva sequentis, ut Omnis voluptas honnm est ; omne bonum utile 
est ; omnis igitur voluptas uiilis est. Subjectiva superioris fit de- 
clarativa sequentis, si hoc modo veils convertere : Omne bonum 
utile est; omnis voluptas bonum est; omnis igitur voluptas utilis 
est.” 

In First Form or Figure, notices the four direct and five indirect 
moods, — reflexion ; and in the second and third, the usual number 
of moods.3 

In Second Figure — " Hie reflexione si utaris, alius modus non 
efficitur, quoniam de utrisque subjectivis fit illatio.” He seems 
to hold that two direct conclusions are competent in Second and 
Third Figures. 

In Second Figure, he enounces generally (four times) as thus ; — 

a Flourished A.C. 457» Piwaow ; 474, See />io/<r/., pp. 638, 566, Genev. 

Tennemann. 1650, and above, p. 404. (fl. 520h Cf. 

^ CaBsiodorua, in First Figure, gives Apuleiim, Dt Syllogitmo CaUgorico^ Op.^ 
both forma, “voleic;” in Second and p. 35. KImen. (a.& 160.) Inidorus, of 
Third, though he gives also an ** vcl sic,*' Seville, {Gothofr. A uct.f jx 878) (a.c. 600 ; 
they are examples, both in converse, of died 636.) 

CapeUa's general mode of enunciation. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


42.5 


“ Omne justum honeatum; nullum turpe honeatum; nullum igitur 
juatum turpe ; but sometimes (once) thus, — “Nullum igitur turpe 
justum." 

In Third Form or Figure generally (six times) thus as — “ Omne 
justum honeatum; omne justum bonum; quoddam igitur kon- 
eatum bonum;” but sometimes (once) as, — “Quoddam igitur 
bonum honeatum." 


VI. — ISIDOKUS. 

Isidorus, Originum, L. L c. 28. De Sgllogismis Dialecticis. 
Opera, p. 20 (1617) ; in Gotho/red. Auctores, p. 878. 

“Formulas Categoricorum, id est, Prasdicativorum Syllogis- 
morum sunt tres. Primse formulte modi sunt novem. 

“ Primus modus est qui conducit, id est, qui colligit ex uni- 
versalibus dedicativis dedicativum universale directim : ut, 

Omne justum honestum ; omne honestum bonum; ergo omne 
justum bonum.” All in first figure, with minor first ; in second 
and third figures, varies ; uses per reflexionem et rejlexim in- 
differently ; and through all moods of all figures follows Apuleiua 
“ Has formulas Categoricorum Syllogismorum qui plene nosse 
dcsiderat, librum legat qxii inscribitur Perihermenias Apuleii, et 
quae subtilius sunt tractata cognoscet ’’ 

VII. — Aveeeoes. 

Averroes, In Anal. Prior., L i., c. v., on First Figure: “If, 
therefore, the middle term be so ordered between the two ex- 
tremes, that it be predicated of • the minor and subjected to the 
major, (as, if we say all C ia B and all B ia A) ; it is plain that 
this order of syllogism is natural to \is ; and it is called by Aris- 
totle the first figure.” And thus are stated all the examples in detail 

C. vi Figure Second. — “ And the proposition whose subject is 
the subject of the qusesitum is the minor proposition, but that 
whose subject is the predicate of the qusesitum is the major. Let 
us then place first in order of enunciation the minor extreme ; let 
the middle term then follow, and the major come last, to the end 
that thus the major may be distinguished from the minor ; for in 
thLs figure the terms are not distinguLshed, unless by relation to 
the qumsitum.” So all the examples. 

C. viL Third Figure. — “ That proposition in which lies the sub- 


Digitized by Google 


426 


APPENDIX. 


jcct of the qusesitum is called the minor proposition, since the 
subject itself is called the minor term; that proposition which 
contains the predicate of the quscsitum is named the major. In 
the example, let the minor term be C, the middle B, and the major 
A, and their order be that we first enounce the middle, tlien the 
minor, and last of aU the major.” And so the examples. 

VIII — Melanchthon. 

Melanchthon, Erotemata Dialecticw, L. iii., p. l7o- 

“ Demonstration why there are necessarily three [and only three] 
Figures. 

“ Every argumentation which admits the syllogistic form, (for of 
such form Induction and Example are not recipient, [?]) proceeds 
either [1°], From genus to species universally with an universal 
conclusion, or [2°], From species to genus with a particular conclu- 
sion, or [3°], A distraction of two species takes place, or [4°], There 
is a concatenation of a plurality of causes and effects. Nor are 
there more modes of argumentation, if we judge with skilL 

“ The process from genus to species engenders the First Figure. 
And the consequence is valid from the genus with a universal sign 
both affirmatively and negatively to the species, — this is naturally 
manifest The process from species to genus with a particular 
conclusion engenders the Third Figure. And it is evident that, 
the species posited, the genus is posited. 

" The distraction of species engenders the Second Figure. And 
the reason of the consequence is clear, because disparate species are 
necessarily sundered. These may be judged of by common sense, 
without any lengthened teaching. Both are manifest, — that the 
figures are rightly distributed, and that the consequences are in- 
dubitably valid." 

IX. — Arnauld. 

Arnauld, L’Art de Penser, {Port Royal Logic), P. iii., ch. 11, p. 
235. — General principle of syllogisms : — " That one oj the pre- 
mises should contain tlte conclusion, and the other show that it 
does 80 contain it.” — [So Purchot, Jnstit. Phil., Vol. L P. iii., ch. 1.] 

Ch. V., p. 215. — “Foundation of First Figure. 

“ Principle of affirmative moods : — That what agrees with a 
notion taken universally, agrees also with all of which this notvjn 
is afirmed ; in other woi'ds, with all tluit is the subject of this 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


427 


notion, or is comprised within its sphere!' [Or, more shortly, 
(says Purchot, c. vL), Whatever is predicated of the superior, is 
predicated of the inferior!] 

“ Principle of the negative moods : — What is denied of a notion 
taken universally, is denied of all whereof this notion is affi.rmed!‘ 
[Purchot — What is repay nant to the superior, is repugnant also 
to the inferior, ch. vi., p. 217.] 

“ Foundation of the Second Figure.® Princijde of the syllogisms 
in Cesare and Festino : — That what is denied of a universal 
notion, is denied also of whatever this notion is affirmed, that is 
to say, of all its subjects. 

“Principle of the syllogisms of Camestres, Baroco : — All that is 
contained under the extension of a universal notion, agrees with 
none of the subjects whereof that notion has been denied, seeing 
that the attribute of a negative proposition is taken in its whole 
extension.” 

Ch. vii. p. 220. “ Foundation of the Third Figure. 

“ Principle of the a£5rmative moods ; — When two terms may be 
affirmed of the same thing, they may also be affirmed of each 
other, taken particularly. [So Purchot nearly.] 

“ Principle of the negative moods : — When of two terms, the 
one may be denied, and the other affirmed, of the same thing, they 
may be particularly denied of each other.” [So Purchot nearly.] 

No foundation or principle given for the Fourth Figure. 

X. — Geosser. 

Samuelis Grosseri, Pharus Intdlectus, 1697, P. iii., S. L, Mem. 
3, c. 2 (probably from Weiss, see Pref.) “ The foundation of the 
first figure is the Dictum De Omni et Nullo ; for whatever is uni- 
versally affirmed or denied of a universal subject, that is also 
affirmed or denied of all and each contained under that subject 

“ Tlie foundation of the second figure is Contrariety ; for the 
predicates of contrary things are contrary. 

“ The foundation of the third figure is the agreement of the ex- 
tremes in any third ; for what agrees with any third agrees with 
each other, and may be joined or separated in the same proposition, 
inasmuch as they are in agreement or confliction in relation to any 
third thing.” 

• Purchot Bay» this Figure rests upon tanu, but $otMthing agrtft with the one, 

single principle — Two thinge are not the which i$ repugnant to the other. 


Digitized by Coogle 


428 


APPENDIX. 


Elustrates the three figures by three triangles, p. 132. In 
the first we ascend to the apex on one side, and descend on the 
other ; in the second wo ascend at both sides ; in the third we 
descend on both sides. 


XI. — Lambeht. 

Lambert, Neues Organon, VoL I., § 225. — See Melanchthon, 
(above p. 426). 

Eelation of Figures. “ We further remark that the first dis- 
coverer of Syllogisms and their Figures was, in his arrangement of 
their propositions, determined by some arbitrary circumstance; his 
views and selections at least were not foundeil on aught natural and 
necessary (§ 196). He places, to wit, that premise after the other, 
which contains among its terms the subject of the conclusion, pro- 
bably in order to introduce into all the figures a common law. To 
that law, however, we do not restrict ourselves either in speech or in 
writing. The mathematician, who perhaps draws the greatest num- 
ber of formal syllogisms with the fewest paralogisms, commences 
to take the first figure, for example, not with the major but with 
the minor proposition, because not only in this figure is such pre- 
mise always the more obtrusive, but also because its subject is the 
proper matter of discom-se. Frequently the premise is only quoted, 
or it is absolutely omitted whensoever it is of itself obvious to the 
reader, or is easily discoverable from the minor and conclusion. 
The conclusion inferred is then, in like manner, constituted into the 
minor proposition of a new syllogism, wherewith a new major is 
connected This natural arrangement of the syllogisms of the first 
figure, rests, consequently, altogether on the principle, — That we can 
assert of the subject of an affirmative proposition, whatever we 
mag know of its predicate ; or what may be said of the attribute 
of a thing is valid of the th ing itself And this is what the syl- 
logisms of the first Figure have peculiar to themselves. It is also 
so expressed ; — What is true of the genus is true also of each of 
its species. 

§ 226. “ On the other hand, in the second and third Figures there 
is no talk of species and genera. The second Figure denies the 
subjects of each other, because they are diverse in their attributes ; 
and every difference of attribute is here effectual. We, conse- 
quently, use this figure principally in the case where two things 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


420 


ought not to be intercommuted or confounded. This becomes 
necessarily impossible, so soon os we discover in the thing A some- 
thing which does not exi.st in the thing B. We may, consequently, 
say that syllogisms of the second figure lead ns to distinguish 
things, and prevent us from confounding notions. And it will be 
also found, that, in these cases, we always use them. 

§ 227. “ The third Figure affords Examples and Exceptions; and, 
in this Figure, we adduce all exempla in contrariiim. The two 
formula are as follows ; — 

“ 1. There are B which are C; fur M is B and C. 

“ 2. There are B which are not C ; for M is B and not C. 

“ In this manner we draw syllogisms of the Third Figure, for the 
most part, in the form of copulative propositions (§ 1 35) ; because 
we are not wont twice to repeat the subject, or to make thereof 
two propositions. Sometimes one proposition is wholly omitted, 
when, to wit, it is self-manifest. 

“In the Fourth Figure, as in the First, species and genera appear 
only w;ith this difference, that in the moods, Baralip, Dibatis, 
Fesapo, Fresison, the inference is from the species to the genus ; 
whereas in Calentes there is denied of the species what was denied 
of the genus. For where the genus is not, neither arc there any 
of its species. This last mood we, therefore, use when we conclude 
negatively a minori ad majus, seeing that the genus precedes, and 
is more frequently pre.sented than, any of its species. 

§ 229. “ The syllogisms of the four Figures are thus distinguished 
in relation to their employment, in the following respects : — 

“ 1. The First Figure ascribes to the thing what we know of its 
attribute. It concludes from the genus to the species. 

" 2. The Second Figure leads to the discrimination of things, and 
relieves perplexity in our notions. 

“ 3. The Third Figure affords examples and exceptions in pro- 
positions which appear general. 

“ 4. The Fourth Figure finds species in a genus in Baralip and 
Dibatis ; it shows that the species does not exhaust the genus in 
Fesapo, Fresison ; and it denies the species of what was denied 
of the genus in Calentes. 

§ 230. “ This determination of the difierence of the Four Figures 
is, absolutely speaking, only manifested when we employ them 
after natural fashion, and without any thought of a selection. For, 


Digitized by Google 


430 


APPENDIX. 


as the syllogisms of every figure admit of being transmuted into 
those of the first, and partly also into those of any other, if we rightly 
convert, or interchange, or turn into propositions of equal value, 
their premises ; consequently, in this point of view, no difference 
subsists between them ; but whether we in every case should perform 
such commutations, in order to bring a syllogism under a favourite 
figure, or to a.ssure ourselves of its correctness, — this is a wholly 
difierent question. The latter is manifestly futile. For, in the 
commutation, we must always undertake a conversion of the pre- 
mises, and a converted proposition is assuredly not always of 
equal evidence with that which we had to convert, while, at the 
same time, we are not so well accustomed to it ; for example, the 
proposition. Some stones attract iron, every one will admit, be- 
cause The magnet is a stone, and attracts iron. This syllogism is 
in the Third Figure. In the first, by conversion of one of its pre- 
mises, it would run thus : — 

Major, — A It magneU attract iron ; 

Minor, — Some stones are maijnets ; 

Conclusion, — Some stones attract iron. 

Here we are unaccustomed to the minor proposition, while it ap- 
pears as if we must pass all stones under review, in order to pick 
out magnets from among them. On the other hand, that the 
magnet is a stone, is a proposition which far more naturally sug- 
gests itself, and demands no consideration. In like manner, A 
circle is not square; for the circle is round, — the square not. This 
proof [in the third figure] is as follows, when cast in the first : — 

What is not round is no circle ; 

A square is not round ; 

Consequently, &c. 

Here the major proposition is converted by means of terminus iriji- 
nitus, and its truth is manifested to us only through the conscious- 
ness that all circles are round. For, independently of this pro- 
position, should we not hesitate, — there being innumerable things 
which are not round, — whether the circle were one of those which 
belonged to this category ? We think not ; because we are aware. 

§ 231. “ It is thus apparent that we use every syllogistic figure 
there, where the propositions, as each figure requires them, are 
more familiar and more current The difference of figures rests. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


4.31 


therefore, not only on their form, but extenrls itself, by relation to 
their employment, also to things themselves, so that we use each 
figure where its use is more natural : The first for finding out or 
proving the Attributes of a thing ; the second for finding out or 
p^’oving the Difference of things ; the third for finding out and 
proving Examples and Exceptions ; the fourth for finding out 
and excluding the Species of a Oetius. 

§ 2.32. “ Further, whether the three last figures are less evident 
than the first, is a question which has been denied [aflBrmed (?)] on 
this account, that the first figure only rests immediately on the 
Dictum de Omni et Kullo [§ 220], whilst the others have hitherto, 
by a circuit, been etluoed therefrom. We have already remarked 
[§ 211], that this circuit, through our mode of notation, is wholly 
superseded. We need, therefore, only translate its principle into 
the vernacular, and we shall find that the D ictum de 0 mni et Nullo 
is on that account applicable to the first figure, because its truth 
is based on the nature of the proposition. From this principle, 
therefore, the first figure and its moods admit of an immediate de- 
duction ; it is thus only a question whether the other figures are 
incapable [capable (?)] of such immediate deduction, or whether it 
is necessary previously to derive them through the first figure ? 
Our mode of notation shows that the latter is an [unnecessary] cir- 
cuit, because every variety of syllogism admits for itself a various 
notation, and because, in that case, the premises are taken for what 
they actually are. Consequently, every figure, like the first, has its 
own probation, — a probation drawn exclusively from the natures of 
the propositions. The whole matter is reduced to this, — Whether 
a notion, wholly or in part, is, or, wholly or in part, is not, under 
a second ; and whether, again, this second, wholly or in part, is, 
or, wholly or in part, is not, under a third. All else proceeds only 
on the interchange of equivalent modes of expression, — the figured, 
namely, and those which are not figured. And this interchange 
we may style translating, since the figured modes of expression may 
be regarded as a special language, serving the purpose of a nota- 
tion. We have above (§ 220), after all the syllogistic modes were 
discovered and denoted, adduced the Dictum de Omni et Nullo, 
but only historically, since our manner of determining the syllogis- 
tic moods is immediately founded on the nature of the propositions, 
from which this Dictum is only a con.sequence. Moreover, this 


Digitized by Google 


432 


APPENDIX. 


consequence is special, resting, as it does, on the notions of Species 
and Oenera. Wherefore, its validity only extends so far as pro- 
positions can be recalled to these notions ; as, for example, in 
the First Figure. In the Second, the notion of Difference emerges ; 
and in the Third, the notion of Example. If we, therefore, would 
have special dicta for the several Figures, in that case it would 
follow, and, at the same time, become manifest that the middle 
term of a syllogism, considered for itself, expresses, in the First 
Figure, a principle \of Ascription or Procreation] ; in the Second, 
Difference ; in the Third, an Examjile; and in the Fourth, the 
principle of Reciprocity. 

1. For the First Figure. Dictum de Omni et Nullo. What is 
tnie of all A, is true of every A. 

2. For the Second Figure. Dictum de Diverse. Things which 
are different, are not attributes of each other. 

3. For the Third Figure. Dictum de Exemplo. When we find 
things A which are B, in that case some A are B. 

4. For the Fourth Figure. Dictum de Reciproco. I. If no M 
is B ; then no B is this or that M. II. If C is [or is not] this or 
that B ; in that case some B are [or are not] C.” 

XII. — Platnee. 

Plainer, Philosophische Aphoriamcn, 3d ed., 1793. — Part I., § 
.544, conformed to his Lehrhuch der Logik und Metaphysik, 1795, 
§ 227. “ The reason why the predicate belongs to the subject is in 
all possible syllogi.sms thi.s, — because the subject stands in a relation 
of subordination with, [is either higher or lower than], a third 
notion to which the predicate belongs. Consequently, all inference 
proceeds on the following rule : — If the subject of the [concluding] 
judgment stand in a relation of subordination with a third notion, 
to which a certain predicate pertains ; in that case, this predicate 
also pertains to the same judgment, affirmatively or negatively.” 

In his note on this Aphorism, Plainer (Lehrbuch) admits — “My 
fundamental rule is only at fault in the second Aristotelic figure, 
which, however, is no genuine figure ; because here, in the pre- 
mises, the subject and predicate have changetl places,” &c. In the 
2d edition of his Aphoi-isma (1784) he had adopted the principle of 
Identity with the same third, as he has it : “ In what extension 
or proportion {Alaasse) two notions are like or unlike to a third, 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


433 


in the same extension or proportion are they like or unlike each 
other." (§ 628.) 

Philosophische Aphorismeu, Part I., third edition, 1793, 
§ 668, compared with second, 1784, § 672-676. — “Nevertheless, 
each of these grammatical 6gures of syllogism has its peculiar 
adaptation in language for the dialectical application of proofs ; 
and the assertion is without foundation, that the first is the most 
natural Its use is only more appropriate, when we intend to show, 
— that a predicate pertains [or does not pertain'\ to a subject in 
virtue of its class. More naturally than in the first, do we show, 
in the second, the difference of things apparently similar ; and in 
the third, the similarity of apparently dif event things. The 
fourth figure, [it is said in the second edition], on account of the 
position of its terms, is always unnatural in language.” 

Philosophische A phorismen, Part I., last edition, 1793, § 561. — 
“ The principle of the first figure is the Dictum de Omni et Nvllo." 

§ 564. — “ Touching the other figure, [the third, for in this edi- 
tion Platner abolishes, in a logical relation, the second], its special 
principle is the following rule : — What belongs to the subordinate, 
that, since the subordinate is apart of the universal, belongs also 
in part {particularly) to the universal." 

In the second edition, 1784, the second figure is recognise<l, 
and, with the third, obtains its special law. 

§ 659. — “ The principle of the second figure is : — If turn notions, 
wholly or in part, are opposite to a third, so are they also, wholly 
or in part, opposite to each other." 

§ 664. — “ The principle of the third figure is : — What can be 
particularly ajffirmed or denied of a subaltern species, that also, 
in so far as such subaltern species is part of a genus, may be 
particularly affirmed or denied of the genus." 

Philosophische Aphorismen. Part I., § 546. Note. — “ In 
general, logicians treat the subject as if it were necessarily subordi- 
nated to the predicate. It may, however, on the contrary, be the 
higher notion, and the predicate thus be subordinated to it. This 
is the case in all particular propositions where the predicate is not 
an attribute of the genus, but an accident of the subject. For 
instance, — Some creatures are animals; here the subject is the 
higher ; Some men are imperfect ; here the higher is the predi- 
cate. We must not, therefore, in our syllogistic, thus enounce the 
VOL. II. 2 E 


Digitized by Google 


434 


APPENDIX. 


fundamental rule of reasonings, — If the svhject be svbordinated to 
a third notion, but with or in the relation of subordination with 
a third notion.” 

XIII.— Fries. 

Fries, System der Loyik, § 56. — “The species of categorical syl- 
logisms are determined by the variety of relations in which three 
notions may stand to each other, so that a syllogism may be the 
result. 

“ These relations may be thought as three. 

" Case I. — Three notations are reciprocally subordinated in gra- 
dation, so that the second is subordinated to the first, but super- 
ordinated to the third. 

“ Case II. — Two notions are subordinated to a third. 

“Case III. — Two notions are superordinated to a third.® 

“ When, in these cases, is a syllogism possible ? 

§ 57. — “ In all the three cases, the syllogisms are equally valid, 
for they are founded on the general laws of the comiection of 
notions. 

" They all follow, to wit, from the relation of a whole sphere to 
its parts, which lies in the Dictum de Omni et Xtdlo. The prin- 
ciples for the three mentioned cases are thus : — 

“For the first, — The part (C) of the part (B) lies in the whole 
(A), and what (A) lies out of the whole (B), lies also out of the 
2 )art (C). 

“ For the second, — What (A or some A) lies out of the whole (B), 
lies also out of its parts (C). 

"For the third, — If a part (B) lie in two wholes (A and C), in 
that case these have a part in common ; and if a part (B) he in a 
whole (C), hut out of a nother whole (A), in that case the first (C) 
has a part out of the other (A). 

" The first case alone coincides immediately with the perfect de- 
claration of a syllogism, — that a case is therein determined by a 
rule. For the third case, therefore, our two declarations of a 
major premise, — that it is the rule, and that it contains the major 
term, — do not coincide, seeing that here the minor term may be 
forthcoming in the rule. On this account, the arrangement of the 

• [Se« Jordano Bnmo (in Denzinger, § 237, p. 163]. 

Loffik, t. ii., p. 259). Stattler, Logica, 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


435 


first case is said to be the only regular, and the others are reduced 
to it. That this reduction is easily possible, we may in general 
convince ourselves, by reflecting that every syllogism requires a 
general rule as premise, and that the other cases are only distin- 
guished from the first by the converted arrangement of the propo- 
sitions. But as all propositions may be either purely converted or 
purely counterposed, consequently the two last cases can at most 
so far deviate from the first, that they are connected with the first 
case only through reversed (gegentheilige) notions. 

§ 57 b. “ The doctrine of the several species of categorical syllo- 
gisms, as regulated by the forms of their judgments, is at bottom 
an empty subtlety ; for the result of all this circuity is only, that, in 
every categorical syllogism, a case is determined by a rule, and this 
is already given in the law, that in every reasoning one premi.se 
must be universal. Tlie scholastic logic treats of this doctrine 
only in so far as the species of syllogism are determined by the 
forms of judgment, and thereby only involves itself in long gram- 
matical discussions. Ari.stotle has been falsely reproached for 
overlooking the fourth figure, he only having admitted three. For 
Aristotle proceeds, preci.sely as I have here done ; only on the rela- 
tion of notions in a syllogism, of which there are possible only our 
three cases. His error lies in this, — that he did not lay a general 
rule at the root of every figure, but, with a prolixity wholly useless, 
in determining the moods of the several figures, details each, 
even of the illegitimate, and demonstrates its illegitimacy. This 
prolixity has been too often imitated by other logicians, in the 
attempts at an evolution of the moods. Kant, goes too far, in de- 
nouncing this whole doctrine as a mere grammatical subtlety. The 
distinction of the three cases is, however, a logical distinction ; and 
his assertion, that the force of inference in the other two is wholly 
derived from that of the first case, is likewise not correct. I mani- 
festly, however, conclude as easily in the third case, — ‘A part 
which lies in two wholes, is a part common to both,’ — as in the 
first, — ‘ The part of the part lies in the whole.’ The third case 
presents, indeed, the readiest arrangement for reasonings from the 
particular to the general, i. e., for syllogisms in the second figure 
according to our terminology. 

“ The scholastic doctrine of the four syllogistic figures and nine- 
teen moods of categorical syllogisms requires no lengthened illus- 


Digitized by Google 



436 


APPENDIX. 


tration. If the figures are determined by the arrangement of 
notions in the premises, then the following combination is exhaus- 
tive. For the conclusion in all cases S P [being supposed the 

same], the [terms or] notions stand : 

1) According to our first case, M P 

S M 

2) With converted rntyor premise, P M 

S M 

3) With converted minor premise, M P 

M S 

4) Both premises converted, P M 

M S 

" Should we therefore simply convert both premises in a syllo- 
gism of the first figure, we are able to express it in all the figures. 
Let the notions given be fireproof, lead, vietal, there then follows 
the conclusion — Some metal is not fireproof— bovo the premises : — 

In the First Figure — No lead is fireproof ; 

Some vietal is lead; 

In the Second Figure — Nothing fireproof is lead ; 

Some metal is lead; 

In the Third Figure — No lead is fireproof ; 

All lead is metal; 

In the Fourth Yigsao— Nothing fireproof is lead, 

All lead is metal. 

“ It is here apparent that the three first figures are our three 
cases ; but the fourth we did not employ, as it contains no peculiar 
relations or notions, but only under our first case superordinates, 
and then subordinates a middle term. This manner of emmeiating 
a syllogism is thus only possible, where we are competent, through 
conversions, to transmute the arrangement of the first figure into 
that of the fourth. Now this happens : 1] If we convert the con- 
clusion S P into P S, since then the major and the minor 

terms, as also the major and minor premises, change names ; or, 2] 
If both premises allow of an immediate conversion, so that the one 
remains imiversal ; for then the converted propositions contain the 
same thoughts as those given, and, consequently, establish the same 
conclusion.” 

[Objections to Fries’ doctrine of figure — 1®, Only applies to affir- 
matives ; 2°, Only the arrangement of the results of a successful 
comparison, and takes no heed of the comparisons that may have 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


487 


been fruitless, (the illegitimate moods) ; 3°, Takes account of only 
one subordination, for, in second and third cases, in each there is 
a reciprocal subordination in Extension and Comprehension.] 

XIV and XV. — Kbuo and Beneke — their Doctrines of 
Syllogism criticised. 

The authority of the two following philosophers, who conclude 
this series, is rather negative than positive ; inasmuch as they 
both concur in proving, that the last attempts at a reformation of 
the Syllogistic Theoiy proceed on a wholly different ground from 
that on which, I think, this alone can be accomplished. These two 
philosophers are Krug and Beneke ; for, beside them, I am aware 
of no others by whom this has been attempted. 

Krug was a disciple of the Kantian school, Kant’s immediate 
successor in hb Chair of Logic and Metaphysics at Koenigsberg, 
and, subsequently. Professor of Philosophy in the University of 
Leipsia He is distingubhed, not only as a voluminous writer, but 
as a perspicuous and acute thinker ; and hb peculiar modification 
of the Kantian system, through a virtual return to the principle of 
Common Sense, is known, among the German theories, by the 
name of Synthetism. Hb Logic, (the first part of hb System, of 
Theoretical Philosophy), was published in 1806, and is one of the 
best, among the many excellent, treatises on that science, which we 
owe to the learning and ability of the Germans. (I have before me 
the fonrth edition, that of 1833.) Krug propounded a new theory 
of syllogistic ; but the novelty of his scheme is wholly external, 
and adds only fresh complication to the old confusion. It has, 
accordingly, found no favour among subsequent logicians. 

Passing over the perverse ingenuity of the principles on which 
the whole doctrine b founded, it is enough to state, that Krug db- 
tributes the syllogbtic moods into eight classes. Of these the first, 
(which, with some other logicians, he considers not as a figure at all, 
but as the pure, regular, and ordinary form of reasoning), corre- 
sponds to the First Figure of the Aristotelico-Scholastio distribu- 
tion. The other seven classes, as so many impure, irregular, and 
extraordinary forms, constitute, (on the analogy of Rhetoric and 
Grammar), so many figures. Of these, the new is only the old 
First Figure, the minor premise, in extension, being stated before 
the major. Krug, like our other modem logicians, b not aware 


Digitized by Google 


438 


APPENDIX. 


that this was the order in which the syllogism was regularly cast, 
in common language, by the Greeks, by the Arabians, by the Jews, 
and by the Latins prior to Boethius.® The old and new first figures 
are only a single figure, the syllogism being drawn in the counter 
orders of breadth and of depth. A mood in these orders, though 
externally varying, is intrinsically, — is schematically, — the same. 
Krug’s distinction of his new first figure is, therefore, null Thus, 
Barama is Barbara ; Caleme is Celarent ; Dirami is Darii ; Firemo 
is Ferio. Nor is his discrimination of the other six better founded. 
His new (the old) Second, and his Fi/th Figures, are also one. 
The latter is precisely the same with the former ; Fimeso is 
Festino, and Fomaco is Baroco. In one case, (under Camestres), 
Krug adopts, as alone right, the conclusion rejected by the logi- 
cians. In this, he and they are, in fact, both wrong ; though in 
opposite ways. Each mood, in the second, (as in the third), figure, 
has two indifferent conclusions ; and the special one-sided practice 
of the former is only useful, as gainsaying the general one-sided 
precept of the latter. The same objection applies to Krug’s new 
(the old) Third, in connection with his Sixth Figure. They are 
one ; Duroco is Bocardo, Faphno is Felapton, and Fisemo is 
Ferison. In two cases, (under Disamis and Bocardo), Krug has 
recognised the repudiated conclusion. Krug (§ 109) has, how- 
ever, committed an error in regard to Bocardo. He gives, as its 
example, the following syllogism, in which, for brevity, I have 
filled up the quantifications ; 

“ Some animals are not [any\ viviparous ; 

All animals are [some) organised tilings ; 

Therefore, some organised things are not [any] viviparous." 

In a note, he adds; “ The conclusion should here be : — ' There- 
fore, some things tvhich are not viviparous are [some] organised.' 
And this is seen also by reduction. We have, however, followed 
the arbitrary precept of the logicians, that the extreme in the 
second proposition should stand subject in the conclusion ; although 
it be here indifferent, which extreme becomes the subject The 
conclusion is only changed into another quality.” Only changed 
into another quality ! Only an affirmative conclusion from a 
negative premise ! Tlie legitimate inference is ; — 

a Sec above, p. 403 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


439 


“ Therefore, no tnmparous u some organic ; " or, 

“ Therefore, any viviparous is not some organic.” 

Bachmann, {Logik, § 1 35), another eminent logician, has erred 
with Krug. A particular predicate in a negative proposition, seems 
indeed one of the last difficulties for reformed logic. Krug’s new 
(the old) Fourth Figure bears a corre.sponding relation to his 
Seventh. He is right, certainly, in abolishing all the moods of the 
fourth figure, except Fesapo and Fresiso ; and, from his point of 
view, he is hardly to be blamed for not abolishing these likewise, 
along with the correlative moods, Fapesnto and Frisesmo, and, 
with them, his seventh figure. Finally, rejecting the scholastic 
doctrine of Reduction, he adopts, not without sundry perverse 
additions, Kant’s plan of accoropli.shing the same end ; so that 
Krug’s conversive and contrapositive and transpositive interpola- 
tions, by which he brings back to propriety his sevenfold figured 
aberrations, are merely the substitution of one " false subtlety ” for 
another. He, and Bachmann after him, renounce, however, " the 
crotchet of the Aristotelians,” in making the extreme of the prior 
premise the predicate, always, of the conclusion, in the first and 
second figures ; and, though both do this partially and from an 
erroneous point of view, their enunciation, such as it is, is still 
something. 

Professor Beneke, of Berlin, is the last to whom I can refer, 
and in him we have, on the point in question, the final result of 
modern speculatioa This acute and very original metaphysician 
stands the uncompromising champion of the philosophy of experi- 
ence, against the counter doctrine of transcendentalism, in all its 
forms, now prevalent in Germany ; and, among the other depart- 
ments of mental science, he has cultivated the theory of reasoning, 
with great ability and success. In 1832 appeared his Lehrbuch 
der Logik, &c. ; in 1839, his Syllogismorum Analyticorum Ori- 
gines et Ordo Katuralis, &c. ; and in 1842, his System der Logik, 
&a, in two volumes. In Logic, Beneke has devoted an especial 
share of attention to the theory and distribution of Syllogism ; but 
it is precisely on this point, though always admiring the ingenuity 
of his reasonings, that I am compelled overtly to dissent from his 
conclusions. 


Digitized by Google 


440 


APPENDIX. 


The Syllogistic of Beneke is at once opposed, and correspondent, 
to that of Krug ; there is an external difiFerence, but, without imi- 
tation, an internal similarity. Instead of erroneously multiplying 
the syllogistic figures, like the Leipsic philosopher, the philosopher 
of Berliu ostensibly supersedes them altogether. Yet, when con- 
sidered in essence and result, both theories agree, in being, and 
from the same side, severally, the one an amplification, the other 
an express doubling, of the nineteen scholastic moods. In this, 
both logicians were unaware, that the same had been, long ago, 
virtually accomplished in the progress of the science; neither con- 
sidered, that the amplification he proposed was superficial, not to 
say mistaken ; and that, instead of simplicity, it only tended to 
introduce an additional perplexity into the study. Beneke has the 
merit of more openly relieving the opposition of Breadth and 
Depth, in the construction of the syllogism ; and Krug, though on 
erroneous grounds, that of partially renouncing the old error of 
the logicians in regard to the one syllogistic conclusion, in the 
second and third figures. But, in his doctiine of moods, Beneke 
has, I think, gone wrong in two opposite ways : like Krug, in his 
arbitrary multiplication of these forms ; like logicians in general, 
in their arbitrary limitation. 

In regard to the former, — the counter quantities of Breadth and 
depth do not discriminate two moods, but merely two ways of 
stating the same mood. Accordingly, we do not multiply the 
moods of the first figure, to which alone the principle applies, by 
casting them in the one dependency and in the other; we only 
show, that, in that figure, every single mood may be enounced in a 
twofold order, more german, the one to the quantity of extension, the 
other to the quantity of intension. An adequate notation ought, 
equally and at once, to indicate both. But in reference to the 
second and third figure.s, the case is worse. For in them we have 
no such dependency at all between the extremes ; and to double 
their moods, on this principle, we must take, divide, and arbitrarily 
appropriate, one of the two indifferent conclusions. But, as every 
single mood of these figures has a double conclusion, this division 
cannot be made to difference their plurality. K Professor Beneke 
would look (instar omnium) into Apuleius or Isidoms, or, better 
than cither, into Blcmmidas, he will find all his new moods, (not. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


441 


of course, those in the fourth figure) stated by these, as by other 
ancient logicians ; who, however, dreamed not that the mere acci- 
dental difference of, what they called, an analytic and synthetic 
enouncement, determined any multiplication of the moods them- 
selves. 

In the latter respect, Dr Beneke has only followed his predeces- 
sors ; I, therefore, make no comment on the imperfection. But, in 
accomplishing what he specially proposes, whilst we do not find 
any advancement of the science, we find the old confusion and 
intricacy replaced by another, perhaps worse. To say nothing of 
his non-abolition of the fourth figure, and of his positive failures 
in doubling its moods ; the whole process is carried on by a series 
of arbitrary technical operations, to supersede which must be the 
aim of any one who would reconcDe Logic with nature. His new 
(but which in reality are old) amplifications are brought to bear 
(I translate his titles) through " Commutations of the Premises, — 
by Subaltemation, — by Conversion, — by Contraposition ; ” and “of 
the Major, — of the Minor,” — in fact of both premises, (e. g. Fesapo, 
&c.). And so difficult are these processes, if not so uncertain the 
author’s language, tliat, after considerable study, I am still in doubt 
of his meaning on more points than one. I am unable, for ex- 
ample, to reconcile the following statements : — Dr Beneke repeatedly 
denies, in conformity with the common doctrine, the universal 
quantification of the predicate in afiirmative propositions ; and yet 
founds four moods upon this very quantification, in the conver- 
sion of a universal affirmative. This is one insolubility. But there 
arises another from these moods themselves (§ 28-31). For, if we 
employ this quantification, we have moods certainly, but not of the 
same figure with their nominal correlatives ; whereas, if we do not, 
simply rejecting the permis.sion, all slides smoothly, — we have the 
right moods in the right figure. This, again, I am unable to solve. 
Dr Beneke’s duplication of the moods is also in sundry ca.ses only 
nominal ; as is seen, for example, in Ferio 2, Fesapo 2, and Fre- 
siso 2, which are form.s, all, and in all respects, identical I must 
protest also against his violence to logical language. Tims, he 
employs everywhere " non omne,” “ non omnia,” " alle sind nicht,” 
&c., which is only a particular, (being a mere denial of omnitude) , 
for the absolute or universal negative, “nullum,” “nulla,” “kein 


Digitized by Coogle 


442 


APPENDIX. 


ist,” no, none, not any, &c., in opposition both to principle, and to 
the practice of Aristotle and succeeding logicians. 


[XVI. — Tmu3. 

Gottlieb Gerhard Titius, Are Cogitandi, sive Scientia Cogita- 
tionum Cogitantium, Cogitationibus Necessaris Instructa et a 
Peregrinis Liberata. Leipsiee, 1723, (first edition, 1701). 

Titius has been partially referred to by Sir W. Hamilton, as 
having maintained the doctrine of a Quantified Predicate. See 
above, p. 312. His theory of the Figure and Mood of Syllogism 
is well deserving of notice, — proceeding, as it does, on the applica- 
tion of that doctrine. This theory is principally contained in the 
following extracts from his Ars Cogitandi, which show how closely 
he has approximated, on several fundamental points, to the doc- 
trines of the New Analytic.'^ 

Titius gives two canons of syllogism : — 

L Affirmative. “ Qusecunque conveniunt in uno tertio, ilia 
etiam, juxta mensuram illius convenientise, inter se conveniunt.” 

II. Negative. “ Qusecunque pugnant in certo aliquo tertio, ilia, 
juxta mensuram illius disconvenientiae, etiam inter se pugnant.” 
C. ix. §§ 30, 27. 

The following relates to his doctrine of Figure and Mood, and 
to the special rules of Syllogism, as commonly accepted : — 

C. X § i. “ Sic igitur omnium Syllogismorum formalis ratio in 
genuina medii termini et praedicati ac subject! Conclusionis colla- 
tione consistit ; earn si dicere veils formam essentialem, aut Jigu- 
ram generalem vel communem, non valde reluctabor. 

§ ii. ” Prseter earn vero Peripatetici Figuras ex peculiari inedii 
termini situ adstruunt, ea rations ut Frimam fignram dicant, in 
qua medius terminus in Majore est subjectum, in Minors Praedica- 
tum, Secundam, ubi idem bis prmdicati, et Tertiam, ubi subject! 
locum bis subit. Galenus adjecit Quartam prim® contrariam, in 
qua medius terminus in majore est praudicatum, in minors subjec- 
tum, quam pluribus etiam exposuit Autor. Ai-t. Cog. p. 3, c. 8. 


• For Titius* doctrine of a Quantified thetical Syllogism, see above, pp. 312, 
Predicate, ita application to the Conver- 274, 375.— Ed. 
aiuu of Propositions and to the Hypo- 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


443 


§ iiL “ C«terum illae figura tantura sunt accidentales, ab iisqne 
vis concludendi non dependet. Quodsi tamen quis diversum medii 
termini situm attendendum esse putet, turn nec Quarta figura negli- 
genda esse vidctur, licet earn Peripatetici nonnulli haut curandam 
existiment, vide Ulman. Synops. Log. L 3, c. 2, p. 1 64. 

§ iv. “ Interim Prima cmteris magis naturalis ex eo videri 
potest, quod Subjectum et Pnedicatum Conclusionis in Prsemissis 
suam retineat qualitatera, cum in secunda et tertia alterum quali- 
tatem suam exucre, in qtiarta vero utrumque earn deponere debeat. 

§ V. “ Postea in unaquaquc figura, pro ratione quantitatis et quaii- 
tatis propositionum, peculiares Modi adstruuntur, ita quidem ut 
Primte figune Quatuor, totidem Secundse, Tertisc sex attribuantur, 
ex quibus etiam debite variatis Quarta quinque accipiat, pront ilia 
passim cum vocabulis memorialibus recenseri sclent, ut ilia quidem 
hue transcribere opus non sit, vide Autor, Art. Cogit., p. 3, a 6, 
6, 7. 8. 

§ vL " Non opus esse istis figuris et modis ad dijudicandam 
Syllogismorum bonitatem, ex monito § 3, jam inteUigi potest 
Quomodo tamen sine iis bonitas laudata intelligi queat, id forte 

non adeo liqiiidum est 

§ vii. “Non diu hie quserenda .sunt remedia : Observetur forma 
essentialis seu figura communis, ac de veritate Syllogismi recto 
judicabitur. Applicatio autem hujus moniti non est difficilis, nam 
primo rcspiciendum ad conclusionem, deinde ad medium terminum, 
quo facto etiam judicari potest, an ejus et terminorum conclusionis 
coUatio in pnemissis recte sit instituta nec ne 


§ ix. “ De cpetero uti anxie jam non inquiram, an omnis bene 
concludendi ratio mimero viodorum denario circumscribatur, 
quod quidem juxta aKpifieiav mathematicam demonstrasse videri 
vult Autor. Art. Cog. p. 3, c. 4, ita id haut admiserim, quod illi 
modi, quos vulgo laudant. Prim®, Secund® aut Terti® figur® pr®- 
cise sint assignandi, licet hoc itidem acumine mathematico se de- 
monstrasse putet dictus Autor. d 1. c. 5 seqq. 

§ X. “ Cum enim qu®vis propositio possit convert!, modo quan- 
titas prsedicati probe ob.servetur, hinc necessario sequitur, quod 
quivis Syllogismus, adhibita propositionum conversione, in quavis 
figura possit proponi, ex quo non potest non ®qnalis modorum 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


444 

numerus in unaquaque figure oriri, licet illi non ejusdem semper 
sint quantitatis. 

§ xL “ Operae pretium non est prolixe per omnia Syllogismorum 
singulis figuris adscriptorum exempla ire, sufficiat uno assertionem 
illustrasse, v. gr. in prima figura, modo Barbara hie occurrit SyUo- 
gismus apud d. Autor. c. 5. 

0. Sapiens subjicitur volunUUi Dei, 

0. Hontitus est sapiens, 

E. 0. /lonestus subjicitur voluniati Deu 

§ xii. “ Hunc in secunda figura ita proponere licet : 

Quidam,qui subjicitur voluntati Dei, est omnis sapiens, 

Oinnis honestus est sapiens, 

E. Omnis honestus subjicitur voluntati Dei, 

ratio concludendi manet eadem, sapiens enim et is qui subjicitur 
voluntati Dei, uniuntur in Majore, dein sapiens et Honestus in 
Minore, ergo in conclusione idea sapientis et Ejus qui voluntati 
Dei subjicitur, quoque conveniunt 

§ xiiL “ In tertia figura ita se habebit ; 

O. Sapiens suljicitur voluntati Dei, 

Q. Sapiens est omnis honestus, 

E. O. honestus subjicitur voluntati Dei, 

nec in hac concludendi ratione aliquid desiderari potest, nam me- 
dius terminus universaliter unitur cum conclusionis pnedicato, 
deinde, quantum sufficit, conjungitur cum ejusdem subjecto, seu 
Omni Iwnesto, ergo subjectum et pnedicatum se quoque mutuo 
admittent. 

§ xiv. " Cseterorum eadem est ratio, quod facile ostendi posset, 
nisi tricas illas vel scribere vel legere tmdiosum foret Ex his 
autem sequitur, quod omnes regulce speciales, ques modis vulgari- 
hus attemperaUe vulgo circumferuntur,/alscB «n<,quod speciatim 
ostendere liceat 

§ XV. “ In universum triplici modo impingitur, vel enim conclu- 
sio creditur absurda, qum talis non est, vel vitiurn est in materia, 
ac altera prteinissarum falsa, vel adsunt quatuor termini, adeo- 
que absurditas conclusionis, si ahqua subest, nunquam ab ea causa 
dependet, quam referunt regulm. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


445 


§ xvi. "Se<l videamus diatinctius, (1) major in prima figura 

semper sit univeralis 

§ zvii. “ Inflectam hi^ exemplum minus controversum, quod 
Autor, Art. Cog. p. 3, c. 7, in modo Disamis, terti® figurse, pro- 
ponit : 

Quidam impii in lumore hahentur in mundo, 

Quidam vituperandi tunt omna impii, 

E. quidam vituperandi in Jtonore kabentur in mundo. 

§ xviii. “Hie babes primam fignram cum majorc particulari, 
optime itenun concludentem, nam licet medius terminus particu- 
lariter sumatur in majore, ejus tamen ille est capacitatis, ut in 
eodem convenientia pnedicati et subjecti ostendi queat, et nisi hoc 
esset, nec in tertia figura rite ooncluderetur. 

§ xii. “ Nec valde obsunt, qure vulgo illustrandse regul® addu- 
enntur. Ex sententia Weia in Log. p. L, lib. 2, c. 2, § 4, male ita 
concluditur : 

Q. animal volat, 

0. Leo est animal, 

E. Q. Leo volat. 

Verum si animal sumitnr in minore sicut in majore, turn ilia falsa 
est, si vero alio sensu, turn existunt quatuor termini ; his ergo 
causis, non particularitati Majoris, vitiosa conclusio tribuenda 
§ XX. “ Nam alias ita bene concluditur : 

Q. animal volat, 

0. avis est animal, (illud quoddam), 

E. 0. avis volat, 

nam h'cet medius terminus particularis sit, tantee tamen est latitu- 
dinis, ut cum utroque Conclusionis termino possit unirL 

§ xxi. " Porro (2) Minor semper sit affirmans. Sed quid desi- 
dcrari potest in hoc Syllogismo : 

0. Homo est animal rationale, 

Leo non est Jtomo, 

E. non est animal rationale t 

et nonne ilia ratio concludendi manifeste bona est, qu® subjectum 
et prffidicatum, qu® in certo tertio non conveniunt, inter se quoque 
pugnare contendit ? 

§ Yxii. “ Sed ais, mutemus paululum Syllogismum et absurditas 
conclusionis erit manifests : 


Digitized by Google 



446 


APPENDIX. 


0. Homo e»t animal, 

Leo non eet Itomo, 

E. Leo non est animal I 

Verum si terminus animalis in Conclusione perinde sumitur, sicnt 
suppositus fuit in majore, nempe particidariter, turn conclusio est 
verissima ; si autem aliter accipiatur, turn evadunt quatuor termini, 
quibns adeo, non negationi Minoris, absurditas conclusionis est 
impntanda, quae obserratio in omnibus exemplis quae hie objici 
possunt et solent, locum habet. 

§ xxviii. “ Sed revertamur ad regulas vulgares ! Nimirum (3) 
In secunda figura major sit universalis. Verum cur non ita 
liceat concludere ; 

Quulam dives est Saxo, 

Quidam Germanus est omnis Saxo, 

E. Quidam Germanus est dives ? 

quod argumentum Weis. 1. 2, c. 4, § 2, intuitu tertiae iigurae pro- 
ponit. 

§ xxix. “ Argumenta, quae faJlere videntur, v. gr. quod Weisius 
L 2, c. 3, § 3, profert : 

Quidam homo est sapiens, 

Nullus stidttis est sapiens, 

E. Nullxu stultus est homo, 

et simUia, responsione, § 22, data eliduntur ; nimirum conclusio vel 
non est absurda, si recte intelligatur, vel adsunt quatuor ter mini , 
quibus adeo, non particularitati majoris, vitium est imputandum. 

§ XXI. " Amplius (4) Ex puris affirmativis in secunda figura 
nihil concluditur, sed rairum foret, si ilia concludendi ratio falleret, 
quae fundamentum omnium Syllogismorum affirmativorum tarn 
evidenter prae se fert ! Hoc argumentum utique formaliter bonum 
est : 

Omnis sapiens sua sorte est conlentus. 

Paid us sua sorte est contentus, 

E, Paulus est sapiens. 

§ xxxi. “ Sed fallunt multa argumenta, v. gr. Weisio d. c. 3, § 
3, adductum : 

Omnis lepus rivit, 

Tu vivis, 

E. Tu es lepus. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


447 


vernm non fallunt ob afiBrmationem prsetnissarum, sed quia vel 
minor falsa est, si sciL prmdicatum accipiatur eodem sensu, quo in 
Majore sumtum est, vel quia adsunt quatuor termini, si prsedicatum 
Minoris particulariter et alio sensu accipiatur. 

§ xxxii. “Non possunt etiam vulgo diffiteri, quin ex puris aflSr- 
mativis aliquando quid sequatur, verum id non vi formm sed Tno- 
terias fieri causantur, vide Ulman. Log. L 3, c. 3, § 4. Haec vero 
est petitio principii, nam quae conveniunt in uno tertio, ilia etiam 
inter se convenire debent, idque non fortuito, sed yirtute nnionis 
laudatse, seu beneficio formta 


§ xxxiv. “ In tertia figura (5) Minor semper sit affirmans. 
Ego tamen sic recte concludi posse arbitror : 

QufMldam laudandum est omnis virtus. 

Nullum laudandum est qucedam magnijicentia, 

E qucedam magnificentia rum est virtus. 

§ XXXV. “ Nec valde urgent exempla opposita Weisius d. L 2, c. 
4, § 2, hoc afiert : 

Omnis homo amhulat, 

Null us homo est porous, 

E. quidam porous non ambulat, 

nam recurrit responsio § 22 data, qure vel conclusionem falsam 
non esse, vel causam falsitatis a quatuor terminis dependere osten- 
dit, qusB etiam locum haberet, licet conclusionem universalem, 
Nullus porous ambulat, assumes. 

§ xxxvi. “ Tandem (6) in tertia figura condusio semper sit 
partimdaris. Verum Syllogismum cum conclusione universali, 
jam exhibui § 13, in Exemplis autem quae vulgo affenmtur, v. gr. 

Omnis senator est honoratus, 

Omnis senator est homo, (quidam sciL), 

E. omnis homo est honoratus, 

vide Weis. d. 1 2, c. 4, § 3, occumint quatuor termim', (nam homo, 
in minore particulariter, in conclusione universaliter sumitur), qui 
adeo veram absurd® conclusionis causam, ac simul regul® vulgaris 
falsitatem ostendunt 

§ xxxvii. “ Ilia autem omnia, quae contra vulgares regulas 
hactenus disputavimus, non eo pertinent, quasi rationem conclu- 


Digitized by Google 



418 


APPENDIX. 


dendi rejiciendis regulis hinc inde confectam commendemiis, ita 
ut in demonstrationibus eadem uti, aut valde delectari debeamos. 
Quin Omni potius eo spectant, ut Peripateticos, qui formam Syllo- 
gisniorum essentialem vel omnino non vel nimis frigide exponunt, 
in explicandia ctiam eorum figuris accidentalibus, falli probarem. 

§ xxxix . “ Atque ex hactenus dictis etiam intelligi potest, quse 
nostra de Reductione sit sententia. Nimiram ex uostris hypothe- 
sibus ilia nihil aliud est, quam SyUogismorum per omnee quatuor 
figuras accidentales, salva semper conclusione, facta variatio. 

§ xl. “ Pertinet igitur Dla tantum ad Frwmissa, Syllogismus 
enim semper ut instnimentum veritatis inquirendte considerari, 
adeoque quaestio probanda, quae semper immobilis sit, nec, prout 
visum est, varietur, praesupponi debet. 

§ xlL “ Reductionis unica Lex est, ut simpliciter, juxta figurm 
indolcm, propositiones convertamus, quod sine ulla difficultate pro- 
ccdit, dummodo quantitatem subjecti et praedicati debite confidere- 
mus, ceu ex iis qu® de C!onversione diximus satis bquet. 

§ xlii. “ Finis est, ut per ejusmodi variationem, terminorum 
unionem vel separationem eo accuratius intelligamus, hinc omnis 
utilitas reductioni non est abjudicanda, si enim recte instituatur, 
ingeuium quantitati propositionum observandse magis magisque 
assuescit, ac inde etiam in penitiorem form® essentialis intelligen- 
tiam provehitur. 

§ xliii. “ In vulyari Reductione, qu® in libellis logicis passim 
exponitur, vide Aut. Art. Cog. p. 3, c. 9, qu®dam exempla repre- 
hendi non debent, quando v. g. Cesare ad Celarent reducitur, nam 
ibi simplici conversione alicujus propositionis defunguntur, juxta 
legem, quam § 41, reductioni dedimus. 

§ xliv. “ Sed si ab illis exemplis abeas, parum vel nihil est, 
quod in eadem laudari debcat, dum fere ex falsis hypothesibus 
omnis reductio oritur, nam conversio per contrapositionem pne- 
supponitur, quam tamen valde dubiam esse, supra ostendimus, 
pr®terea peculiares modi in singulis figuris adstruuntur, ac omnis 
reductio ad primam jiguram facienda esse existimatur, cum tamen 
idem Syllogismus per omnes figuras variari queat. 

§ xlv. “ Ipsa vero reductio nullis legibus adstricta est, converti- 
tur Conclusio, transponuntur Pr®miss», propositiones negativ® 
mutantur in afibmativas, atque ita quidvis tentatur, modo figura 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


44.9 


intcnta obtlneatur. Quo ipso puerilis error, quo Logica, pro arte 
concinnandi tres lineas, casque in varias formas mutandi habetur 
satis elucet. Inepta scientia est, quoe in verbis disponendis, circum- 
agendis aut torquendis unice, occupatur. 

§ xlvi “ Juxta hsec igitur, vulgari modo reducere, maximam 
partem nihil aliud est, quam errorem errore tcgere, ingcnia discen- 
tium torquere, ac magno conatu magnas nugas agere, inscitiamque 
professa opera ostendere.” — E d.] 


D. SYLLOGISTIC MOODS. 

(Vol. I. p. 401.) 

(a) Direc-t and Indirect Moods. 

(1) Their Principle. — First and Fourth Figure. 

(See above, Vol. I., p. 423.) 

Direct and Indirect Moods, — principle of. — That the two terms 
should hold the same relation to each other in the conclusion, that 
they generally hold to the middle term in the premises. This de- 
termined by the Question. This constitutes direct, immediate, 
natural, orderly inference. VTien reversed, by Conversion, there 
emerges indirect, mediate, unnatural, irregular inference. 

In the two last Figure.s, (Second and Third), the two terms hold 
the same relation to the middle term in the premi.ses ; ergo no 
indirect inference, but always two direct conclusions possible. 

In the first Figure, as the two terms are subordinated to each 
other in the premises, one direct conclusion from premises, 
whether read in Extension or Comprehension, and, consequently, 
an indirect one also, — the First Figure being first figure in Exten- 
sive quantity ; the Fourth Figure being first figure in Comprehen- 
sive quantity. Direct and indirect moods in each. 

1 . Blunder about definition of major and minor terms by logi- 
cians, (for which Aristotle not responsible),® cause of fancy of a 
Fourth Figure, constituted by indirect moods in comprchen.sion. 

2. Tliat predicate could have no prelinition, and, therefore, though 

a See Stohl, [AWfF tographo edita cura Campari Posneri 

in Compendium I/Mleclicum D. Conradi Prof, Pub. Jence, 1656, Ad. L. Ui. c, 
Jlomeii,nunc ex Aucin'U Ah- viii.] 

VOL. II. 2 y 


Digitized by Google 



450 


APPENDIX. 


they allowed its converse, the direct inference was not suffered . 
This in Fapesmo, Frisesnio, (these alone, by some logicians, ad- 
mitted in the First Figure), and Fesapo and Fresison in Fourth or 
Comprehensive First.a 

3. That major proposition, that which is placed first 


Fourth Figure. — The First Figure, and that alone, is capable of 
being enounced in two orders, those of Breadth and of Depth. It 
is exactly the same syllogism in either order; and, while the order of 
Depth was usually employed by the Greeks, Orientals, and older 
Latins, that of Breadth has been the common, if not the exclusive, 
mode of euouncement among the western logicians, since the time 
of Boethius. In either form, there are thus four direct moods, 
and five indirect, — in all nine moods ; and if the Figure be held to 
comprise the moods of either form, it wiU have eighteen moods, as 
in fact is allowed by some logicians, and, among others, by Men- 
doza, (Disp. Log. et Met. T. I. pp. 515, 516), Martianus Capella, 
(De Septetn AHibtis Liberaiibus, L. iv., De Dialectica, in cap. 
Quid sit Prcedicativus Syllogismus, (see above, p. 424), states 
and allows either form, but, like his contemporaries, Greek and 
Latin, he employs in his examples the order of Depth. 

Now, mark the caprice of the logicians of the west subsequent 
to Boethius. Overlooking entirely the four direct moods in the 
order of Depth, which they did not employ, as the conclusion 
would, in these cases, have been opposed to their own order ; they 
seized upon the five indirect moods of the order of Depth, as this 
aflforded a conclusion corresponding to their own, and constituted 
it, thus limited, into a Fourth Figure. 

Did not make two forms of First Figure. 

An indirect conclusion is in subject and predicate the reverse of 
a direct ; opposed, therefore, to the order of predication marked 
out by the premises which the direct conclusion exclusively follows. 


a [Tliat fourth Figure difTon» from 6rat 
only by tnuMpositinn of Premi«c«, — held 
by Derodon, Logica p. 606. 

Camcrarius, jytftputaixona PhHotoj^iar, 
Disp. i, qu. 13, p. 116. Caramuel, 
et Real. Pfiii., Disp. xii. p. 45. irensus, 
Intey. PhiL^ Plfmenta Sect. iii. 


§ 3, p. 29. Campanella, Pk\L Rai, 
Dialect.t Lib. ii. c. vi. art. xi. p. 391, 
and art. ir. p 385, (1635). lUdiger, De 
Senm Veri et Fahi, ii. 6, § 36. Cniaius, 
Weg Zur Qevisgheit, § 336, p. 606. Plat- 
ner, PkUoeopKitcke Aphoritmen, i. § 554, 
p. 267 ] 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


4.jl 


An indirect conclusion, (what the logicians have not observed),® is 
an inference from the direct conclusion, and, therefore, one mediate 
from the premises. 

(2) Moods of Fourth Figure redressed. 

(Early Paper — previous to 1844. Later signs of quantity sub- 
stituted. — Ed.) 

I. Bamalip, — only Barbara mth transposed premises and con- 
verted conclusion. 

(2) J ll ironi are (some) metals ; 

(1) All metals are (some) minerals ; 

All irons are (some) minerals. 

(By conversion.) 

Some minerals are (alt) irons. 



(Minerals), ¦ : (Metals), — -.(Irons). 
(Redressed) 



II. Caleraes, — only Celarent with transposed premises and con- 
vertetl conclusion. 

(2) All snails are (some) mollusca ; 

(1) No moUuseum is any insect ; 

No snail is any insect. 

(By conversion) 

No insect is any snail. 



(Insect) : | ¦ : (Mollttscum) , mm : (Stiail) 



III. Dimatis, — only Darii with transposed premises and con- 
verted conclusion. 

« But see Contaremis, De Quarla Figura Syllog., Opera, p. 235 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



452 


APPENDIX. 


(2) Some stare are {some or alt) planets ; 

(1) All planets are some things moving round sun ; 
Some stars are some things moving round sun ; 
(By conversioii) 

Some things moving round sun are some stars. 
A,- ,:B: — ,0 



{Moving round Sun), : {Planets ) : , ¦ , {Stars) 

(Redressed) 





IV. Fesapo, [Felapos].“ 

(2) No artery is any vein ; 

{\) All veins are {some) bloodvessels ; 
No artery is {some) bloodvessel. 

(By conversion) 

Some bloodvessel is no artery. 



{Bloodvessels) , 



m ; ( Fein) ; - 
(Redressed) 


; {A rtery) 



V. Fresison, [Frelilos]. 

(2) No muscle is any nerve ; 

(1) Some nerves are {some) expansion on hand ; 
No muscle is {some) expansion on hand. 

(By conversion) 

Some expansion on hand is no muscle. 



, Z.ibiire11a, Opera Loyiea, De Qiiarta 
Fig, i>p. 118, 119, 125. Burgers- 
dyk, Intlil. Log., L. ii. c. 7, p. 167, re- 


verses premises and reduces to Fapesmo 
an indirect mood of First ; thus violat- 
ing the rule of that Figure. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


453 


{Expayision cm hand), — , {Nerve) : ; {ifutcle) 

(Redressed) 



(March 1846.) — My universal law of Figured Syllopsm excludes 
the Fourth Figure. — What worse relation of subject and predicate 
subsists between either of two terms and a common third term 
with which one, at least, is positively related ; that relation sub- 
sists between the two terms themselves. What relation, &a ; that 
relation, &c. Now, in Fourth Figure, this is violated ; for the predi- 
cate and subject notions, relative to the middle term in the pre- 
mises, are in the conclusion turned severally into their opposites 
by relation to each other. This cannot, however, in fact be ; and, 
in reality, there is a silently suppressed conclusion, from which 
there is only given the converse, but the conversion itself ignored. 

Fourth Figure. Reasons against — 

1°, Could never directly, naturally, reach (a) Conclusion from pre- 
mise, or (b) Premises from qutesitum. 

2°, All other figures conversion of premises of First, but, by 
conversion of conclusion, (as it is), no new figure. 

3°, All other figures have one conclusion Fourth a converted 
one, often dififerent. 


(March 1850.) — Fourth Figure. The logicians who attempt to 
show the perversion in this figure, by speaking of higher and 
lower notions, are extra-logical. Logic knows nothing of higher 
and lower out of its own terms ; and any notion may be subject 
or predicate of any other by the restriction of its extension. 
Logic must show the perversion in this Figure ex facie sylloyismi, 
or it must stand good. On true reason, why no Fourth Figure, 
see Aristotle, Anal. Pr., K L, c. 23, § 8, and Pacius, in Commen- 
tary. 

(March 1 850.) — Fesapo and Fresiso, (also Fapesmo, Frisesmo), 
proceed on the immediate inference, unnoticed by logicians, that 
the quantities, apart from the terms, may, in propositions I nA and 
AnI, be converted. 


Digitized by Google 



454 


APPENDIX. 


Averroes on Prior Aimlytics, B. i., Ch. 8. 

" If we ask whether A be in C, and say that A is in C, because 
A is in B, and B in C ; in this case, there is a natural syllogism 
by general confession ; and this in the First Figure. 

"In like manner, if we say that A is not in C, because B is in 

C, and B is not in A ; it is plain that we collect that conclusion by 
natural process ; and this is the Second Figure, which is frequently 
found employed by men in their ordinary discourse. 

“ In like manner, also, if we say that A is in C, because A and C 
are in B ; that syllogism is also natural to us, and is the Third 
Figure. But if we say A is in C, because C is in B, and B in A ; 
the reasoning is one which no one would naturally make ; for the 
reason that the qu®situm, (that is, C to be in A), does not hence 
follow, — the process being that in which we say A is in C, since A 
is in B, and B in C ; and this is something which thought would 
not perform, unless in opposition to nature. From this it is mani- 
fest, that the Fourth Figure, of which Galen makes mention, is not 
a syllogism on which thought would naturally light,” (&c.) There- 
after follows a digression against this figure. See also the same 
book, Ch. 23d, and the Epitome, by Averroes, of the same, Ch. i. 

(3) Fourth Figure — Authorities for and against. 

Admitted by — 

Ildefonsus de Penafiel, Cursus Philosophicus, Disp. Summttl. 

D. iii. p. 39. G. Camerarius, Disjntt. Philos., P. i., q. xiiL, p. 116. 
Port Royal Logic, p. iii. c. 8, and c. 4. Eidiger, De Sensu Veri et 
Falsi, L. ii., c. 6, § 36. Hauschius in Acta Enid. p. 470 ft seq. 
Lips. 1728. '^oldvas, Logica Recognita, c. xii. p. 277. Crakan- 
thorpe, Logica, L. iii. c. xv. ji. 194, (omitted, but defended). 
Lambert, Neues Organon, I. § 237, et seq. Hoffbauer, Analytik 
der Urtheile und Schliisse, § 138. Twesten, Logik, inshesondere 
die Analytik, § 110. Leibnitz, Opera, ii. 3.57 ; v. 405 ; vi. 216, 
217, ed. Dutens. Oddus de Oddis, (v. Contarenus, Non Dari 
Quart. Fig. Syli, Opera Omnia, p. 233, ed. Venet, 1589.) 

Rejected by — 

Averroes, In. A n. Prior., L. i. a 8. Zabarella, Opera Logica, 
De Quarta Fig. Syll., p. 102 ct .seq. Purchot, Instit. Phil. T. I. 
Log. P. iii. c. iii. p. 169. Molinaeus, Elementa Logica, L. i. 
c. viiL Facciolati, Rudimenta Logica, P. iii c. iii. p. 85. Scay- 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


¦155 


nus, Paraphrasis in Organ., p. 57-1. Timpler, Logical Systemu, 
K iv, c. L qiL 13, p. 543. Plainer, Philosophische Aphorismen, 
I. p. 267. Burgersdicius, Instit. Log. L. iL c. vii. p. 165. Dero- 
don, Logica Restituta, p. 606. Wolf, Phil. Rat, § 343, et seq. 
(Ignored.) Hollmann, Logica, § 4.53, p. 569. Goclenius, Pro- 
U^nata Logica, P. iv., p. 119. Keckermann, Opera, T. I., Syst 
Log. Lib. iii., c. 4, p. 745. Arriaga, Cursus Philosophicus, Ln 
Siimmulas, D. iiL § 5, p. 21. Aristotle, An. Prior, i. c. 23, 
§ 8 ; c. 30, § 1, (omitted). Jo. Picus Mirandulanus, Conclusiones, 
Opera, p. 88. Molanchthon, in 1st edition of Dialectic, L. iii., 
De Figuratione, (1520), afterwards (1547), restored, (Heunianni, 
A eta, iiL 753). Cardinalis Ca.spar Contarenus, Epistola ad Odduni 
de Oddis, De Quart. Fig. Syll. Opera, p. 233 (1st ed., 1571). 
Trendelenburg, Elementa Logica, § 28, &c. Herbart, Tjehrbuch 
der Logik, Einhit., 3, §71. Hegel, Encyclopcedie, § 187. Fries, 
Eystein der Logik, § 57 b. Griepcnkerl, Lehrhuch der Logik,§ 
iHetseq. Drobisch, § 77, p. 70. 'SYaUis, I nstitutio Logiew, 
L. iiL c. ix. p. 179. 


(6) INDIRECT MOODS OF SECOND AND THIRD FIGURES.a 


From 1 

(II. Fig.) 


i. 

/Cesaro 

''Camestres 

Itfflfxim ; (1, 2, 5, 8, 9)j5 Cesarea. 

iL 

Rfjlrxim ; (2, 5, 8, 9.) Camestre, Ca- 
mestres, Faresmo, (only subiiltem of 
Camestres) ; rejected (2), admitted 
(3, 6.) 

iii. 

Festino 

Premises reversed ; (2, 3, 4, 5, 0, 7, 8, 9.) 
Firesmo, Frigeros, 

ir. j 

I 

Baroco 

(III. Fig.) 

Premises reversed ; (2, 5, 7, 8, 9.) Bo- 
cardo, Moracos, Forameno. 

i« 

Darapti 

Jirflexim; (1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11.) 

iL 

1 Felaptou 

Premises transposed ; (4, 6, C, 7, 8, 9, 
11.) Fa{)emo, Fapelmoa 

iii. 

i/Disamis 

\Datisi 

RfJUxim; (4, 7, 10, 11.) 

iv. 

Kejtfxim ; (4, 7, 10, 11.) 

V. 

Bocardo 

Premises transposed ; (4, 7, 9, 1 1.) Ba- 
roco, Macopos, Danorcoc. 

vi. 

Ferison 

Premises transposed ; (4, 6, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
1 11.) Frisemo, Fiseros. 


a The indirect Mood* of the First to Uie authorities given on following 
Figure are universally admitted. page. — En. 

B The numbers within brackets refer 


Digitized by Google 



4.3G 


APPENDIX. 


1 . 

2 . 


3. 

4. 

6 . 


C. 


I. 

8 . 


9 . 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 


6 . 

6 . 

7. 


8 . 

9. 


10 . 


11 . 


i (TI. Fig.) 

Mart. Capella 
' Duns Scotus 


Lovanienscs, (1535) 
PaciuB, (1584) 

Conimbricenses 


Burgersdicius, (1626) 
Caramuel, (1642) 
Scheibler, (1653) 
Noldiiu, (1666) 


Cesare, rtf trim. 

Cesarc and Camestres, conclusions simp- 
ly converted; Festino and Baroco. 
Rejects (and rightly), what has since 
been called Faresmo, as a mere sub- 
altern of Camestres (.4 n. Pr. L. L qu. 
23. See also Cunimbricenses, In 
A risl. Dial. II. p. 362.) 

Faresmo, Firesmo. 

Firesmo (on An. Pr. L. i. c. 7, and rela- 
tive place of his Com. A nal.) 

Record that indirect moods from Cesare 
and Camestres ; and also Friseso, Bo- 
cardo were admitted by some “re- 
centiores" (II. p. 362.) 

Faresmo, Firesmo. 

Moracos, Frigesos. 

Cesares, Camestres, Firesmo, Bocardo. 

Cesares, Camestre, Firesmo, Forameno ; 
(he has for the direct mood Factono, 
in place of Baroco.) 


(HI. Fig.) 
Apulcius 
Cassiodorus 
Isodorus 
Duns Scotus 


Lovanienses 

Pacius 

Conimbri censes 


Burgersdicius 

Caramuel 

Scheibler 


Noldius 


Darapti, refltxim. 

Do. 

Do. 

Darapti, Disamis, and Datisi, their con- 
clusions simply converted; Felapton, 
Bocardo, Ferison, {Sup. An. Pr., L. 
i. qu. 24.) 

Fapemo, Frisemo (ib.) 

Fapemo, Frisemo (ib.) 

Record that some “ recentiores” admit 
indirect moods from Darapti, Disa- 
mis, Datisi ; also Fapesmo, Frisesmo, 
and Baroco. 

Fapemo, Frisemo. 

Fapelmos, Macopos, Fiseros. 

Admits them from Disamis, Datisi, Da- 
rapti, but not from those which con- 
clude particular negations. 

Danorcoc, (he has for Bocardo Docam- 
roc), Frisemo, Fapemo, and what are 
converted from Darapti, Disamis, and 
Datisi without names. 

Darapti virtually two moods ; this 
maintained by Theophrastus. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


467 


Indirect moods are impos.sible in the Second and Third Figures, 
for what are called indirect conclusions are only the direct conclu- 
sions. Mem., that in the Second Cesarc and Camestres are vir- 
tually one ; whilst in the Tliird Figure Darapti is virtually two, os 
Disamis and Dati.si are one. 

For the particular quantification of the Predicate, useful illus- 
trations, as in the First from Fapesmo, Frisesmo, or (in the pseudo 
Fourth) from Fe.sapo and Fresiso ; so in the Second Figure from 
what have been called the indirect moods of Figure II. 


1. Bocardo. 


2. Firesmo. 


1. Baroco. 


Fiourk II. 


A, — t— ;B^, 





Figure III. 



A, 

A, 


(1853.) Blunders of Logicians. — What have been called the 
Indirect Moods of the Second and Third Figures, arise only from 
the erroneously supposed transposition of the premises ; and the 
Fourth Figure is made up of the really indirect moods of the First 
Figure, with the premises transposed. 



2. Fapemo. 


2. Frisemo. 


(c) New Moods — Notes upon Table of SYLLOOissiaa 

Fig. L vi. — Corvinus, {Institutiones Pkilosophue Rationalis, 
1742, § 540), says : — “ There sometimes appears to be an inference 
from pure particulars. For example, Some learned are [some'] 
ambitious men ; some men are [all the] learned ; therefore, some 

a See below, Appendix xi. — Ed. 


Digitized by Coogic 



458 


API’ENDIX. 


men are ambitious. But the minor proposition, although formally 
particular, involves, however, a universal, to wit, its convcise, — All 
the learned are[some] men, — which is equipollent." — Whynot,then, 
scientifically enounce, (as I have done), without conversion, what 
the thought of the convertend already really and vulgarly involved? 

In all Figures. — I have been not undoubtful, whether the 
syllogisms of the class, in which the two premises, being the 
same, are mutually interchangeable, should be regarded as a single 
or as a double mood. Abstractly considered from all matter, the 
mood is single ; for the two premises, however arranged, afford 
only a repetition of the same form. But so soon as the form is 
applied to any matter, be it even of a symbolical abstraction, the 
distinction of a double mood emerges, in the possible interchange 
of the now two distinguished premises. To the logicians this ques- 
tion was only presented in the case of Darapti (III. ii.) ; and on this 
they were divided. Aristotle {An. Pr. i. c. 6, § 6) contemplates 
only one mood ; but his successor, Theophrastus, admitted two, 
(Apuleius, De Uab. Doctr. Platonis, L. iii. Op. p. 38, Elm). Aris- 
totle’s opinion was overtly preferred by Alexander, {ad locum, f 30, 
ed. Aid. quoted above, p. 419), and by Apuleius, {1. c.) ; whilst that 
of Theophrastus was adopted by Porphyry, in his lost commentary 
on the Prior Analytics, and, though not without hesitation, by 
Boethius, {De Syll. Categ. L. ii.. Op. pp. 594, 598, 601, 604). The 
other Greek and Eoman logicians silently follow the master; from 
whom, in more modem times. Valla (to say nothing of others) only 
dift'er.s, to reduce, on the counter-extreme, Cesare and Camestres, 
(II. ix. a, and X. b), and, he might have added, DLsamis and Datisi, 
(III. iv. V.), to a single mood, {De Dial., L. ii. c. 51). (For the ob- 
servations of the Aphrodisian, see above p. 415 et seq.) 

To me it appears, on reflection, right to allow in Darapti only a 
single mood ; because a second, simply arising through a first, and 
through a tran.sposition, has, therefore, merely a secondary, cor- 
relative, and dependent existence. In this respect all is difier- 
ent with Ce.sare and Camestres, Disamis, and Datisi. The prin- 
ciple here applies in my doctrine to the whole class of syllogisms 
with balanced middle and extremes. 

Fig. II. xiL b. — David Derodon, {Log. Rest. De Arg., c. ii. § 51), 


Digitized by Coogle 


APPENDIX. 


439 


in canvassing the special rule of the Second Figure, — that the 
major premise should be universal, — he now approbates, he now 
reprobates syllogisms of this mood ; but wrong on both alterna- 
tives, for his admissions and rejections are equally erroneous. “ Hie 
syllogismus non valet .- — Aliquod animal est [aliquodi] rationale; 
sed [uWus] asinus non est rationalis; ergo, [uMim] asinus, 

non est [aliquod'] animal." (P.635.) The syllogism is valid ; only 
it involves a principle which Derodon, with the logicians, would 
not allow, — Tliat in negatives the predicate could be particular, — 
(see Log. Rest. De Argument, c. ii. § 28, p. 623.) Yet almost 
immediately thereafter, in assailing the rule, he says : — “ At multi 
dantur syllogism! constantes major! particular!, qui tamen sunt 
recti; ut , — Aliquod animal non est [ullus] lapis; sed [omwts] 
adamas est [oZiquts] lapis; ergo, [ullus] adamas non est [aliquod] 
animal." (This syllogism is, indeed, II. iii. a ; but he goes on :) 
“Item: Aliquod animal est [aliquod] rationale; sed [uWus] 
lapis non est rationalis; ergo [mWms] lapis non est [o/i- 

quod] animal.” Now these two syllogisms are both bad, as in- 
ferring what Derodon thinks they do infer, — a negative conclusion 
with, of course, a distributed predicate, (p. 623) ; are both good, 
as inferring what I suppose them to infer, — a negative conclusion 
with an undistributed predicate. 

Fig. III. viiL b. — Derodon, {Ibid, § 54), in considering the 
Special Eule of the Third Figure, — that the minor preini.se should 
be affirmative, — alleges the following syllogism as “ ritious : ” — 
" Omnis homo est [aliquod] animal; sed [uf/us] homo non est 
[ttZius] asinus; ergo, asuius non est [aliquod] animal,” 

(p. 638.) It is a vii-tuous syllogism, — with a particular predicate 
(and not a universal, as one logician imagines), in a negative con- 
clusion. — Again, (omitting his reasoning, which is inept), he pro- 
ceeds : — “ Hie vero syllogismus non est vitiosus, sed rectus : — 
[Onint’s] homo est [quidam] rationalis ; sed homo non est 

asinus [or Deus] ; ergo [«W«s] asimis [or Deus] non est 
[quidam] rationalis.” This syllogism is indeed correct ; but not, 
as Derodon would have it, with a distributed predicate in the con- 
clusion. That his conclusion is only true of the asinus, per acci- 
dens, is shown by the substitution of the term Deus; this showing 
his illation to be formally absurd. 


Digitized by Google 



460 


APPENDIX. 


Fig. III. iL — Derodon (Ibid.) says : — “ Denique, conclusionem 
in tertia figura debere esse particularem, non universalem, sta- 
tuunt commnniter Philosophi ; unde hie syllogismus non valet ; 
— ‘ Omnis fwmo est [quidani] rationalis ; sed omnis homo est 
[quoddavi] animal; ergo, omne [quoddani] animal est [}«oddam] 
rationale, Verum, licet conclusio sit universalis, syllogismus 
erit bonus, modo,” &c., (p. 638.) The syllogism is, and must 
remain, vitious, if the subject and predicate of the conclusion be 
taken universally, whilst both are undistributed in the antecedent. 
But if taken, as they ought to be, in the conclusion, particularly, 
the syllogism is good. Derodon, in his remarks, partly overlooks, 
partly mistakes, the vice. 

Derodon, criticising the Special Rule of the First Figure, — that 
the major premise should be universal, — says, inter alia ; — “ At 
multi dantur syllogismi primm figune constantes majori particu- 
lar!, qui tamen sunt recti : ut, — ‘ Aliquod animal est [aliquod] 
rationale; sed homo est [aliquod] animal; ergo [!!] homo est 
aliquis] rationalis': item,” &c., &c., (p. 627.) This syllogism is 
vicious ; the middle term, animal, being particular in both its 
quantifications, affords no inference.<> 


XI. 

LOGICAL NOTATION. 

(See VoL I., p. 305.) 

(a) Lambert's Linear Notation.^ 

This very defective, — indeed almost as bad as possible. It has 
accordingly remained unemployed by subsequent logicians ; and 
although I tliink linear diagrams do afford the best geometrical 
illustration of logical forms, I have found it necessary to adopt a 

a 5>ee fibovc, p. 817 . — Kd. bert and Euler, see S. Maimou, Yrrtuch 

/9 Kur Lambert's schenio of notation, tiner wruen Lwjik, Sect. iv.,§ 7, p. 64 <4 
aee bU OrjrnnOB, I. § 21. ; and 9tq. Berlin, 1794 , — Ed. 

for a criticism of the schemes of Lam- 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


461 


method opposite to Lambert’s, in all that is peculiar to him. I 
have been unable to adopt, unable to improve, anything. 

1°. Indefinite or particular notions can only be represented by 
the relation of two lines, and in two ways : 1°, One being greater 
than the other ; 2°, One being partially out of relation to the 
other. Instead of this, Lambert professes to paint particularity by 
a dotted line, i. e., a line difiTerent by an accidental quality, not 
by an essential relation. But not even to this can he adhere, for 
the same notion, the same line, in different relations, is at once 
universal and particular. Accordingly, in Lambert’s notation, the 
relation of particular notions is represented sometimes by a conti- 
nuous, sometimes by a dotted, line, or not represented at all (See 
below, ]• 1, 2, 3, 4, 5). 

2°, The inconsistency is seen at all climax in the case of the 
predicate in aflSrmatives, where that term is particular. In Lam- 
bert’s notation it, however, shows in general as distributed or uni- 
versal ; but in this he has no constancy. (See 1*, 1, 2, 3, 4). But 
the case is even more absurd in negative propositions, where the 
predicate is really taken in its whole extent, and yet is, by the 
dotted line, detenninately marked as particular. (See 4). 

3°, The relation of negativity, or exclusion, is profes-sedly re- 
presented by Lambert in one line beyond, or at the side of, another. 
This requires room, and is clumsy, but is not positively erroneous : 
— it does expre.ss exclusion. But his affirmative propositions are 
denoted by two unconnected lines, one below the other. This is 
positively wrong ; for here the notions are equally out of each 
other as in the lateral collocation. But even in this he is incon- 
sistent ; for he as often expresses the relation of negativity by 
lines in the relation of higher and lower. (See below, 1, 4). 

4°, He attempts to indicate the essential relation of the lines by 
the fortuitous annexation of letters, the mystery of which I have 
never fathomed. 

5°, He has no order in the relation of his lines. 

The middle term is not always the middle line, and there is no 
order between the extremes. 

This could not indeed be from his method of notation ; and ex- 
cept it be explained by the affixed letters, no one could discover 
in his lines the three compared notions in a syllogism, or guess at 
the conclusion iqferred. (See 1 — 5). 


Digitized by Google 



4G2 


APPENDIX. 


6°, From poverty tlie same diagram is employed to denote the 
most different moods in affirmative and negative. (Compare 2 
and 3 with 4). 

7", No order in the terms in the same figure. 

8°, Incomplete. Lambert can represent ultra-total, &c., included 
in affirmative, but not ultra-total, excluded in negative. Has the 
merit of noticing this relation. 

9“, Lambert ; but it is needless to proceed. What has been 
already said, shows that Lambert’s scheme of linear notation is, in 
its parts, a failure, being only a corruption of the good, and a 
blundering and incongruous jumble of the natural and conven- 
tional The only marvel is, how so able a mathematician should 
have propounded two such worthless mathematical methods. But 
Lambert's geometrical is worse even than algebraic notation. 

To vindicate what I have said, it will be enough to quote his 
notation of the moods of the Third Figure, (I. p. 133), which I 
shall number for the previous references. 


III. Figure. 


1.* Darapti. 

C c 

M m 

B b 

1. Felapton. 

M m C 

B b 

2. Disamis. 

B b 

M m 

. . . C 

3. Datisi. 

C c 

M m 

. . B 

4. Bocardo. 

B b 

M m 

C 

S. Fcrisoo. 

M m C c 

. . B 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


4(>3 


(Z>) Notation by Maass. 

Professor Maass of Halle, “ discontented, not unreasonably, with 
the geometrical notations of Lambert ancl Euler, has himself pro- 
posed another, compared with which, those of his predecessors 
show as absolutely perfect. It will be sufficient to despatch this 
scheme, with a very few remarks. To use it is wholly impossible ; 
and even the ingenious author himself has stated it towards the 
conclusion of his Logic (§ 495 — 512), in the course of which, it is 
not, (if I recollect aright), honoured with a single reference. It is 
however, curious, as the only attempt made to illustrate Logic, 
not by the relations of geometrical quantities, but by the relations 
of geometrical relations, — angles. 

1°. It is fundamentally wrong in principle. For example, 
Maass proposes to represent eoinclusive notions, notions, there- 
fore, to be thought as the same, by the angles of a triangle, whieh 
cannot possibly be imaged as united, for surely the identity of the 
concepts, triangle, trilateral, and figure with angles equal to two 
right angles, is not illumined by awarding each to a separate 
comer of the figure. On the contrary, coexclusive notions he 
represents by angles in similar triangles, and these can easily be 
conceived as supeiTJosed. The same may be said of co-ordinates. 
But, waving the objection that the different angles of a figure, as 
necessarily thought out of each other, are incapable of typifying, 
by their coincidence, notions to be thought as eoinclusive, — it is 
further evident, that the angles of an equilateral triangle cannot 
naturally denote reciprocal or wholly identical notions, in contrast 
to others partially identical ; for every angle of every triangle 
infers, — necessitates, — contains, if you wiU, — the whole of every 
other, equally as do the several angles of an equilateral triangle. 

2°. But Maass is not consistent. He gives, for instance, a tri- 
angle, (Fig. 12), to illustrate the subordination of one notion to 
another ; and yet he represents the lower or contained notion by 
an obtuser, the higher or containing notion by an acuter, angle. 

3°. The scheme is unmanifest, — in fact, nothing can be less ob- 
trusive. It illustrates the obscure by the obscure, or, rather, it 

• Qrundru$ der Jjoglle^ 1793. I quot« ing in the way I do of Maasa* echeme of 
from the fourth edition, 1823. I r^ret notation ; for his Logic is one of the best 
the neceesity imposed on me of speak- compends published even in Germany. 


Digitized by Google 



464 


APPENDIX. 


obscures the clc<ar. Requiring itself a painful study to compre- 
hend its import, (if comprehended it be) ; instead of informing the 
understanding through the eye, it at best only addresses the eye 
through the understanding. DiflScult, — we only regret that it had 
not been impossible. 

4°. It is clumsy, operose, complex, and superfluous. For, to re- 
present a notion denoted by a single angle, it is compelled to give 
the redundance of a whole triangle ; and three repugnant notions 
demand an apparatus of three several figures, and six vacant 
anglea In fact, the only manifestation to which this scheme of 
angles can pretend, is borrowed from the scheme of figures which 
it proposes to supersede. 

5°. It is wholly dependent upon the accidents of foreign aid. 
To let it work at all, it calls in to its assistance an indefinite plu- 
rality of figures, a Greek and Latin alphabet, combinations of let- 
ters straight and deflected, and an assortment of lines, thick and 
thin, plain and dotted. I have counted one diagram of the 
eighteen, and find that it is brought to bear through three varie- 
ties of line, four triangles, and eleven letters. 

It is needless to enumerate its other faults, its deficiences, ex- 
cesses, ambiguities, &c. ; transeat in pace. 

(c) The Author's Notation. — N o. I. Linear. 

The notation previously spoken of,“ represents every various 
syllogism in all the accidents of its external form. But as the 
number of Moods in Syllogisms Analytic and Synthetic, Intensive 
and Extensive, Unfigured and Figured, (and of this in all the 
figures,) are the same ; and as a reasoning, essentially identical, 
may be carried through the same numerical mood, in every genus 
and species of syllogism : it seems, as we should wish it, that 
there must be possible also, a notation precisely manifesting the 
modal process, in all its essential differences, but, at the same 
time, in its internal identity, abstract from every accidental variety 
of external form. The anticipation and wish are realised ; and 
realised with the utmost clearness and simplicity, in a notation 
which fulfils, and alone fulfils, these conditions. This notation 
I have long employed : and the two following are specimens. 

« See Tabular Scheme at the cud of the preneiit volume. — E d. 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX. 


465 


Herein, four common lines are all tlie requisites : three (horizon- 
tal) to denote the terms ; one (two ? — perpendicular) or the want 
of it, at the commencement of comparison, to express the quality 
of affirmation or of negation ; whilst quantity is marked by the 
relative length of a terminal line within, and its indefinite excur- 
rence before, the limit of comparison. This notation can repre- 
sent equally total and ultra-total distribution, in simple Syllogism 
and in Sorites ; it shows, at a glance, the competence or incortijye- 
tence of any conclusion ; and every one can easily evolve it. 



Of these : the former, with its converse, includes, Darii, Dabi- 
tis, Datisi, Disamis, Dimaris, &c. ; whilst the latter, with its con- 
verse, includes Celarent, Cesare, Celanes, Camestres, Cameles, 
&c. But of these, those which are represented by the same dia- 
gram are, though in different figures, formally, the same mood. 
For in this scheme, moods of the thirty-six each has its peculiar 
diagram ; whereas, in all the other geometrical schemes hitherto 
proposed, (whether by lines, angles, triangles, squares, parallelo- 
grams, or circles), the same (complex) diagram is necessarily 
employed to represent an indefinite plurality of moods. These 
schemes thus tend rather to complicate, than to explicate, — rather 
to darken, than to clear up. The principle of this notation may 
be realised in various forms.<> 


The problem, in general, is to manifest by the differences and 
relations of geometrical quantities, (lines or figures), the differences 
and relations of logical forma The comparative excellence of any 
scheme in solution of this problem will be in proportion as it is, 
1°, Easy; 2“, Simple; 3°, Compendious; 4°, All-sufficient; 5°, 
Consistent ; 6°, Manifest ; 7°, Precise ; 8°, Complete. 

In the scheme proposed by me, 


a Reprinted from DUcu»$ion$f p. 657. lions denoted by the diagrams, see 
For a further explanation of the rela* above, vol. i. p. 189. — Kn. 

VOL. II. 2 G 


Digitized by Google 


466 


APPENDIX. 


1°. I denote terms or notions by straight lines ; and, as a syllo- 
gism is constituted by three related notions, it will, of course, be 
represented by tliree related lines. 

2°. I indiciite the correlation of notions by the ortler and par- 
allel coextension of lines. (The perpendicular order and horizon- 
tal extension, here adopted, is arbitrary.) 

3°. Lines, like notions, are only immediately related to those 
with which they stand in proximity. Hence, the intermediate 
line in our diagi-am, representing the middle term of a syllogism, 
is in direct relation with the lines, representing the extremes, 
whereas the latter arc only in mutual correlation through it. 

4°. The relative quantity of notions is expressed by the com- 
parative length of the related lines. In so far as a line com- 
mences, (liere on the left), before another, it is out of relation with 
it, — is inde6nite and unknown. Where a line terminates under 
relation, (here towards the right), it ceases absolutely to be. A line, 
beginning and ending in relation, indicates a whole notion. A 
line, beginning before or ending after its correlative, indicates the 
part of a notion. 

5“. The kinds of correlation, AflBrmation and Negation, are 
shown by the connection, or non-connection, of the line.s, (here 
from the left). The connection, (here a perpendicular line), indi- 
cates the identity, or coinclusion, of the connectetl terms ; the 
absence of this denotes the opposite. The lines in positive or affirma- 
tive relation are supposed capable of being slid into each other. 

This geometric scheme seems to recommend itself by aU the 
virtues of such a representation, and thus stands favourably con- 
trasted with any other. For it is easy, — simple, — compenilious, — 
all-sufficient, — consistent, — manifest, — precise, — complete. 

1 °, Easy. — Linear diagrams are more easily and rapidly drawn 
than those of figure ; and the lines in this scheme require, in fact, 
no symbols at all to mark the terminal differences, far less the 
double letterings found uecessaiy by Lambert. 

2°, Simple. — Lines denote the quantity and correlation of 
notions far more simply than do any geometric figures. In those 
there is nothing redunilant ; all is significant. 

S'*, Compendious. — In this respect lines, as is evident, are fiU- 
preferable to figures ; but Lambert’s Uuear scheme requires more 
than double the space sufficient for that here proposed. 


Digitized by Coogl 


APPENDIX. 


4G7 


4°, All-sufficient. — Any scheme by figures, and Lambert’s 
scheme by lines, is, in itself, unintelligible ; and depends on tho 
annexation of accidental symbols, to enable it to mark out the 
differences and relations of terms. Lambert, likewise, endeavours 
to supj)ly this exigency by another means, — by the fortuitous quality 
(his dottings) of certain linea In our scheme lines, simple lines, 
and lines alone, arc sufficient. 

5°, CJonsistent — Lambert's linear scheme is a mere jumble of 
inconsistenciea Compared with his, those by figures are, in this 
respect, far preferable But the present linear scheme is at once 
thoroughgoing, unambiguous, and consistent 

6°, Manifest. — In this essential conilition, all other geometrical 
illustrations arc lamentably defective. In those by figure, each 
threefol<i diagram, typifying an indefinite jdurality of moods, re- 
quires a painful consideration to extract out of it any pertinent 
elucidation ; this is, in fact, only brought to bear by the foreign 
aid of contingent symbols. Nor can these schemes properly re- 
present to the eye the relation of the toto-total identity of a plu- 
rality of terms ; the intention requires to be intimated by the ex- 
ternal accident of signs. Lambert's lines sink, in general, even 
below the figures, in this respect But as lines are here applied, 
the sole pertinent inference leaps at once to sense and under- 
standing. 

7°, Precise. — Ambiguity, vagueness, vacillation, redundancy, and 
withal inadequacy, prevail in the other schemes. In those by 
figure, one diagram is sometimes illustrative of as many as a dozen 
moods, positive and negative ; and a single mood may fall to be 
represented by four diagrams, and perhaps in six several way.s. 
Lambert’s lines are even worse. In our scheme, on the contrary, 
every mood has a diagram applicable to itself, and to itself exclu- 
sively, whilst every possible variety of its import has a correspond- 
ing possible variety of linear chfiTerence. 

8°, Complete. — In this last and all-important condition, every 
seheme, hitherto proposed, is found to fail. A thoroughgoing, 
adequate, and pliant geometric method ought equally and at once 
to represent the logical moods in the Unfigured and Figured Syllo- 
gism, in the Syllogism Synthetic and Analytic, in Extension and 
Intension, — this, too, in all their mutual convertibilities, and in all 
their individual varieties. This our scheme performs ; but exclu- 


Digiiized by Google 



4G8 


APPENDIX. 


sively. So mucli, in general Again, in particular ; — Of the 
figures, circles and triangles are necessarily inept to represent the 
ultra-total inclusion or cocxclusion of terms, — in a word, all the 
relations of proportion, except totality and indefinite partiality ; 
whilst quadrilateral figures are, if not wholly incompetent to this, 
operose and clumsy. Lambert’s linear method is incompetent to 
it in negatives ; and such inability ought to have opened his eyes 
upon the defects of his whole plan, for this was a problem which 
he expressly proposed to accomplish. Tlie present scheme, on the 
other hand, simply and easily performs this, in aflSrmation and 
negation, and with any minuteness of detail 


Authoe’s Scheme of Notation — Unfigueed and Fioubed 
Syllogism — N o. II. 

(1853.) Tlie following Diagram affords a condensed view of 
my other scheme of Syllogistic Notation, fragments of which, in 
detail, will be found in Mr Thomson’s Outline of the Laws of 
Thought, and in Mr Baynes’ Essay on the New Analytic of 
Logical Forms. The paragraphs appended will supply the neces- 
sary explanations. 


Digitized by Coogle 



APPENDIX. 


4C9 


(M) 



Breadth 


Order 

e/" 


Depth 




Either or Neither. 


1. ) A Proposition, (Sidarripa, {nlei't'allum,'tp6Tacn^, literally 
protensio, the stretching out of a line from point to point), is a 
mutual relation of two terms {Spot) or e.xtremes (a/tpa). This is 
therefore well represented, — The two terms, by two letters, and 
their Kelation, by a line e.xtended between them. 

2. ) A Syllogism is a complexus of Three Terms in Three Pro- 
positions — It is, therefore, adequately typified by a Triangle, — by 
a Figure of three lines or sides. 


Digitized by Google 


470 


APPENDIX. 


3. ) As upwards and downwards is a procedure arbitrary in the 
diagram, the diagram indicates that we can, indifierently, either 
proceed from the Premises, (rationes), to the Conclusion {ratio- 
natum), or from the Conclusion to the Premises ; the process 
being only in different points of view, either Synthetic or Ana- 
lytic. (An exclusive and one-sided view, be it remembered, has 
given an inadequate name to what are called Premises and Con- 
clusion.) 

4. ) Rationally and historically, there is no ground for consti- 
tuting that Premise into Major which is enounced first, or that 
Premise into Minor which is enounced l<ist. (See after, p. 697, 
&c.) The moods of what is called the Fourth Figure, and the In- 
direct moods of the First Figure, are thus identified. — In the 
diagram, accordingly, it is shown, that as right or left in the order 
of position is only accidental, so is first or last in the order of 
expression. 

5. ) The diagram truly represents, by its various concentric 
triangles, the Unfigured Syllogism, as involving the Figured, and, 
of the latter, the First Figure as involving the two others. (In 
fact, the whole differences of Figure and Figures are accidental ; 
Moods alone are essential, and in any Figure and in none, these 
are always the same and the same in number.) 

6. ) Depth and Breadth, Subject and Predicate, are denoted by 
the thick and thin ends of the same propositional line. 

7. ) Depth and Breadth are quantities always coexistent, always 
correlative, each being always in the inverse ratio of the other. — 
This is well shown in the connection and contrast of a line gradu- 
ally diminishing or increasing in thickness from end to end. 

8. ) But though always coexistent, and consequently, always, 
to some amount, potentially inferring each other, stiU we cannot, 
without the intervention of an actual inference, at once jump 
from the one quantity to the other, — change, pe?' saltum, Predicate 
into Subject and Subject into Predicate. We must proceed gra- 


Digiti?ed by Googic 


APPENDIX. 


471 


datim. We cannot arbitrarily commute the quantities, in passing 
from the QuR^situm to the Premises, or in our transition from the 
Premises to the Conclusion. When this is apparently done, (as in 
the Indirect moods of the First Figure and in all the moods of the 
Fourth), the procedure is not oidy unnatural, but virtually complex 
and mediate ; the mediacy being concealed by the concealment of 
the mental inference which really precedes . — Indicated by the 
line and broken line for the First Figure. 


9). In Syllogism, Figure and the varieties of Figure are deter- 
mined by the counter relations of Subject and Predicate subsisting 
between the syllogistic terms, — between the Middle and Extremes. 
— All adequately represented. 

10. ) Figure and the differences of Figures all depending upon 
the difl’erence of the mutual contrast of Subject and Predicate 
between the syllogistic terms ; consequently, if this relation be 
abolished, — if these terms be made all Subjects, (or it may be all 
Predicates), the distinction of Figure will be abolished also. (We 
do not abolish, be it noted, the Syllogism, but we recall it to one 
simple form.) — And this is represented in the diagram. For as 
the opposition of Subject and Predicate, of Depth and Breadth, is 
shown in the opposition of the thick and thin ends of the same 
tapering line ; so where, (as in the outmost triangle), the proposi- 
tional lines are of uniform breadth, it is hereby shown, that all 
such opposition is sublated. 

11. ) It is manifest, that, as we consider the Predicate or the 
Subject, the Breadth or the Depth, as principal, will the one pre- 
mise of the Syllogism or the other be Major or Minor ; the Major 
Premise in the one quantity being Minor Premise in the other. — 
Shown out in the diagram. 

.12.) But as the First Figure is that alone in which there is such 
a difference of relation between the Syllogistic Terms, — between 
the Middle and Extremes ; so in it alone is such a distinction between 
the Syllogistic Propositions realised. — By the diagram this is made 
apparent to the eye. 


Digitized by Google 


472 


APPENDIX. 


13. ) In the Unfigured Syllogism, and in the Second and Third 
Figures, there is no difference between the Major and Minor Terms, 
and, consequently, no distinction, (more than one arbitrary and 
accidental), of Major and Minor Propositions. — All conspicuously 
typified. 

14. ) All Figured Syllogisms have a Double Conclusion ; but 
in the different figures in a different way. — This is well repre- 
sented. 

15. ) The Double Conclusions, both equally direct, in the Second 
and Third Figures, are shown in the crossing of two counter and 
corresponding line.^ — The logicians are at fault in allowing Indi- 
rect Conclusions in these two figures, — nor is Aristotle an excep- 
tion. (See Pr. An., I., viL § 4.) 

16. ) The Direct and Indirect Conclusions in the First Figure 
are distinctly typified by a common and by a broken line ; the 
broken line is placed immediately under the other, and may thus 
indicate, that it represents only a reflex of, — a consequence through 
the other, [Kar av6.K\acri.v, reflexim, per rejiexionem). The 
diagram, therefore, can show, that the Indirect moods of the First 
Figure, as well as all the moods of the Fourth, ought to be re- 
duced to merely mediate inferences ; — that is, to conclusions 
from conclusions of the conjugations or premises of the First 
Figure. “ 


[The following Table affords a view in detail of the Author’s 
Scheme of Syllogistic Notation, and of the valid Syllogistic Moods, 
(in Figure), on his doctrine of a quantified Predicate. In each Figiire, 
(three only being allowed), there are 12 Aflfimiative and 24 Nega- 
tive moods ; in all 36 moods. The Table exhibits in detail the 12 
Affirmative Moods of each Figure, and the 24 Negative Moods of 
the First Figure, with the appropriate notation. 


* Repruitcd from p. 657*661 . — Ed. 


Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX. 


473 


The letters C, F, each the third letter in its respective alphabet, 
denote the extremes ; the letter M denotes the middle term of the 
syllogism. Definite quantity, (all, any), is indicated by the sign 
(:) ; indefinite quantity, (some), by the sign (, or ,). The hori- 
zontal tapering line (¦¦»—) indicates an affirmative relation 
between the subject and predicate of the proposition. Nega- 
tion is marked by a perpendicular line crossing the horizontal 
(» I ). The negative syllogism.s, in all the Figures, are exactly 
double the number of the affirmative ; for every affirmative 
affords a double negative, as each of its premises may be marked 
by a negative. In Extension, the broad end of the line denotes 
the subject, the pointed end the predicate. In Comprehension 
this is reversed ; the pointed end indicating the subject, the 
broad end the predicate. By the present scheme of notation, 
we are thus able to read a syllogism both in Elxtcnsion and in 
Comprehension. The line beneath the three terms denotes the 
relation of the extremes of the conclusion. Predesignation of 
the conclusion is marked only when its terms obtain a different 
quantity from what they hold in the premises. Accordingly, 
when not marked, the quantification of the premises is held re- 
peated in the conclusion. In the Second and Third Figures, — a 
line is inserted above as well as below the terms of the syllogism, 
to express the double conclusion in those figures. The .symbol 
s— .shows that when the premises are converted, the syllogism 
remains in the same mood ; shows that the two moods 

between which it stands are convertible into each other by con- 
version of their premises. The middle term is said to be Balanced, 
when it is taken definitely in both premises. The extremes are 
balanced, when both are taken definitely ; unbalanced, when the 
one is definite, and the other Is not. 

The Table here given exhibits the author’s final arrangement 
of the Syllogistic Moods. The Moods are either A), Balanced, or 
B), U 7ibalanced. In the former class both Terms and Propositions 
are Balanced, and it contains two moods, — i. ; ii. In the latter 
class there are two subdivision.s. For cither a), the Terms are 
Unbalanced, — iii. iv. ; or b), both the Terms and Propositions are 
Unbalanced, — v. vi. ; vii. viii. ; ix. x ; xi. xii. 

It should be observed that the arrangement of the order of 
Moods given in the present Table, differs from that of the earlier 


Digitized by Google 


474 


APPENDIX. 


scheme printed above, p. 287 et seq. The following is the corre- 
spondence in the order of moods : — 


Present and 
Final Table. 

I. 

corresponds to 

EnHIer 

Table. 

I. 

II. 

... 

... 

IL 

III. 



XI. 

IV. 


. . . 

XII. 

V. 



VII. 

VI. 



VIII. 

VII. 



III. 

VIII. 


... 

IV. 

IX. 

... 

• • • 

V. 

X. 

• . • 

. . . 

VI. 

XI. 

. . « 

• • • 

IX. 

XII. 

... 

... 

X. 


The order of the earlier table is that given by Mr Baynes, in the 
scheme of notation printed at p. 76 of his Essay on the New Ana- 
lytic. The order of the present table corresponds with that given 
by Dr Thomson in his Laius of Thought, p. 244, 3d edition, 1853. 
—Ed.] 



Digitized by Coogle 



Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


ABSTiiAcr or Oenoral Lojpc, tte Lotpc. 

AI»«tnwjtion or GoncrRliaation, what, L 
; 147-8 ; its synonyms, ih. 

Acarloroical DisputAtion, ii. *2:14-5. 

Accirients, nr Extrinsic Dcuominations, 
what, L 217. 

Acquisition of Knowlcd^, doctrine of, 
srtj Ix)gic. 

AflToctions or Passions, as a souroo of 
error, tee Error, Cnusoa of. 

Afranitis, quote*! on the nature of expo- 
rienco, ii. I.^>K. 

Apricola, Roriolphus, L -^*2 

A)i>ortus Mat'iius, roforro*! to on ^>^008 
of l^gio, L 9j quotod on province of 
Lopric, 22_j (juuU^ on quantification of 
pro<licHtfl, iu 

Altlrich, Dean, his Comfienriivm, L 2.9 ; 
his abusive employment of the ternii 
AypotAftirai anil cnnditinnal, ; hia 
abuse of the phrase propotitio ejepotiia, 
35tL * 

Alexander of Aphrodisias, the oldest com- 
mentator on ^Vristotle, L 5^ rofomxl 
as to his use of the term 
ib. ; has the distinction of Abstract 
or General and Applio<l or Special 
Ix>^o, 53 ; hU illustration of tho dis- 
tinction7~ 53-4. tee Ix>jpc ; 282; 283; 


on principle of name of major an*! 
minor terms, 25M ; M ; 338 ; referred to 
on quantity of hypothetical sylloinsms, 
^48 ; dill ; 414 ; ii. ^ 25d ; quoted on 
quaoUfioation of prodlroto, 30^ hia 
ground of tho discrimination of major 
and minor terms in tho second and third 
Fiji^ros, 408-9 ; certain early Greek 
logicians mentioned by, who nx;ognUed 
no major or minor term in the second 
and thinl Figures, 409-10 ; (and Her 
minus), quot^ on figure of syllogism, 
415-20. 

Alexander de Ales, or Alensis, hold the 
law of Contradiction to he the primary 
principle of knowledge, L 9^ but, in 
fact, identified it with tbS of Ex- 
cluded Middle, ib, 

AUtedius, on tho principle of Contradic- 


tion, i, 88j paiiially onticipatcil Lam- 
bert in tho use of parallel Unco as logi> 
cal notation, 250. 

Alvarez, L 450. 

Ammonius Hermiie, reforro*! to on genus 
of Jxigic, L ^ 54 ; on tho principle of 
Contratliction, ; 22fi ; 245; 

279 ; 33.H ; 391; referred to on the 
Ailyor or 4fi3 ; 4>>C ; ii. 8 ; 

refeiTcHi to on Division and its various 
kinds, 2 m ; referred to on Greek article, 
28* > ; quoted on quantification of pre- 
dicate, *299, 303-fi ; quotod on Hypo- 
thetical (Conjunctive) and Disjuiietivo 
Syllogisms, ; (and PhilojH>nus), 

their ground of the discrimination of 
major and minor terms in the second 
and third Figures, 4i>8. 

Analogy, what, ii. lfi5-6 ; 170-71 ; founded 
on the principle of Phiiotopkical Prt- 
16d ; its agreement with and 
dUtinotioD from Induction, lfifi-7 ; has 
two oascntial comlitions, 171-2 ; sum- 
mar>’ of the doctrine of, 172 ; Induction 
and Analogy cora;»ored together, 172-3 ; 
these do not afford absolute certainty, 
173-4 ; authors referred to on, 174. 

Analysis, tee Motho<i. 

A s«/y/»V, narao employed by Aristotle to 
denote a particular port of Logic, i. S. 

Anaximenes, of Lamjisacus, tho Uxjatiso 
Jibetoi-ic to Alejeaniier attributed to, L 
890 . 

Ancillon, Frederic, referred to, 1. 44. 

Andreas, Antonius, the first to explicate 
the law of Mentity os a co-ominate 
principle, L SL 

A Htrhauunfff expresses what is common to 
Perception and Imagination, as opposed 
to Conception, via., the indiriauality 
and immediacy of their objects, L 12»>-7 ; 
183 ; can bo translateil into English 
only bjr/a/MiVios, but ambiguously, 127. 

Antholofjia Or^a, L 39ir 

*Awopl0/if;<ny, its character and meaning, 
ii. 

ApodeUtie^ employed by Aristotle to de- 
note a particular part of Logic, L S. 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


479 


AnenJuii. L 

Art, ancient an«I moJonij diverse charac* 
tom of, ii. 131-2. 

Association, laws of, what, ii. 12*2-3. 

Association r>r Stigp^tion, as a source of 
Error, jw Error, causes of. 

Assumption, name for Minor Premise, 1, 
2-S5 ; but not a suitaide terra, ib. 

Attention, tlio act of, how constitutc<l, L 
123 ; Proscision, Abstraction, and At- 
tention correlativo terras, 12;L 

Auffustiu, St, his answer to tho question 
what time is, L 1(>7. 

AuK^stin, Pseudo, roferrod to on inapplica- 
bility of tho categories to Deity, L 

Augustinus Niphus Sucssanus, L Hfi- 

Aldus (lolliua, LiiH; 

Authenticity, criticism of, »et Testimony. 

Avorroos, quoted on use of tho Arabic 
article in quantificution, ii. 2H» ; quoted 
on quontiticAtion of profUcate, ; 
quoted on figure of syllogism, 425-ti ; 
quoted on fourth Figure, 454. 

Avicenna, ii. Ifi? ; 171. 

^4.r/o»tu, used by Stoics and Raraists as a 
synonym for jiropo^ition^ L 2tid. 

Alloffiar^sbvrt^datcfSf — namonppliod by 
Ammonias and Philoponua to principle 
of Contraiiiction, L 88, #e« Contnulic- 
tion, principle of. 

Axioms, what, L 2dd. 

BAcnyANX, referred to on tho analogy 
between Logic and Mathematics, L iij 
94-5: 124 : 210; 2:j0 ; 254 ; 2.59 ; 2h2 ; 
:tOt; ; 3fnF73n ; :m ; p2i 404; quotetl, 
with brief original interpolations, on 
the figures and moods of Syllogism, 
405-22; 
quoted 

^phisms, 452-4 ; ii. 8] ; quuto<l on tho 
prejudice of loajmod~autuority, 87-8 ; 
H4-18 ; 13£i 151 ; 174. 

Bacon, Lord, wholly misconcoivc<l the 
character of Logic in certain rosj>ects, 
L at fault in his criticism of Aris- 
totlo’s doctrine of Induction, 325; called 
empirical genoraliHAtions axioms, it 47j 
his classification of tho sources of error, 
80 ; quoted on reading, 223; the aim of 
his Orffaiion, 2;il. 

Balfour, or Balforous, roferrod to on a 
spurious passage in Aristotle's J^hetoric, 
L ^ quoted on illustration by the 
AplmKiisian of Abstract and Applied or 
St>eclal Logic, 5£; on Abstract and Ap- 
iilied or Special l/>gic, 112. 

Ballot, iU meaning in relation to concepts, 
L UL 

Baurogarton, A. G., tho Leibnitian, the 
first to use the term priudptum (xrlusi 
wwv/u‘, L called tho principle of 
Identity, principittm p<aitiunis tivt 
idtntitatxs, 92 : attempted to demon- 
strate the law of Sufficient Reason by 
that of (Contradiction, 95 ; 142 ; quoted 
on (Canons of Syllogism, ii. 324-5. 


his reduction of Baroco, 440 ; 
on character of ancient Greek 


Baynos, Thomas Spencer, his Rtsay on the 
ytw A nal^te uj txyical Forms refomxl 
to, L 4^ his translation of tho Port 
Royal Ix)gic notice<l, 7^ 1 1'2 ; his Rtsay 
refoiTod to, ii. 315. 

Ret/rijf, tho term in German philosophy 
for tho syralnilical notions of the under- 
standing, L IH3. 

Belief, Truth and Error, doctrine of. 

Ben (jci'son, or Gorsonides, Levi, quote<i 
on quantification of predicate, ii. 3 10-11. 

Benoke, L 95 ; his doctrine of syllogism, 
ii. 

Bertius, L 279 ; 375. 

Bosa, L 3.037 

Biel, Gabriel, his use of coneeptus, L 42. 

Biunde, ii. liil 

Blcmmidus, Nicephorns, L 119 ; rcferre«l 
to on origin of distinction of propwi- 
tioDs Sfrundi and (eiiii adjaefntis, 228 ; 
quoted on imjH>rt of tho term <rwAAo- 
yiapSs, 279, 384 ; his Fpitome for many 
centuries the toxt-book of Logic in tlio 
schools of the Greek Church, 432 ; 
mentioned a.s tho inventor of tho Greek 
mnemonic verses for mocxl and figuro 
of syllogism, 43*2 : but, according to 
later view, those verses only a transla- 
tion of tho I^tin, 432: ii. 25d; quote<l 
on ( 'ontingent ConyorsioD, 2fi5. 

Boethius, referred to on the application of 
tho term (o/jict L ^ 142. 1 5^1 ; his divi- 
sion of C/onversion, 284 ; tho first to 
give tho name C'oarrrjio j>er acridenSj 
iL; nature of this process as employed 
by, 28*2; quotea for use of sump'him 
and asmmptio, 285 ; referred to on uso 
of terms ponsns and toUens, in connec- 
tion with hyj>othctical syllogism, 3;18. 
414 ; ii. 14j quotcsl on tho influence of 
passion on the mind, 94j 256 ; quoted 
on quantification of predicate, 3t>6-9. 

Bolzano, L 338 ; 344 : iL 174. 

Boyle, Hon. Robert, rofornxl to for dis- 
tinction of roason in ahstmeto, and rea- 
son i« coneretOf L 60. 

Brandis, Ch. A., referred to on tho title 
Organon for tho ]<^col treatises of 
Anstotlo, L 34; 191. 

Braniss, Cb. J.71T 262 ; 448. 

Bremlth and Depth, nanios for tho exten- 
sion and comprehension of concepts, L 
141 (t alibi, 

Buchanan, George, i. 303. 

Buffier, L 159 : ii. Hj quoted on canons 
of syllogism, 337-8. 

Burgersdyk, or Burgorsdicius, referred to 
on genus of I»gic, L 9 ; his Instihttionts 
Logirtt noticed and recommended, II ; 
ii. 225 ; referred to on Whole and Part, 
202 ; quoted on Potential and Actual 
Whole, *206-7 ; 41iL 

Buridamis, his sophism of tho Ass re- 
ferred to tho bead of Sophisma Hdero- 
seteseoi, L 466. 

Burleigh, Lord, his practice in reeling, 
ii- 216-17. 


Digitized by Googit 


480 


INDEX. 


liiitlor, SAmnol, quoted as to the princi- 
pal utility of Kbetoric, L 

Cajetan, Cardinal, quoted for hU use of 
tho termfl iuteH*iv€ and txUniive in rela- 
tion to notions, L 141. 

Calkor, L 1 tl. 

Camcrarius, Gul., referred to on penua of 
Lopic, L rofomKl to for acbolaAtio 
theories on the object-matter of Logic, 
27-8. 

Campbell, Principal, quoted on indis- 
tinctness of terras, L 1 T'l-tJ. 

Capcila, Martianus, quoteil on figure of 
syllogism, ii. 421-5. 

Carainuel, stt Lobkowits. 

CarletoD, Thomas Compton, referred to 
on tho metaphysical character of tho 
CaU^ori<»i of Aristotle, L 

Caro, quoted, ii. lU4-b ; 114 ; 144. 

Cartesians, majority of, maintained Logic 
to bo an art, L IL 

Caasiodorua, L 802 : ii. 424. 

Categorical Proposition, Instter styled 
Aftsolute or Po-fecty L 283, ti< Judg- 
ments, doctrine of. 

Ctttf(]orit'nl, tho terra, as used by Aris- 
totle, equivalent to aJHriniitivf, L 284 ; 
its application by Theophrastus and 
Kiidonms, in opposition to 

: this difiercnco of signification 
not hitherto observed, 2^t5. 

Catogoric.s or I'ralicamouU of Aristotle, 
what, L llNi ; original moaning of tho 
tonn Cattgor^, 11^7 ; its employment by 
Aristotle, ib. ; by Plotinus, jft. ; by 
Kant, ll»7-8 ; the Categories of Aris- 
totle metaphysical, lilii; criticised os a 
cloM-sifioatioii of being, 1 >0 ; objects 

not included under, 198; divereitv of 
oiiinion among logicians reganiing 
their number, 2n<* ; various authors 
roferre<l to regarding, 200-1. 

Certainty, «« Truth ana Error, Doctrine of. 

C.'hauvin, L 205. 

Cicero, referred to on the ii.so of Logica, 
L fi ; probably borrowed his use of that 
term from tho Stoics, ih. ; quoted on 
tho province of I»gic, 87 ; enounced 
the principle of £xchu1e<l Middle, 91 ; 
recitgnisecl tho principle of Hca.son and 
Consof^uent, 9^ his definition of argv- 
mfhtHm quoted. 279 ; applied the terra 
to an argument like tho modem 
Sorites, but which could also be a 
CArgttpp<an, 376 ; callc<l the sophism 
Sorites AcervalU, ib. ; his oniplovTiiont 
of the term KHthgmemt, HlHj ; his state- 
ment of the Igaara Jtaiio, 462 ; 465-6 ; 
ii. ; 20*j-7. 

CiiTultis in drmonjitrrtndo, uf Proliation. 

Clas-scs, names for the different steps in 
tho series of, in physical science, L 201. 

Clearness and Obscurity, Distinctness and 
Indistinctness of Concepts, m Con- 
cepts, (Quality of. 

Clement of Alexandria, quoted on teach- 


ing as a mean of sclf-improvoment in 
knowledge, ii. 210. 

Clorc, stt Le (.lore. 

Voijiiatio {Thf>vght)y its use by Descartes, 
1. 12 : 8ft Thought. 

Cognitive Faculties, Weakness and Dis- 
proportioned Strength of, as u souroe 
of error, Error, Causes of. 

Coke, Zachar)’, his use of the term coh- 
cfpt, L 42. 

College of Alcala, the, Ht Cursui Cam/>/M- 
tenris. 

Communication of Knowledge, Doctrine 
of, xre L*>gic. 

Comparison, Faculty of, its products 
threefold, — Concepts, Judgments, and 
Keasonings, L HI ; its oflicos, 12-2-8 

Comprehension and Extension of Con- 
cepts, Mf. Concepts, (Quantity of, and 
Reasonings. 

CoHcrjit, should bo used to denote tho ob- 
ject conceive<l, L 41-2 ; its derivation, 
42 ; many words in English formed on 
tho same analogy os pvtcejA, dlgtH, &c. 
ib. ; was in common use in the sense 
propose<i among the older English 
philt>8<»phical writers, ib . ; and among 
the old French philosophers, ib. ; now 
employed in French in translating the 
German Hojrijf, ib.y tee aho VtjncejAu-t: 
what, 16 ; its synonyms, 76-7 ; m CJon- 
copU, Doctrine of. 

ConctjAio, its meaning, L 120. 

CV>ncc])tion, employment of the term by 
Stewart to denote the simple represeu- 
iatioii of an object pi'esented in Percep- 
tion, L 40 ; vacillation in its \xte by 
Reid, ib . ; sense in which employed by 
tho author, ib . ; its derivation, 41 : 
moans both tho act of conceiving and 
tho object conceived, ib . ; should l>o 
use<l to denote exclusively the act of 
conceiving, and eourept apiilio<l to the 
object conceived, 41-2 ; Reid (juotod 
on, 109-12 ; his mistakes rcgakling, 
112 13 ; tisually called bv tho logicians 
SinifAe A ppreftension, UL 

Concepts, Doctrine of, L 116-24 ; of Con- 
cepts or Notions, oi^cr of discussion, — 
A. In general, what they are, and how 
produced, 118 rt teg.^ 130 ei teg. ; doc- 
trine of concepts umittc<i by Wbatoly 
in his JCfanentt, US; a. Meaning of the 
terms CoHCcpf or A’o<m>h, 119-20 ; their 
8^’nonyms, 119 ; Coneept denotes the re- 
sult of the act of ConcefAiony tliat is, 
of comi*rchendlng or grasping up into 
unity toe various qualities by which an 
object is chamcterisefl, 126 ; /h^otion 
denotes cither the act of apprehending 
the notes or marks of an object, or tho 
result of that act, ib. ; employment of 
the terms animo vol inente eonaptre, and 
Uiiimi conceptut, ib. ; of conciptre, con- 
ceptHt and without adjunct, ib.\ 
the term Notion how employra by the 
author, 121 ; b. Nature of the thing ex- 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


481 


proiifto^l, ft $fq. \ a concept oquiralent 
to the mediate and relative km>wlod^ wo 
have of imohjuct. OK comprininK' qualities 
or cluiracteni common to it with otiior 
objoctR, 1^; nature and production of 
concept* illufltntted bjr reforoncu to the 
history of our knowledge, 12’2 ft $ffj , ; 
the results of comparison and abstrac- 
tion or attention, oh oiioratlng on ob« 
jocts originally presonte*! in confiwoii 
and im|)erfoct ^>crception!«, and reducing 
multitude to unity, 122-4 ; the reduc- 
tion of muititiitle to unitv involved in 
conception oxplaino«l on<l illustrated, 
124 ft stq. ; thouglit ono and the same, 
while its content* are identical, 124 ; 
objoota are to us the same when wo are 
unable to distingtiish their cognitions, 
whether as wholes, or in their partial 
characters, 124-5 ; concepts or notions 
arc conKtitutod by the points of similar- 
ity discovered in objects, and identified 
in the unity of consciousness, 125 ; 
concepts may themselves become the 
objects of comparison and abstraction, 
I2*i ; concepts or notions HU|>orfiuou8ly 
styled ytnerat, ib.\ gonoml characters of 
concupts, el »<u., IM et x/y. ; a. A 
concept affonU onl^ an ina<iequato 
knowledge of the thing thought under 
it, 127 ft *eq . ; b. AtTonls no absolute 
object of knowle<igo, but can bo realised 
only by being applietl as a term of rela- 
tion to one or more of the objects 
which agree in the point or points of 
resemblance which it expresses, 12ji ; 
this doctrine explains the whole mystery 
of generalisation nn<l general terms, ib . ; 
the generality of a concept is {Kiteiitial, 
not actual, 12l>-35 ; concepts are not, 
on that account, mere words, 136 : c. 
Their dependence on language, 132 rt 
sry. ; Uncage necessary to the perfec- 
tion of concepts, 131* ; B. Of concefits 
or notions in special, quantity 

of concepts. 141 ei wlmt is meant 
by saying that a concept is a quantity, 
143; this quantity of two opjwsite kinds, 
-^-Intensive or (jcimprehensive and Kx- 
tensive, 143-56. iff I'onccjits, Quantity 
of; quality of Concepts, srr Con- 

cept^ Quality of ; Reciprocal Relations 
of, ft sfy., $ff Concepts, Reciprocal 
Relations of. 

Concepts, Quantity of, or C-omprehension 
anti Extension of Concepts, what, i. 
141-3, 1 46 ; how respectively desig- 
natod, 141 ; these quantities opposeil 
to each other, 146 ; law regulating 
the mutual relations of, ib. ; tliis il- 
lustmiotl, lil ; ))roces 80 s by which 
amplified and resolved,-- Determination 
or Concretion, Abs^action or Gonoral- 
isation, Definition, and Division, 14^7 ; 
opposed in an inverse ratio, Da. 

finition and Division the processes by 
which the Comprehension and Extension 
of concepts are respectively resolved, 


149-51 ; diagram representing, with re- 
lative IlhistnUion. 152-6. 

Concepts, Quality of, L 152 et $eq. ; this 
determined by their relation to their 
subject, 157 ; consists in their logical 
perfection or imperfection, 157, 158 : 
this of two degrees, — Cleamuss and 
Distinctness, and Obscurity and In- 
distinctness, 15^ ; those degrees distin- 
guished, 15v9 ; original application of 
the expressions elfttmes*, Ac., 

1.59 ; illustrate<l by reference to vision 
and representation, 159-60 ; 16.3-5 ; 

clonmoss and obscurity as in concepts, 
160 d the absolutely clear and tlio 
absolutely obscure, 161 ; distinctness 
and indistinctness of, 1 62 ; historical 
notices of this di-stinction, lii2 d w/. ; 
due to Ijeibnits, lii2 ; notice of Locke 
in connection with it, ib , ; dilTeronco 
between a door and distinct knowlc<lge 
illuatrate<l, 153 d teq, ; the judicial de- 
termination of life and death supixises 
the difference between a clear and dis- 
tinct knowledge, 164 ; further illustra- 
tion fn.>m the numan countenance, 164- 
5; special conditions of the distinctness 
of a concept, and of its dogroos, 16,5-7 ; 
the distinction l>otwccn clear and dis- 
tinctknowledgo illustratoil by examples, 
167 ; how the distinctness of a concept 
is affectixl by the two quantities of a 
concept, 153 d jro. ; distinctness is in- 
ternal and extemiU. 1G8-9 ; relations of 
Definition and Division to internal and 
external distinctness, 169 ; simple no- 
lions admit of an extensive, inaividual 
notions of an intensive, distinctnoss, 
1511 ; the highest {toint of the distinct- 
ness of a concept, 169-70 ; im|>erfection 
to which concepts are liable, in respect 
of tho thought of which they are the 
expression, 171-2 ; this imperfection 
illuRtmtcil, 172 ft $eq. ; noticed by 
British pbiloaophcrs, 174 ; Stewart 
quoted on tho subject, 174-7 ; Locke 
antici)>ated Hume in remaricing tho 
employment of terms without distinct 
meaning, 177 : l/>cko quoted on this 
]K>int, li7-9 : tno distinction of Intuitive 
and Symbolical knowledge first taken 
by I^ibnitx, 179 ; this di.stinction su- 
pemododtlic controversy of Nominalism 
an<l Conceptualism in Germany, 179-83 ; 
discusaoil by him in lie VognitioHft I'en- 
taif, d JdetJt, IKO ; the passage quotetl, 
LSI -2 ; the distinction appreciated by 
tho disciples of Loibnits, IS^) ; Wolf 
quoted on, 134-6. 

Concepts, R^iprocal Relations of, L 187- 
224 ; relation proper of, what, L^7 ; can 
be compared together with reference 
only either, 1 % To their Extension, or, 2% 
To their Comprehension, i6. ; considered 
A. Asde}>endont on extension, 187-212 ; 
as dependent on extension, concepts 
stand to each other in the five mutual 
relations of Exclusion, Coeztension, 


Digitized by Google 


482 


INDEX. 


Subordination, Co-ordination, and In- 
tcmoction, 187-8 ; examples of the five 
mutual relations of conccpU, 188 ; dia- 
grams illustrative of, 18^ ; of theso 
relations, sub-ordination an<T co-ortlina- 
tion of principal importance, 180 ; sub- 
ordinatiuD considered, ; terms 

expressive of the different modes of tho 
refution of subordination, 100 et attf. ; 
SujKjrior, Inferior, Brx»ndcr, Narrower 
Notions, IW ; Universal, Particular, 
190-1 ; General Notion, Gcdtis, Si»ccial 
Notion, SjHJcios, 191-2, aee Genus andSpo- 
cios ; Co-orfUnation, what, 209 ; the two 
general laws by which subordination and 
co-ordination under extension are re^- 
late<l, viz., of Ilomogponoityand Hetero- 
geneity, 2Qlt.lo ; their import, 210 ; law 
of Hctcrogeucitv, true only in thwry, 
t*6. ; additional law of lx>^ical Affinity 
promulgate<l by Kant, but to be rejected, 
2 11 ; B. As de|>cDdoiit on compre- 
hension, but not in tho relations of 
involution and co-oniination, 212 2f ; 
notions, in relation to each other, are 
Identical and Different, 212 : identical, 
divitle<l into absolutolv ana relatively 
identical, 212 ; absolutely idonticid 
notions imi> 08 siblo. 212-13 ; relatively 
identical called also SSimilar and Uo- 
ciprocating or Convertible, i'6. ; notions 
are Congruent or Agreeing, and Con- 
flictivo, 213-14; Congruent and Identi- 
cal notions, and Diverse and Confiictive 
distiDguishcd, 214. att Concepts, Opl>o- 
sitiun of ; Intrinsic and Kxtnnsic, 210- 
17 ; Involution and Co-ordination in 
comprobonsion, 217. 22<) ; those rela- 
tions of notions noglocteii by logicians, 
and hence also neglected reasoning in 
comprehension, 21/ ri arq. ; the rela- 
tion of tho Containing and the contained 
in comprehension properly callc<l in- 
volution^ 220 ; this illustmied, 220-21 ; 
tho involving notion the more complex, 
tho involved tho more simple, 222 : co- 
ordination in comprehension, 223 24 ; 
notions co ordinat^i in coinpreben.sion 
called Dispamte, in extension Disjunct 
or Discrete, 224. 

Concepts, 0})position of, arises underCom- 
prebension, L 213; constituted by con- 
diction, or the imiMssibiUty of being 
connected in thuugot, ib.; twofidd, 1*", 
Immediate or Contradictory; Me«li- 
ate or Contrary, 213-14 ; these distin- 
piishe<l and illustrated^ 214-15 ; their 
logical significance, 215-18, Opposi- 
tion, of Propositions. 

Conceptualism and Nominalism, tho 
whole controversy originated in the 
ambiguity ofwor»ls, L 12^ 130; how to 
1x3 reconcile*!, 128; this question not 
agitatc<l in Germany, ib. 

Vonctftlua, its use by Biol, Occam, L 42 ; 
Vonrf^dua, and coxcep/M animi, “Its 
meaning, 120. 

Voncljtert^ its meaning, L 120. 


Conclusion, of a syllogism, what, L 281 : 
its synonyms, ib. ; U tho problem stated 
as a docifdon, 282. 

Concrete or Special Logic, »ee Logic. 

Condillac quoted on inmience of Associa- 
tion, ii. 12^7 ; ILL 

Conditional Jud^ont or Proposition, itc 
Judgments, Poclrino of. 

Conditional and variations 

in regard to the application of tho 
terms, L 23d ; Boethius, use<l condition- 
alU and btffioUtcticut {htffto- 

thcticiil) as convertible, ih. ; conditional 
to bo applied to the genus as including 
h^iMhtUi.al ontl disjunctive, 237. 

Cenforenco, see Knowledge, Doctrine of 
tho Acquisition and Poriocting of. 

Confucius, his remedy for precipitation, 
ii. Ii8. 

Conimbricenses, L 262 ; their error re- 
gnnling tho opposition of Boethius and 
ATerrocs to Aristotle on quantification 
of preiiicnto, ii. 308. 

Conspccics, what, L ^9 ; in so far as they 
are consiilorod different, but not con- 
tradictory, called Discrete or Disjunct 
Notions, ih. 

Contingent Conversion, of the Lower 
Greeks, what, U. 264-5 ; Blommidas 
cited on, 2(L5. 

Contradiction, or Non - Contradiction, 
principle of, a fundamental law of 
thought, L 79 ; what, 81 ; prorierly the 
law of Non-ContradicUun, 8^; how 
enounced, ib . ; tho principle of all 
logical negation and distinction, ib . ; 
differs from tho law of Identity only by 
a negative expression, 8^ its historj’, 
£2 et acfj . ; can Imj traced~I>ack to Plato, 

87 ; emphatically enouncc<l hy Aristotle, 
87-8 ; with tho Peripatetics and School- 
men tho highest principle of knowledge, 

88 ; obtained its name from the Greek 
Aristotelians, ib. ; said by Ammonius 
and Pbilnponus to bo ^e criterion 
which divides truth from falsehood 
throughout the universe of existence, 
ib . ; said by Suarez to bold tho same 
supremacy among tho principles of 
knowledge w hich tho Deity docs among 
tho principles of existence, ib , ; contro- 
versies touching its truth and axiomatic 
character, 88-1* ; its truth denied by 
modem absolutists, 89 ; how viewed by 
Schelling and Uogel, 1*0 ; along with 
that of IdontiW, regiilates the categori- 
cal syllogism, 249. .v>3 ; authors referre<l 
to on, ii. 246 ; conditions of, ib. ; proof 
of, attempted by Claulxirg, t5. ; see 
Fundamental Ixiws of Thought. 

Contus, Sebostianus, iL 308. 

Conversion ]ter aevidens, what, L 264 ; 
Conversion not tho more syn- 

onym of, ii. 2ZJ ; differently define<l by 
different logicians, 272 ; by Boethius, 
ib . ; hy logicians in general, i5. ; os am- 
pliative, not logical, 264 ; os restric- 
tive, fortuitous, or not a conversion, ib. 


INDEX. 


483 


Conversion, of Ju<I'/monti» or Propositions, 
L 2»>2-7 ; wJiAt, terms 

emp)oyc«l to donuto tlio orit'inal and 
convortc<l proposition, ih. ; tbo ori^nal 
]trop<Miition ou^jiit to bo cMle<l tho Cuh- 
rrrtfnil or Com'trtiU^f tho pro«luct of 
tho conversion, tbo Convfi’tetl or ('on* 
tvrsr, 2*il, ; $ef alto ii. 2r>«>, 2^k> ; 

s|>ecios of conversion distii»truLHhe<l by 
lotficians, 2vi»i-4 ; ^ Simpio or Ihire, 
2»»:i 4 ; ^ Ck>nversio per Accidens, 2t>4 ; 
this name first jfiven by liocthius, lA. ; 

(Jonvorsio per Contrapositionem, »A. ; 
flivisions of, i>y Doothhis, ih. ; nine* 
m<»niu verses f«jr conversion, 204-»^ ; 
definitions of, in j;oner:d, it ; a cose 
of iiuinoliato inference, ih. ; names 
fur tho pru(K)siiioD ^iven in, and its 
pro<lnct, ; best names for tluMO 

toother, ijonvtrient or Vonitrliiiti^ and 
for each apart, C’onc«'rfc/id and C'um- 
XfrUf ih . , ; eiT(.»rH of the common 

logical tloctrino of, tw»> -first. That tbo 
ipiantities are not converted with tiio 
(luaiiliHod tonus, 257-^, 27d ; thiswronff 
shown, 1*, Because the terms of a pro- 
pfwition are only terms of relation, z57 ; 
2'*, Only comparoti as <juantitios, ; 3”, 
Quantity of projwsition in conversion 
remains always tiio same, ‘^OT-S, 271 ; 
4'\ Of no conso<|uonco lopicall^’ whether 
suI)joct or predicate placoil first. 25H ; 
soconti error — ITio not considering that 
tho predicate has always a <iunntity in 
thought as well as tho subject, 2.^-0«3 ; 
itt afto 271-4, 27 fi ; only one stiocics 
of, and that thorouRh-ifidng ana self- 
sufficient, 2«)4 ; cOHvrrno ptr arctdts/, 
os ampiiativo, not lofpcal, and os re- 
strictive, merely fortuitous, lA. ; ieeaUo 
271 -2, »e>' Conversion per aceiJnt-* ; Cua- 
xtrtw p<r eoHtrapitsUtOHemt only holds 
thrmi^li contnwliction, and is indepen- 
dent of convemion, iL* »ee Convondon )ter 
eomtrnji^teitiimem ; the Coutinprunt Con- 
version of tho lower Greeks, not a con- 
version, 2»1T), »e« Contingent Con^'orsiun ; 
advanburos of tho author's own method 
over those of tlio lopcians, ; tho 

character of, as given by Grook lo- 
gicians subsmjnont to Aristotle correct, 
2 »i»i ; errors of Aristotle and tho logi- 
cians roganling, 2fi*j, 274-fi ; authorities 
rofomxl to on, 274-5. 

Conversion per cuHtra^iMhionem^ only 
holds through oontrodictiun, and is not 
roiKjrly a conversion, ii. 2- >4 -5, 275 ; 
old by sumo to l>o moiliatc, 2fi4 ; this 
emmoous, t'A. ; rules for, lA. ; historical 
notices of, and authors roferrod to on, 
264-5. 

Conversion »ts meaning in Ari.s- 

totlo, ii. 271-2. 

Co-onlination of concepts, He Concepts, 
Relations of. 

Copula, the Ic^cal. what, L 228-0 ; in- 
cluded in tbo predicate by Aristotle, 
tA. ; styled tho ^\ppre 1 l\ca^e^ wpo<rscmy- 

VOL, IT. 


t*A. ^ that negation does not 
belong to, hold by some hani^ians, 252 ; 
tlio opiHisite iloctrine moiutainoii by 
tho author, ih. ; true nnjiort of, 2.52-fi ; 
origin of the controvomy rogor<Ung the 
place of negation, 253 ; its meaning in 
Comprohonsivo and Extensive proposi- 
tions, 274. 

Comxand Tisias, cose of, referred to, 

(kiroHaries, what, L 2<k>. 

Curvinus, quoted on inference from pure 
jMirticulars, ii. 457. 

Cousin, Victor, bis contradictions on tho 
cognition of tlio Absolute, L lill. 

Craknnlhoipo, i. 23U ; referred to on 
names oi propositions in conversion, 
263, 324 ; 367 ; bis doctrine of Induc- 
tion, ii. 3>»7. 

Crollius, i, 5-4 ; 325 ; 342. 

(¦nonius, ii. P7 ; 210. 

Criticism, Art of, tee Testimony. 

Crousox, ii. 9^ quoted in illustration of 
precijiitancy, Ii. 97-8 : quoto«l on sloth 
as a source of error, 99 ; 137 ; 144. 

CrusiuR, Christian August, ii. lOfl; quoted 
on canons of syllogism. 32U-22. 

CMrutti Cinnnlnifnxi$, refciroil to on in- 
duction ot Aristotle, ii. -3*J4. 

Chist4im, power of, as a source of error, 
see Error, Clausos of. 

D’Anna dr Raci>xih, rofcmxl to for scho- 
lastic theories of tho object-matter of 
Logic, L 28. 

Damasconus, Joannes, L | referred to on 
motho^i in I.<ogic, ii. 9. 

Damtron, his L 7d. 

David, the Anriemau, roferrod to on Uio 
caU^orioB, L 2t)0. 

Daijes, or Danes, L 3^ referred to on 
principle of Sufficient Heasem, L 9L 

Do Morgan, A., Letter of Sir W. Hamil- 
ton to, iL 355. 

Dofinito and Indefinito Propositions, ns 
understood by tho author, L 243-4, 249, 
set Judgments, Propositions. 

Definition, or Declaration, the analysis of 
the comprehension of a concept. L 
147 9, 15u ; doctrine of, ii. 10-21 ; what, 
lO-U ; the terms deeiaration and dr- 
Jimition express tbo same process in 
ditforent asjiecU, lA. ; definition in its 
stricter sense, 11 - 12 ; this explicate*!, 
tA., ti setj. ; various names of — De- 
Ex/f*ts{(ionf Jh- 
srriptivttf Ue’finiiioH t*roper^ ib. ; No- 
minal, R^l, and Genetic, what, 12-13 ; 
rules of, 14 ; these explaine*!, t'A., H seq. ; 
first rule, 14-15 ; second rule, 15-17 ; 
thii^ rule. circular tiefinition, 

17-21 ; fourth rule, 18 19 ; fifth rule, 
19 - 29 ; Definition, in its looser sense, 
2IV21 ; Diluciilations or Explications. 
2< > ; I>escriptioas, 2L 

Degorando, Baron, L 94 ; 173 ; ii. 45. 

Delarivi^ro, his L 79 ; referred to 

on definite artic’lo in relation to qiuuiti- 
fication, li. 280. 

2 H 


Digitized by Google 


48-t 


INDEX. 


Donzinj^or, roferro*! to on cato- 

gories, L 2Ul: 2<>2 ; 'JiHi; qnoto*l on 
mcxles of falfana untut compt>$Ui ft 

4iV>-7 ; 4(ki. 

Dcrodon, Dnvir}, rofcm>i to on \STioleand 
Part, L t^2; 30d; quote<l on nanntity of 
disjunctive and hyi>otholioal proposi- 
tions, liiil ; ^4 ; ; hold syllogisra and 

onthir'mcmo to bo the sarao «i»cciea of 
reasoning, 23^ J 4(W> ; 408 ; 437 ; his 
mothiKl of reducing Camestros to Bar- 
bara, 440; notice of, ii. 317 ; his po- 
lemic against the special rules of syllo- 
gism, 318; qtiotoil on Induction, 3ij3-4; 
his criticism of tho s]>ecial ruloa of the 
figuros reviewod, 4r>S-(»0. 

Descartes, quoted regordingtho extension 
of the term Tkoutjhi {cogitaUu)^ L 12 ; 
quoted on tho means of avoiding error, 
il- 77 ; his doubt, 85 ; his precept to 
doubt oil, Hl-8 ; oouditious which mo- 
dify its application, li2< 

Determination, or Concretion, what, L 
147-8 ; its synonyms, 

DitUtctic, ancient nomo (with certain limi- 
tations) for Logic, L ^ its use i»y Plato, 
ih.\ its origin, ib.\ its use by Hegel, ii.\ 
by Aristotle, — the logic of probable 
matter, ^ mistakes regarding tho us© 
of the term by Aristotle, »A.; employed 
in a vacillating manner by”tEo Stoics, ^ 
9. 

AiaXfKTiK^ Tpay^uLray^ equal to 

Abstract or (lenoral liOgic, L ^ ftf 
Ixigic, 

AioAficTiK'^ yv^yaclif rpay- 

equal to Special or Applied 
Logic, L ^ if* Logic. 

Diftn tie Omni et tie A’k//o, the canons of 
deductive categorical syllogisms in ex- 
tension, L 303 ; how expres.se<l, ih . ; 
logicians who confound the Dictum do 
Omni with the Nota Not», Ac., ii 
who make tho Dictum tho fun<lamontal 
rale of syllogism in general, 3.‘l9-40, see. 
Syllogism ; who confounii or make co- 
ordinate the law of IVojKirtion or Ana- 
logy with, 340 : who restrict the Dictum 
to the first figure (immediately), i6.; 
who make the Dicta the sunromc canons 
for imivomal syllogisms, lo. ; who erro- 
nooiisiy suppose Aristotle to employ, 
besides tho Dictum, the rule of I*ro]Kjr- 
tion as a fundamental law of syllogism, 
341 ; bow enounced by Noldius, i0.\ by 
Rousch, 341-2 ; by Aristotle, 342 ; by 
•lac. Thomasius, lA.; objections to, 
342.3 

Duiorot. quoted on memory, ii. 119. 

Dilemma, see Hypothotico-disjunotivo syl- 
logism. 

Dilommatic judgment or proposition, see 
Juclgmcnta. 

Diogenes I.Acrtius, referred to on genus 
of Logic, i ^ attributed tho invention 
of Sophism ^Sttrites to Kubulidcs, 37fi ; 
4.*>4 ; 4liii ; ; 40d ; referred to on tho 

Platonic definition of mmi, ii. Ih ; 51. 


Diagrams of Ammonius, ii. 420; crrono- 
ously referrcil to Fnl>cr Stnpuleusis, VA. 

Dialt>gue, H. 224, »<s Knowleilge, Doctrine 
of tho Acquisition and Perfecting of. 

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, his employ- 
ment of tho term enllynume^ L 31H). 

DionysiuK Cato, on teaching as a moans of 
solLimprovoment iii knowledge, it 210. 

Dis>'u.*sittHs on Philtaop/tif, Author’s, re- 
forreil to for schokistic theories on 
objoct-mattcr of I»gic, L 27 ; on tho 
chameter of Dr Whately's Elentents, 
refornMl to for a later dovclopmont of 
tho author's doctrine on the logical 
I^aws, L ^ 105: 279 ; 2i*4 ; referred to 
on history of I^atin and Greek mne- 
monic verses for Mood and Figure of 
Syllogism, 432. 

Disiunclive Reasoning or Syllogism, first 
class of Conditicmal Syllogisms, and sec- 
ond class afforded by Internal Form of 
Syllogism, L 32d ; a reasoning whoso form 
is determined by tho law of Kxcluded 
^liddlo, and whose sumption is accord- 
ingly a disjunctive projKisition ; either 
of Contradiction or of Contrariety, t'6. ; 
either affirmative, constituting tho 
Motlus PonenSy or Slrnlns j)onfndo toUens, 
or negative, constituting the Motlus 
ToUens, or Sfinlus iolUitdo pOM»s, 327 ; 
mnemonic verses for these modes of, 
vA. ; its definition explicated, vA. et seq. \ 
a syllogism with disjunctive major pro- 
mise is not necessarily a disjunctive 
reasoning, t'A. ; general view of, 32S rt 
» 7 . ; formula for a syllogism, a. With 
two disjunct members, lA. ; b. With 
more than two disjunct members, 329- 
3.'i0: tho principle of, 330-31 ; tho sevcml 
l>arts of, 3.31 -2 ; the rules of, 3;12-3 ; 
those explicated, 333 ei seq.\ first rule 
of, 333-4 : second rule of, .134 ; thin! 
rule of, 33I-.5 ; tho disjunctive syllo- 
gism of comprehension and extension, 
3it5-6 ; though sj>ccially regulated by 
tho law of Excludoil Middle, still the 
other logical laws operative in, ‘k>4-5 ; 
may bo drawn in all tho four figures, 
447 ; this illustrateil. 447-8 ; its char- 
acter according to author’s latest view, 
ii. 377-8, 38S. 31*0. set Hyryiothetical Rea- 
soning or Syllogism. 

Disputation, see ICnowlc<lgo, Doctrine of 
the Acqiiwition and Perfecting of. 

Division, tho analysis of the extension 
of a concept, L 147, 149, 151 ; doc- 
trine of, it 22-3<i : division in gen- 
eral, what, 22-3 ; of two species, Pur- 
tition nnd l/igical Division, 23-4 ; pai*- 
tition cither Real or Ideal, 2L5 ; exam- 
ples of these two kinds of, 24 ; logical 
division, what, 25-d ; its rules. 2<3 ; its 
character and rules explicated, 27 ft I 
tho end of, is I Hstiiictness, which involves 
C-omplotone.«w of thinking. 27 -8; as many 
kinds fif, {>ossible as there are characters 
affording a principle of divi«uon, 2^ a 
univorsm notion the only object of, iL . ; 


Digitized by Coogle 


INDEX. 


485 


gonomi problem of, : mlciiof, 

*••{. \ thfHccljvwificxl, W lil ; th«we«j>ring- 
iiig, L), fn»m tho princi|>le of lUviMion, — 
first, Hocomf, and third nalos, 
ii.) from tho reluti(»nn of tho dividing 
mumiteni totho dividwi wholtm, — fourth 
and fifth rulon, ikiiii; iii.), from tlio 
ndations of tho sevoml dividing mom- 
i>cr« to each othor, — Hixth nilo, ^ iv.), 
from tho rolationn of tho diviuionu to tho 
Huh-divisiun,— Mivcnth rule, 

Douht or douhting, tho art of doubting 
well difficult to toaeh and to loam, ii. 

Error, C-atisua of, Doscartos. 

TXfwnam, it referro*! to on Arifitotlo 
and Plato's views of method, 

Drtibisch, L 124 ; refomyl to on ojiposi- 
tion of concepts, 214 ; on co-onlination 
of notions in ooniprehcnsioo, 22U: 22i: 
254 ; 311: 4^ ii. 2d. 

Duncan, William, of Abordocn, hU Lonlr. 
i. 70. 

Duncan, Mark, L SItS ; 344 : 3t>8 ; 437 ; 
Ttyiuco'l Camcslres to (.'elaront, and 
Barocu to Ferio by countor^KuiiLion, 440. 

Enc^cfo^attlta Britanniray L 113 d aHhi. 

Euni»omatic. at roncepta, iXictrino of. 

'^Ervoia, ivvdrifJM, v6i)^y ambiguona, L 1 10- 

Enthymcme, a sylhigiam defective in ex- 
ternal form, L 3^<> ; the common doc- 
trine of logicians rvgapfUng, 38<i 7 ; thia 
doctrine futile, and orroneoualy at- 
tributeil to Ariatotlc, 1487 tt 
Not a special form of roa.Honing, 3>»7-8 ; 
2"', IHstinction of, oa a a|>ocial form 
«)f reasoning not ma<lo by Ariatotlc, 
3'^3 ft ; the enthymomo of Aristotle, 
what, 3M1 ; varimia applications of tho 
term, by IKonyaius of Halicarnas- 
aua, author of Wt^turie (o AhramUry 
Kopnter Apamoenaia, Aulua Geiliua, 
Cicero, Quintillinn, 31K) ; donoteil, with 
fMiino of tho ancionta, a lylhjgism with 
Some supprcaaod jmrt, aa tho Aphrodi- 
aian, Amnionins, Philoponua, Pachy- 
meres, Quintilian, Ulpian, Scholiast 
on Mcrmogenca, -SOI ; S"", Admitting 
tho validity of tho discrimination of tho 
Enthymemo, it cannot l»o rewtrictttl to a 
ay llogiam of one wumiroH.soi 1 promise, 39 1 ; 
cxamjdea of, of the first, second, and 
thirrl ortlor. ; epigrammatic ex- 
amples of, with ¦uppres.sed conclusion, 
3U3-4. 

Epieheirema or Renson-Rondcring Syllo- 
gism, tho first variety of complex aylhv 
gism, what, L 3'i4-r> ; authors roforrtxl 
to on variations in tho application of tho 
name, .‘405 : in ArisUdlo, tho term La 
used for a dialectic syllogism, il>. ; aa 
a pnlysyllogism comparatively simple, 
3>4 ; may 1 ki drawn in any figure, 14H. 

Epictotua, L 4»i5 ; fallacies mentioned 
by, li 

Erasmus, his ndvico to a young man on 
tho oon<luct of hU studios, ii. 2L 

Eriauo, Sobaatiano, L 35. 


Kmeati, 11. 144. 

Error, $rt> Truth and Error, Doctrine of. 

Error, < 'ansoa, C Iccasiona. and Kornedios of, 
ii. 8<M51 ; R-icon’s classification of tho 
aourcoa of, dll ; its causes and (Mu^isions 
comprehendo<l in one or other of four 
classes, — 1*, In the general circum- 
stances which mollify tho intellectual 
character of tho IndivMual ; ^ In the 
(Amatitution, Habits, and li^iiona of 
his powers of Cognition, t'wllng, an<l 
Desire ; S'*, In Language os an Instru- 
ment of Thought and Motlium of Com- 
munication ; or, 4*, In tho nature of the 
objects about which his knowledge is 
conversant, those c«>nsl«lor©cl in de- 
tail, SQ r# ; L (ioncral circum- 
stances which mo«Hfy tho intelloctuid 
character of the individual, SU et *fO. ; 
the.so of two kinds, — 1% Tho jiarticular 
dogn'es of cultivation to which his na- 
tion has attaine<l ; 2A Tho stricter aa- 
sociati<ma, a.s schools, sects, he. 81 ; 
those iihistratcil, M-fi3 ; man by nature 
social, and influenced by tho opinion of 
his fellows, 81-2; Pascal <juot^ on tho 
|>ower of Cu-stom, 82 ; on ingenious 
philosopher quoted on tho s.amu sub- 
ject, d^-4 ; the art of doubting well, 
difficult to Icam and to leach, 84-5 : 
two genoml forms of tho influence of 
example, 8.5,— 1. Prejudice in favour of 
tho Ohl, ¦'^¦'>•7 ; 2. Prejudice in favour 
of tho Now, 87; Prejiulico of I.s3amccl 
Authority, 87-8 : means by which tho 
influonceof Si^cioty as a source of Error 
may bo counteracted, 111 ft \ neces- 
sary to institute a critical examination 
of the contents of our knowloflgo, 21 ; 
tho precept of Descartes on this point, 
ill et Kff. ; ooniUtions which m<Mbfy its 
ap}>Ucati(>n, 112 ; a gradual and progres- 
sive obrogation of prejudices all that 
can bo required of tho stuilent of phi- 
losophy, 9 2-3. IL The (.'«*nstitution. 
Habits, and Reciprocal Relations of 
tho Powers of Cognition, Fooling, and 
Desire, 93-1 39 ; o? two kinds, — i. Tho 
undue prop«n«lomncc of tho Affi'ctive 
Elements of Mind, 93 ft *f*j . ; influence 
of pa>tsion on the mind, 94 ; Boethius 
quoted on this influence, ib’\ tho pos- 
sibility of error limite<l b) Prolmblo 
Reasoning, 94-5 ; tho I*assion8 as sources 
of error ro«iuco<! to four, 9.5-fl ; L Pre- 
cipitancy, 9ti ft \ Seneca quoted on, 
ift. ; Erasmus quoted on, 97 ; illustra- 
tions of, from sianoca, Montai^e, 97-8 ; 
precipitate <logmatiKm and scepticism 
ph>ute.H of tho same disposition, 98 ; 
rcmo<ly for procipitatioii, 98-9 ; 2. 

Sloth, 99 ; Seneca i^uotcd on, »7>. ; its 
remedy, I*9-lfiQ ; 3. Hope and Fear, 
192 : how those passions opomto un- 
favourably on tho Undcrstami ing. 100-*2; 
4. Solf-I»vo, including Vanity, Pride, 
kc. 1112 ft ffq. ; Aristotle's precept re- 
garding this passion, U>2 ; illust.ration.s 


Digitized by Google 


48G 


INDEX. 


of tho inflticncc of Relf-Iyjvo on our 
opinions, lo2- 4 ; Sclf-L<.)V(3 loaiLn us to 
rojruril with favour tho opinions of those 
to whofn wo arc iu any way attachtsl, 
Inj : Mulohranclio a<itiuco(i to this ef- 
fect, irU-o ; this shown esjK'cially when 
tho passion changes, ln5 ; Arnauld 
holds that man is naturally onvious, 
105 ; tho love of Disputation, lOft-d ; 
tho affections now mentioned tho im- 
mediate causes of all error, lOt^i ; pre- 
liminary conditions re*iuisite for tho 
efficiency of precepts apfainst tho sources 
of error, ; rules against ermrs 

from tho Affections, 1<»S, ii. Weak- 
ness and PisprmKirtione* 1 Stronffth of 
tho Faculties tif Knowlclj^o, lO i* ‘19 ; 
no«loct of the limited nature of the Hu- 
man Intellect a source of error, lliil ft 
S'"'/. ; L Philosophy of the Absolute, 
11(1 ; li, A one-8ulc<l view of tho fini- 
tudo of the mind, Uli et ; this U- 
lustratofl by reference to the two c«mtra- 
dictorios, —the al>soiute commencement 
nn<l tho infinite non-communcemont of 
time, 111 ; tho same principle exempli- 
fid in the case of the nocessitarian ar- 
pumont aifainst tho freo4lom of tho 
human will, 111-2 ; and in tho case of 
tho libertarian argument in l>chalf of 
free-will, 112-3 : weaknes.-i and disnro- 
jKirtioned strength of the several Cop- 
nitivo Faculties, as a source of error, 
113 ct sry. ; those faculties of tw*o 
classes— -a f/owor and a Hiphor, 113 : 
A. Tho Lower Class, 113 ti $ctf . ; L ITio 
F*ro.sontativo Faculty, of two kinds, 
113; a External Porception, as a source 
of error, HI ft xo/. ; conditions of iU 
adc«]uato activity, 1 1 Wi ; precautions 
with a view to detecting illusions of tho 
Senses, and obidatinp tho errors to 
which they leal, ; b. Self-Con- 

sciousness, as a source of error, 116 W 
«//. ; this power varies in intensity ac- 
cording to lime, state of health, and 
object, 1 1^7 ; IL Memorj*, as a source 
of error. ll<~ k sof . ; as fWble, IIS ; as 
too strong, llH-2<t ; reraodieM for those 
oppe*sito extremes, 12li; S. Tho Repro- 
ductive Faculty, of two kinds, 12n-21 ; 
a. Ueininwconce, as a source of error, 
121 ; its undue activity, iL ; its inac- 
tivity, t’6. ; b. Suggestion or Associa- 
tion, as a source of error, 1*22 el etq. \ 
influence of Association in matters of 
Taste, 123 ; Stewart quoteil on this in- 
fluence, 12A-G ; (’ondillac (pioted on tho 
KAino, 12<i-7 : (fravesando, lleriHlo- 

tus. and JiLstin, refcrro«l to on tho same, 
127-y : only rctno<ly for tho influence of 
Association is tho PhiloHi»phy of tho 
Human Mind, 128--1^> ; 4, Imagina- 
tion, as a source of error, 131 ettetf. ; 
iu neocMHity in sciontific jmnimts, 
131 ; tlofcct in the art of mo«lom 
times as compare*! with that of an- 
cient, aiosing fn»m imperfect culture 


of imagination, 131-2 : errors arising 
from tho <lispro|>ortion between imagi- 
nation and jmlgmont, 132 tt those 
arising from the wciikness of imagina- 
tion, 133 ; from iU disprojwrtionate 
vivacity, iK\ rcmwlics fur these dofocU, 
131 ; 11. Higher faculties, 134 et ; 

Elaliorativo Faculty as a source of 
Error, 131 ri sfq<\ error does not lie in 
the conditions of our higher faculties, 
l>ut is possible in tho application of tho 
laws of those faculties to doterminalo 
cases, 1 3 4 -5 ; defective action of tho 
understanding miw arise from one of 
three causes ; a Natural focblonosa, b. 
Want of necessary experionco, c. In- 
compctency of attention, 13.5- 6 ; iL Uo- 
gulative Faculty not proj>orly a source 
of error, 137 ; remote sourcoe of oiror 
in tho (iifforent habits determined by 
Kox, ago, Ixxlily constitution, erlucatiou, 
Ac., 13Z ; solcctc<l examples of these, — 
aono-Ki<l«yl cultivation of the intellec- 
tual |w>wers, 137 ; this exomplifitsl in 
three different phases, — in exclusive 
cultivation, L Of tho powers of ob- 
aervation, 2. Of metaphyMics, 3. Of 
mathematics, 13S ; Stewart rcfcirod i/> 
on tho two latter errors, 139 : 111. leji- 
gnage as a source of error, 140-50 ; its 
goncnil character consirluitMl with a 
view to show how it becomes tho occa- 
sion of error, 140-43; in what sense lan- 
guage is natural to man, 140-41 ; diffi- 
culty as to the origin of language, 142 ; 
tangui^ has a general ami a special 
chameter, 1 4-2.3 ; no language U a per- 
fect instrument of thought, 1 43 ; lan- 
guages, from their multitude, difficulty 
of their acquisition, inadequacy, am- 
biguity of words, are sources of error, 
144 ; this illustrated, 144 ei «//. ; signs 
necessary for the internal o{>eration of 
thought. i5. ; anil for its communica- 
tion, 145 ; intonations of tho voice tho 
only adetjuate sensible syralHils of 
thought and its communication, il>. ; 
those articulate and inarticulate, ifi. ; 
the latter constitute language Language 
Projior, iV>. ; how this is a source <»f 
error, 1 45-6 ; tho ambiguity of woinIs 
tho principle source of error originating 
in, IPH two circum-stancos under Ibis 
head which mutually affect each other, 
146-7: tho vocabulary ofcvoiy language 
necessiirily flnito, and the consequences 
of this, LtZ ; wonls are merely hints to 
tho mind, 147-K ; remedy for error 
arising from language, 149-5U ; IV. Tho 
Objects of our knuwle<lgo a source of 
omir, 150 : rules touching tho causes 
and remedies of our false judgments, 
150-51. 

Essence, Rwontials. or Internal Denomi- 
nations, wimt, L 217. 

Essor, quotefl on tho distinction of tho 
matter anti form of thought, L 15 ; on 
tho latter as the object of i./>gio to tlio 


Digitize-:* * 


IXDEX. 


487 


exclusion of the former, 16-7 ; on the 
laws of tho\ight m thought m strictly 
the object of Logic, 17-H ; quot<xl on 
the distinction of lotncal meta- 

physical tnith, HM)-7 ; referred to on 
relation of concepts to tiicir ori^n as 
direct or indirect, 1 40 ; 142 ; quototl 
on the cliKintess and olmciirity of con- 
cepts, 1i>0-d2 ; quoted ont ho s]>cc'ial 
oonditions of the distinctness of a con- 
cept, l<i5-7 : lti8 ; IdD ; fjuoted on the 
hu,'hest |>oint of the distinctness of a 
concept, U)U-7Q ; quote*! on tiio im- 
|MMsihility of notions al>so1utcly iden- 
tical, quoted on the Atfroomont and 
difforonco of concepts an<l j^i^rments, 
; quote*! on certain ultm-lo- 
jjical distinctions of proj»ositions, 2|>/>-7; 
tpiote*! on the act or reasoninjf, 2 *k^- 0 • 
({uotcl on the f?unem! conditions of 
ayiloj^sin, 2-SO ; <pioted on the form of 
syllo^sm as a ground of its division 
into species, ; on the laws ro- 

^latins: the various kimlsof syllu^fisms, 
; <^uoted on positive and con- 
trary np{>oHiti<in in a disjunctive renson- 
in^q ‘1211 ; on the principle of the dis- 
junctive syllo^nsm, UIJO-l ; on the seve- 
ral jMvrts of the disjunctive syllogism, 
3-'!l-4 ; quotod on the jiecuhar prin- 
cipal” of the hypothotic-al syllogism, 
144U-42 ; quoted on the tirst rule of 
hypothetical syllogisms, 34^5-6 ; on the 
ground on which the hypothetical syl- 
logism has l>oen roganic*! as having 
only two terms and two propositions, 
34»f-S ; quoted on relation of syllo- 
gisms to each other, ; quotod on 
Kpicheiroma and Sontes, 3**4 ; 451 ; 
quoted on di>*ision in general, ii. 22^ ; 
on logical division, ; quoted on 

the rules of division, 31-6 : quutotl on 
rules <if division sj>riiiging trum rela- 
tions of dividing rooml>ors to the divided 
wholes. 34 ; on the relation of the 
sovoral <Uvi*ling mombers to each other, 
3u ; on the rule of division, — hltino n« 
Jiat per 35 H ; quotod on the 

differences of prolmtions, 43 5 ; on pure 
anfl empirical probations, 45-6 ; quoted 
on distinctions of probations from their 
internal form, ii-9 ; on probations, 
under the internal form, as synthetic 
and analytic, 4«i-5l ; 6i{, 73, 153 ; quoted 
on oxjiorionco and observation, lotiiii ; 
quoted on induction and analogy, 166-7 ; 

• 16i> ; quotoii on sum of doctrine of 
iuiluction, 1 70 ; quotod on induction 
and aiuUogy as not atTording absolute 
certainty, 173-4 ; quutoil on testimony, 
176-8 ; 1 79 ; qatite*! on crc*libility of 
testimony in genond, 179-85 ; on testi- 
mony in s|HX5ial, 185- 90 ; quotwl on 
criticism and intciqirotation, 193-201 ; 
quote*l on speculation as a moans of 
knowlcige, 202-3. 

Eudemus, referresi to on uso of the term 
cateijorienl, L ; lus nomoaclaturo of 


tho {^ts of the hypothetical sj;Ilogism, 
340. 

Eugeni(w, or Eugenius, i^ 119; 142; 2*>0; 
referretl t4> on the distinction of l*<»ieu- 
tial an<i Actual in relation to notions, 
2<w> ; (piutoil on iin|xirt of the term 
<rv\Koyi<rph%, 279 : 281 ; 325. 

Elder, employo<l circular diagrams as lo- 
gical nutation, L ^56 ; Imt not tho 
first, il. 

Eustachius, referred to on Method in Lo- 
gic, ii. IL 

Eustratius, ii. 3. 

Example, Aristotle quote*! on, ii., 36Q. 

Excluood Mhldlo, or Third, principle of, 
a fun*lamcntal law of thought, L 79 ; 
what, 83 ; its logical si^iificance, lA. ; 
tlio principle of disjunctive judgments, 
84 ; its history, 84 ^ *<'V- I can Ih> traco*l 
Imck U> Plato, 87-l|<> ; explicitly enoun- 
ced by Aristotle. 9<* ; enounced by Ci- 
cero, 21 ; receive*! tho appellation by 
which It Is now known at a com|>ara- 
tivcly modem date, probably from 
Baumgarton, 21 ; regulates in conjunc- 
tion with that of lluasou an*! Conso- 
quent Hyp«ithotico- tiisjunctivo Syllo- 

f isms, 291 ; determines tho form of tlio 
>isjmictivo Syllogism, 326 .’i54 ; nuthiira 
rcforrotl to on, iL 247 ; whether iden- 
tical with law of Contradiction, I'A. ; 
whether a valid an*! logitiniato law, 
247-8; tee Fundamental I^wsof Thought! 
Exclusive and Exceptive Particles, what, 
and their ofToct as indirectly predesig- 
nating tho pre*iicate, it. 26u ; authori- 
ties referred to on, t'A. ; see PropuHiti*.»ucii 
Kx)Kmibilcs. 

Exi>eriunce, Knowlc«lgo, Doctrine of 
the Ac*{uisition aiul Perfecting of, 
Ex{>tiriuntial, or Experimental Proj>osi- 
tions, what, L ^66. 

FacciolaTI, L 191 : 197 : quotod on tho 
meaning and distinction ol cntufurirtnn, 
vngum, an*! 1 98 ; reforro*! 

to on C^togori*js, 290-91 ; referred to on 
Whole and Part, *^>2 ; 22*> ; 282 : 3H ; 
3<>5 ; <^»7 ; 376 ; -462; 463; 464 ; it 51 ; 
quoted on Induction, 3<35. 

Fallacies, what, L 449 ; of two kinds,— F*a- 
ral' agisms and Sophisms, ib. ; this ilist inc- 
tion not of strictly logical imiiort, 452 ; 
but not without logical value. * 6.; divided 
into Formal, Material, and those at once 
Formal on*! Material, 454 ; Material, 

liu beyond tho jurisdiction of Logie, ^ ; 
Ancient Greek Sophisms, their charac- 
ter, 452-4 ; considored in detail in oh fur 
as they lie within a single syllogism, 
455 ei neft., U. 1, L Formal Fallacies, 
togoricai, 45513 ; first subordinate class, 
— those consisting in t^Hntfrnione termi< 
noruM, 455 ; under this genus are com- 
prise*! throe species, 1% FallarUt *ens^n 
roiHinniti ft dtrisi, - 456 ; m«xies of this 
fallacy, 45*)-7 : 2% Fatlano a dirfo 

qnid ad dictate tiiHjdicUerf 45Z » ^ 


Digitized G< -ogle 


488 


lADEX. 


Fidlana Jufunt dirflonis^ 457 ; II. Mate- 
rial, 458 >)*^ ; of two kinds, -» 1.1 Of an 
Unreal Universality, ; 2.~r 0f Un- 
real Middle or Rca.son, 4ril» Gl> : thc^o 
kin<l8 of, coincide, 4(k> ; tbU fallacy aa 
danj'ero\is in its nc^tivo oa in its i>osi- 
tivo form, 4d0 ; si>ccio9 of this fallacy, 

— 1*, i^phlsmtt Aik*, vtl pojti futt', frtjo 

prytjdrr h*pc, 4dl-2 ; 2^, 

4G2di; the history of this fallacy, 4d;i-4 ; 
its vice, 4G4 ; 3®. Sifp/iitma 
iff. ; its various ueeurnations, 4do-G ; 4®, 
Stf^mua hfhroztUseoii, 40G ; its Torious 
nnnms, ift. ; its character, (A. ; the AtV<- 
. oio.ittt, 4<>7 ; ilIuHtmtc«l in the case of 
rrotoffoms and K\iathliis, 4o7-8 ; and in 
the parallel case of Corax uud Tisias, 
4d8 ; get- Probation, Doctrine of. 

Fear, »ee ?>ror, Caascs of. 

Feuorlin, referre^l to on principle of Suffi- 
cient Ueason, L IM. 

Fichu*, plucofl the law of Identity a.s the 
primary principle of all knowicrige, L 
1 * 2 . 

Fhfuro, of Syllogism, constituted by the 
pLico which the middle term holds in pre- 
mises, L 3l>5, 3 j0. 4o 0 ; the Four Figures 
arise from the relative |H>sitions uf the 
middle term, 31**i ; formula* of the Fig- 
ures in Comprehension am! Extension, 
ih. ; mnemonic verses for these in CV>m- 
prohonsion and Extension, 31*7 ; the 
luuno given by Aristotle, 

4<H> ; the first, on the prevalent doc- 
trine, not properly a figure, I'b. ; three 
figures distinguislied bv Aristotle, ih. ; 
fourth attributed to Galen, but on slen- 
der a*ithority, 40(*»1, 423 ; first notice of 
Fourth Figure l»y Avorrocs, 401 ; com- 
plex modificathm of Figtiro by tho 
Quantity and Quality of tho projiosi- 
tions, ortho M»mkI, of a reasoning, 4Q 1-2, 
Uf Mo<k1 of 8yll«*gism; dt*ctrino of the 
Fi^ircs acconling to the logicians, and 
in Exlensiuo alone, 4<K5-22 ; symlK>I by 
letters of the First Figure, 4* C> : rules 
of First Figure, iL>5-G ; legitimate 
moods of First Figure, with circular 
diagrams illustrative of, 4«Xi-8 ; Focond 
Figure, its symbols, 4(W ; |u rules, 
4*>8-t* ; its le^timate mooils, with dia- 
grams, Third Figure, — its Hvm- 

Dol, 412; its rules, 412-4 ; its legitimate 
moods, with diagrams, 414-8 ; Fourth 
Figiu^j, — its ayralK)!, 418; its niles, 
418-1* ; its legitinmtc mooils, with dia- 
grams, ; whatever figure is valid 

and regular in ExtoiiHion is also valid 
and regular in C'omprehonsion, 422-3 : 
criticism of tho foregoing doctrine of 
Figure, 42^1 €t U'j. ; tho Fourth Figure, 

- rcimdiate<l by tlie groat majority 
of ine rigid Arist<jtolians, 42J ; h>gi- 
ciaiiH ntit in i>ossi'»»i«>n of tho gro*imls 
on which this figmre may be set asitle, 
424 ; gruumls on which tho Fourth 
Figure ought t<» Ik> disallowed, 421, tt 
Sty. ; a cross inference |»os8ib!e from 


Extension to Comprehension, and vice 
ivr#a, 424 -5 ; this tho nature of the in- 
forcnce in the Fourth Figure, 42.5 : this 
nrovod and illustrated, 42.5-6 ; this by- 
nrid inference is— 1% Unnatural ; 2®, 
Useless ; 3% Logically invalid, ^7-8 ; 
general character of the Second, TbinI, 
and Fourth Figures, 4^30-31 ; tho last 
throe figures only tho mutilated expres- 
sions of a comj>Iex mental proeoss, nod 
virtually identical with tho first, 433. rl 
gfq, ; this shown in detail, 434-6, but 
gee Mood of Syllogism ; Figure in rela- 
tion to Hv|>uthcrical, Disjunctive, and 
IJ yjK>thet ico Disjunctive Syllogisms, 
4 fij-8 : of no account in vaiying tho 
Syllogism, ii. 4o5-G ; double conclusion, 
in Second ami Thin! Figures, 40G-12 ; 
grounds on which it has been attempted 
to establish tho di.scriminatiou of a 
major and minor term in tho Second 
anti Third Figures, 407, tt ztn . ; Aris- 
totle, VA. ; Aiumonius and Philoixmus; 
408 ; Honninus, Hl ; Alexander Aphro- 
disiensis, 408-1* ; Scotus, 4»1~* ; Mon«loxa, 
ib. ; anticipatory recognitions of tho 
truth that there is no major or minor 
term in tho second and third figures, 
40l»-12; by certain early Greek logicians, 
; by Vall^ 410-1 1 ; by John Her- 
guant. 411-12 ; histtincal notices regnni- 
ing figure of syllogism, 41 3- 41* ; Ans- 
totlo, 413-14 ; Alexander and Ilcrmiims, 
41.5-20 ; Philo|>onus <or Ammoniusl, 
42*4-24 ; Martianus Ca|>olla, 424-5 ; Isi- 
donis, 425 ; Averrocs, 425-G ; Mohmcli- 
thon, 42G ; Amauld, 42G-7 ; Guisscr, 
427-8 ; liunbcrt, 428 - 32 » Platner, 
432-4 ; Fries, 434-7; Krug and Deneke, 
437-42 ; Titius, 442*9; direct and in- 
direct mocsls in first and fourth figure, 
441* ; but not in second and third, ib. ; 
fourth fimiro, - its chnnicter, 4.50-^l ; 
authors by whom held that fourth 
figure differs from first only by transpo- 
sition of promises, 45ll ; rnomU of fourth 
figure redreaseil, 4.51-3 ; criticism of 
fourth figure, 453-4; authoritiee for 
and against this figure, 454-5. 

First Figure, »r Figure. 

Fischer, i- 2*44 ; referred to on co-ordina- 
tion of noUous in Uomprehemdon, L 
22* >-24. 

FisclmlHjr, ii. 215. 

Fontaine. La, <juotcd, ii. 79. 

Fonseca, I*., L 2»>1 ; 21*4 ; W7 ; 40*» : 499 ; 
45*» ; referred to as against the doctrine 
of a material ({iiautification of the pre- 
dicate in roci]>rucating iiroiKMitiuns, ii. 
294. 

FonnftI Imiuction, gft Indurtion. 

Formal truth, #rr Truth and Error, Doc- 
trine of. 

Forma) and Material, their distinction, ii. 
2^1*-9i. 

Fourth figure, gn Figure. 

Fries, bj GO ; on principle t»f Double \o- 
gutiou, 95 ; ; 288 ; 306 ; 342 ; 356 ; 


Dk’"-- :rd 


INDKX. 


489 


: ii., iii ^ Zli Mi liii llli 

on (.'ouuns of Svilt^sin, H:>1 -5 ; 
<{u<»to4l on Kuniro of S^'JlogiBm, 4:U-7. 

FuudnmontAl Uiws of Thought, onlor of 
their conHidoration, L lil ; tliono four in 
nundior."— L Identity, 2. Contradiction 
or Non*C«ntnulictiun, iL Kiicludod 
Mitldle, Uoason an<l Cun?U)quent, or 
Sufficient Uoason, Zy ft $f*/. $et S<>) ; 
thoir hwtory, lee thuBo Laws ; jron- 

eral obHervationii in relation to, ^ rt 
; these fall into twoclAHsos, the first 
tdiwa consisting of the three jirinciplos of 
Identity, (.'ontradiction, and Excluded 
Middle, tlio second of the prindplu of 
Kuason and (Vmsotjuont alone. i<7 ; this 
chissification founded, 1% On tiio differ* 
once of connection between the laws 
themaelves, UZ ; 2'", On the dilTerence of 
the emls which the two classes seromlly 
accomplish, Uiil two counter opinions 
rcifarmn^ the limits of objective |K>wi- 
bility, l£i ; the roMitoctive spheres of the 
two classes of tlio laws of thou^^ht de- 
fined and illustrate*!, ih! ft #o>/. ; to deny 
the universal application of the first 
three laws is to subvert the reality of 
thought, 1*^ 1<H> ; but this is not in- 
volved in the denial of the universal ap- 
plication of the law of Heasun and C«>n- 
se<|ttent, Too ft »f»f. ; this law shown in 
general not to bo the measure of objec- 
tive |H)SHii>ility, 1lHi 5 ; by reference to 
extonsion, 1^, As a whole, 101-2; distinc- 
tion of positive and nu^tivo thotight, 
1<>2 ; thw law not the criterion of ob- 
jective possibility shown by reference 
to extension ; 2', As a part, ; S'*, 
Hy reference to the law of Koason and 
t'on»o<iuont itself, 104 ; this law redu- 
cible to a hijfhcr principle, lol-5 ; sum- 
mary statement of the spheres of these 
laws, lo5 ; the i^ueml intluenco which 
tlie fbr^oinjr laws exert on the ojtem- 
tions of thinking, l<>5-8 ; tlio highest 
criterion of nun-reality, but no criterion 
of reality, lo<> ; erroneously hold to l»o 
the }M>siiive stiuidard of truth, ih. ; tlie 
abHolutists proceed on their subverHion, 
lo7-8 ; the whole of these laws o|>era- 
tive in each form of syllogism, although 
certain of them more prominently ref- 
late each various form, •i.'hVCt ; their re- 
lations, li, 241 ; authors on, in general, 
»/». ; of two kinds, — the laws of the 
Thinkable, and the laws of Thinking, 
241-5 ; tlmt thoj’ belong to l<ogic, 2J5 ; 
on order and mutual relation of, ifj. ; 
by whom intrtsluced into U>gio, it . ; in 
particular, authors on, 245-vS ; uf Ulcn- 
tity. Contradiction, Excluded Middle. 

Gale, TiiEoi’im.i s, i 4.‘^d. 

Galen, the fourth tigure of syllogism attri- 
buted to, but on slender authority, L 
4iM)-l, 423 ; new logical treatise of, 4(11. 

Galileo, his rebuke of the rrofossor of 
Tatluo, ii. 1U3. 


Galluppi, quoted on canon of syllogism, 
ii. ^7. 

Gossenili. L 4<)2 ; 41i5 ; 4»k> ; ii. ^ roforred 
to, on Method in L(»gic, IL 

Gollius, iff Anlus Gollius. 

General or Al»«tnict Logic, tre I»gic. 

(•(momlisation, what, L 120; ita whole 
mystery explained, 128, tff Concepts, 
DiM’trine €>f. 

Generic and Specific Diffiereoco, tee Genus 
and S{>ecio8. 

Gcneritication and SpociAcation, limite*! 
expremionafortbeproces.seHof Al>Mtrac- 
tion and Determination, considored in n 
partictilar relation, L 121, ip2, 1KC5 : 
dc|>end on the two laws of Uomogon- 
oily and Iloterogeneity, 210: iff Genus 
and .Species. 

Genetic DoAnition, iff DoAnition. 

Geuovesi, or GoDuonsis, referred to on 
one science l>otng the instrument of 
another, L 35^ ; his L^tin Logic notico<i, 

ZL ii* ^ 

Gonuonsis, nfe Genovosi. 

Genus and 8[>ecieM, or General and SpociaJ 
notion, what and how designated, L liii ; 
thedistinction of, merely relative, 102-3 ; 
the abstraction which carrioe up 6|>ecios 
intogenera, callctl Gcneritication orGcn- 
oralUation, Ihl. 1113-4 ; the determina- 
tion which divides a genus into its spe- 
cies, called SpeciAcation, 11^2^ 1 1*4-5: 
gradations of genera ami s))ec)es, and 
Gteirdosignatiuns, 11*5, llhi; Sm)rumo or 
Most General genus, what, 11>5; Sul>al- 
tein or lntermo<iiato genus, what, ih , ; 
Lowest or Most Six^ciol st>ocies, what, 
lit . ; SuKoltcm or Intcnncdiato s])ecies, 
what, Dili ; thaso distinctions taken from 
l’oq)hvr)'’tt /fitroiiwiion to the CoJego^ 
rifi% it. \ a genus os containing under it 
8}M.*oics, ora s|>ecios as containing umicr 
it individuals, is called a Logic^, Uni- 
versal, Subject, Subjective, or Potential 
w'holo, 2lil ; an individual as containing 
in it K{K>cies, or a species as containing 
in it geuora, is called a Metaphysical, 
Formal, or Actual whole, ib . ; those 
distinctions illustratod, ‘2o2 ti tfq.^ ire 
Whole; Generic and Specific Difference, 
207-8- as contmdistui^iUhed from Indi- 
vdilual Difference, 20^ Consj>eciua, 
what, 2<>9 ; the classification of tilings 
by genera and species govomod by two 
laws— viz., of Ilomogonoitjr and of 
Heterogeneity, 201*-l0 • a tlanl law al- 
leged by Kant-- viz., oi Logical Affinity 
or continuity, but rcject«Ml, 21 1 ; Genus 
an<l Difforonco, the elements of Ilefiu- 
ition Proper, ii. 1_U 12, 

George of Trobisond, or Georgius Trnix>- 
zuntius, described the pnicess of Sorites, 
but gave it no appropnato name, L 377. 

Gerlach, L hLL 

Gibbon, his practice in reading, ii. 220. 

Gicig, Dr, mist<K>k Reid’s view of Con- 
ception, L 1 13. 

Goclonius, Ibxlulphus, discovered and sig- 


Digitized t. Google 


490 


INDEX. 


naliscd tho Rcgrowrivo Comprehenmre 
SurilM, L 383; but l>cforo him thia given 
by Pacixis, ; IL li. 

Godwin, ouotod on competition as a moans 
of intolloctual improvement, ii. *20i*-10. 

Goethe, bis estimate of mathomatics, ii. 
l:2iL 

Great Britain, tho country in which I»gic 
has Iteen must gouemliy and cumpletety 
misunderstood, L 2t>. 

Greek Sophisms, auciout, their character, 
L 

Qromer, or Grttserus, L 35 ; quoted on 
figure of syllogism, ii. 427 -S. 

(iundling, L ’65. 

Gunner, L 3^ 

Harvey, Gideon, his use of Conetpi, L 
42 . 

Hoereboord, his PraxU Lexica referred to, 
ii. *22n. 

Hegel, his employment of the term l>ia- 
Udift L 7_^ repudiated the principles of 
Contradiction and Excludo<l Middle in 
relation to the absolute, rejected 
the principle of Identity os applicable 
only to the finite, 9^ a dying deliver* 
once of, 3i»4. 

ncraclitus, ({uoted, ii. 208. 

Herl»ort, reforro*! to fiir a complicated 
theor}' of Sorites in dififurcut figures, L 

448. 

llenlcr, quoted on tendency of the ago to 
ovcr-roa<iing, ii. 217. 

Hermann, Guttfriod, L SOri. 

Hermimis, his ground of the discrimina- 
tion of major and minor terms in tho 
second and third figures, ii. iUfi ; quoted 
on figure of syllogism, ii. 415-l(j. 

Hcrmogencs, L 4<>«> : ii. 23. 

Herodotus, case citeil from, llliisiratiog 
the power of .(Vssociatian, ii. 123. 

Hotcrogoneity, Law of, what, L 210, tc€ 
Genus and Spocios. 

Hibemicus, Thomas, ij. 212. 

Hilairo, St., ii. 37d. 

Hinds, Dr, his encomium of tho EUmentt 
of Loyir of Dr Whately, L 30. 

Ilisponus, Petrus, Pope John xx., or xxi., 
or xxii., L 2«>f» ; author of the I.atin 
mnemonic versos for .Mood and Figure 
of Syllogism, L 431 ; notice of, 431-2 ; 
his SummHt<r. for many centuries the 
text-book of Logic in tho schools of the 
Latin Church, 432. 

Hobboa, maintuined all thought to bo at 
bottom a calculation, L 27i« ; qiiotoci on 
tho inHuonco of authority on opinion, 
iL 95. 

Ibnikcr, L llf>. 

Hoffbauer, L ^ ^ 247j SOd ; ii. ^ 
174 ; quoted on cauuns of syllogism, ii. 

HoUmimn, L 40d; ^ 413; ii. 174. 

Homogeneity, law of, what, L 2Ut>, we 
Goims. 

Hojki and Fear, we »ror. Causes of. 

liusipiulan, John, erroneously attributod 


the invention of tho Fourth Figure to 
ScotuH, L 424 . 

Human Mind, limited nature of, as a 
source of error, txt Krror, Causes of. 

Hume, David, i. IIH ; <uiote<l on indistinct- 
ness of terms, 174-5 ; quoted on belief 
as the root of knowlo<^e, ii. Z2r 

Hutcheson, Francis, quoted on canons of 
syllogism, ii. 322-4. 

Hypolemma, name for minor premise or 
subsumption of a syllogism, L 2Ni 

Hyi«>tbesis, what, L 2*»0, ii. 1(14 ; its 
place and emi in science, 1 ri4-.5. 

HyfK>tbeiical Judi^ent, or Proposition, 
»e( Judgments, Doctrine of. 

Hypothetical Heasoning or Syllogism, the 
second class of Conditional Syllogisms, 
and third class affurde<l by Internal 
Form of Syllogism, i. 3.37 : its general 
character — a reasoning whose form is 
detennincil by the Law of Reason and 
Consequent, and whose sumption is thus 
not'cssarily an hy|XJthetical jiro]>osition, 
337-3 ; of two forms, Amrmativo or 
Constructive — modus ponenSf and 
tive or DostnicUvo— tolUus, 3-37 ; 
authors rcfomnl to on use of terms 
jxuitns and totUns, 3^ ; mnemonic 
versos for those forms, i6. ; a\ithors on, 
in genera], roferrod to, if>. ; its general 
character explicated, .33l» et mq. ; con- 
tains throe profHisitions, 33l( ; tho 
modus )MtutHS Olid modus ioUehS ilhis- 
trate<l, 331^ 40 ; nomenclature of Theo- 
phrastus) Eudomus, Aic., regarding, 
310 : its ()oculiar principle— the Law 
of Koason and Consequent, 340 etsetj . ; 
this principle, how variously enounced, 
341 ; why wo cannot conclude from tho 
truth of tho c<u)Kcquont to tho truth 
of the antecedent, and from tlio false- 
hood of tho antecedent to the falsehood 
of tho consequent, 341-2 ; convorsion 
of, to categorical syllogisms is, 1®, Un- 
nocosaarj’, ^^2 ; 2®, Not alway fxissiblo, 
342-4 ; authors on tho conversion of, 
roferrod to, 342 ; those of one fonn 
easily convertible into another, 314 ; 
S{>einal rules of, 344-5 ; those explicated 
— first rule, 345 cf ¦*>•7. ; r^julates tho 
general form of, 34,5 ; grvmnd od which 
it has l>ocn regarded ns liavingonly two 
terms and two propositions, i44<> ; this 
view erroneous, 34>> 7 ; — second rule, 
347-9 ; that tho sumption is always de- 
finite to be undorsttxKi in a qualified 
sense, 34^ ; that the sumption is always 
affirmative, 349 ; tho siioaumption of, 
ih. ; — third rule. 349-50. sfr ii, 37_L 3^ ; 
though pruminontlv ivgulatcd by tho 
law of Reason and Ck>n»e«juent, still tho 
other logical laws n^iomtive in, ;155 ; 
difficulty in connection with, in regard to 
the doctrine that all reasoning is either 
from whole to part or from the (uuls to 
the whole, stated and obviat^l, 355 
tt ; a»toce<lcnt and coiise<picnt of, 
equal to couditiou oud conditiontHl, 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


491 


; boTico tho reason or condition 
inunt contain the conso<|uonty ih. ; whoio 
and ports reanoctively may bo viowo<l 
in thought either as the conditioning or 
as the cunditionoci, 3T>S ; application of 
this doctrine to the solution of the pre« 
vioiis difficulty, ; not liable to the 
atfoction of figure, l 44d ; author's Inter 
doctrino of ilypiHhetical (or (Jonjunc- 
live and Disjunctive) KeasoningK, ii. 

; those rwiuciblo to imme<iiate 
infurontics, 3*39-70. 371. 373-4, 37^i. 

373 ; referrod to tho class of Explica- 
tivos or (X>Dditionabi, 37U-1-2 ; notcom- 
|»oBite by contrast to the regular syllo- 
gism, but more simple, 37d ; only i>ro- 
parations for argumentation, 370-7, 3^4 ; 
canons of Hyi>othetica1 syllogism, 874, 
thcor)- ol, regarded as alternatives, 
^^j-h7 ; errors of logicians regarding, 
837 ; historical notices of, 8H7-94 ; Aris- 
totle, 8H7-8; Ammoniiis Ilormia', 3.s8- 
90 ; Anoojrmous Scbolion, and matter 
relative to, 390-94. 

IlyLMithetieol Projiotiition, application of 
the doctrine of a (piantifivu prodicato 
to. and its result, ii. 2.53, ttt Hypotheti- 
cal Syllogism. 

Ilypothetico-Disjunctivo or Dilemmatie 
Judgment, Judgments, i>octrine 
of. 

Hy]x>thotico-Disjunclive Syllojrism, Dil- 
enimatic or Dilemma, tliird class of 
Conditional Syliogisni and fourth class 
afforflod by Internal Form of Syllogism, 
L 291, 3.'»o ; regultiUsl bv the laws of Ex- 
clude Mi<ldlo and of Ileoson and Con* 
seejuent in conjunction, 21il ; what, !3^); 
held by Wallis to be a negative in- 
duction, ih. ; its character oxplicate<l, 
ih.\ designations of — ceralinas, curnu- 
Ih*, 3ol-2 ; rules 

for sifting a pru{toscd dilemma, 

Idea, tho term, reawm why not regularly 
employed, and sense in which it is 
occasionally used by tho author, L 12«i. 

Identity, principle of, a fundamctiUil 
law of thought, L 79 ; what, 79-30 ; 
variously onuuncc<l, its logical iin- 
portanco— tho principle of all logical 
affirmation auu definition, 80-1 ; its 
history, ^ et Hq. ; dovolopoti lost in 
tho oi^er of time, S7_i 91 ; first expli- 
cated as a coordinate principle, by 
Antonius Andreas, attheond of the 13th 
contur)*, 91 ; maintained by Andreas 
against Aristotle to be tho one absolute- 
ly first princi(ile 92; controversy regard- 
ing the relative priority of tho laws of 
Identity and Contradiction, ih. ; called 
by Wolfpri«r//rt«w rtr(ttmfiHi*f ih. ; by 
I^umgarten pri/iri/num. pwiiumit give 
uienlitatUf ih. ; placed by Fichte and 
tSchelling as the primary priuciiilo of 
all knowledge, ih. ; rejected by ilegel, 
ih . ; along with that t»f Contrmliction, 
roguiutes tho categorical syllogism, 2->4, 


y»3 ; formally tho same with that of 
Kaa.son and Conso«picnt, 3f)4 ; authors 
rofornxl toon, ii. ; set Fundamen- 
tal Laws oflliought, I^portion, law of. 

Imagination, what, ii. 130-31 ; its necessity 
in scientific pursuits, 131 ; as a source 
of error, »/>., tee Error, Causes of. 

Immediate Inference, what, ii. 2.**.^, 3*39, 
372 ; cases of, rocognise<l by logicians, 
2.V3 et seq. ; ll Conversion, lA, see Con- 
version ; 2*37 ; 2. Equipolicneo, or, better 
Double Negation, — merely grammatical, 
2t»7 ; 3. Hubalternation, bettor, Itestric- 
tion, 2*37 ; this Uilatomland Unilateral, 
2t>7-3 ; not noticisl by logicians that in 
subnltcrnation tho some means soim al 
least, 2i>8 ; the two prop<isitions in sub- 
alternation should l>e called IteArintfent 
or liertriciii'e, the given proposition the 
Jlestrintjetnl, and the product tho 7f«- 
Ai'ici or Hestrified, 2»38 : logicians have 
ovorlookotl tho immediate infercnco of 
Subcontrarioly, ‘2t3'S-9 ; 288 ; this called 
by the author JuteijratioH, 2t>9 ; 2831 ; 
the two propositions in integration 
c.'illod the InUffral or InlojraHt, tho 
given proposition the Intetfrand, and 
tho proiluct tho IntHjrate, ih.; tabular 
scheme of, 284 ; Eustachius quoted on, 

372- 3; authors reforro*! to on, 378; 
kinds of, iL . ; authors by whom adupte<l, 
<6. ; Immcdiato Peremptoiy, and Im- 
nieiUate Alternative Inference, 373-4 ; 
tho latter contains five siiccics, em- 
bracing among theso the iMsjunctivo, 
Hyi>othotical, ami Hypothotico- Dili- 
junctivo syllogisms of tlie logicians, 

373- 4 ; logicians who refer Hypothetical 
and Disjunctive Syllogisms to, 371. 

IroiHslimonts to thinking. Doctrine of, see 
Logic. 

Indefinable, tho, what, L 147. L*»l- 

Indefinite, tho, how distinguished from 
tho Infinite, L 103. 

Indefinite lVo{Kisitions, L 243. see Judg- 
ments, Pro])ositioii8. 

Indotermined, the, what, L lL 

Individual or Singular Difforonco, what, L 
2n7-8, see Genus and Sjiecies. 

Individual Propositions, L 243, tee Judg- 
ments, Pro(>ositions. 

IndiridHum so/natuni and IndividnuM 
ivi//«m, ii. 3oo. 

Indivisihlo, tho, what, L 147-51. 

Induction, of two kinds, Logical or 
Formal, and Philosophical, Heal, or 
Material, L ^ ii. ^ 338; the 
views of If^cimis n^rt^hng tho nature 
of Logical ln<iuction cironetms, 319 ; 
the characters of Logical and of Real 
Induction, 319-21 ; canon of Inductive 
Syllogism, 321 ; this erpiaJIy formal 
with Ih.vt of Doductivo Syllogism, ih.\ 
a material induction, bow expressed as 
A funuai, 321 ; objection obviated, 322- 
3 ; fonnitlw for Inductive Syllogisms in 
C'om]>rclicnsiun and Extension, 32M-4 ; 
Wbatcly and others orruucously make 


Digifeed by Google 


492 


INDEX. 


Ulo inductivo dcductivo, ; 

this done licforo Whatoly by Schramm 
and Wolf, ih. ; doctrine of the older 
lo^ciai)8 ro^nlin^, correct as for ns it 
jfoe*, 324-.0 : doctrine of Inijicrfoct In- 
duction, ; B:u;on at fault in bis 
criticism of Aristotle's doctrine uf, 325- 
6 ; authors referred to on, in j;cneral, 
325 ; Heal or MateriAl, founded on 
the prineijilo of J'/tUosofJtlrai Pre- 
snmptvni^ li. Id5 ; its a^^cemont with 
and distinction from Analoj^', li>5-7 ; 
of two kinds, — Indiridual and Sjx>- 
cial, 1 <17 -3 ; but in the h\st result all 
Induction is individual, liH ; two 
conditions of leLdtimate, i<is:.70 : sum- 
mary of the doctrine of, 17<> ; In- 
duction and Analof'v compared to- 
pother, 172-3 : these «io not afford ah- 
solute certainty, 173-4 ; authors re- 
fcrro«l to on, 174 ; authors quoted and 
referred to on, iL ti58-d8 ; Aristotle, 
35.H.(>1 ; example of, given in the Or- 
fftmoH of Aristotle, probahiy not that 
prupo.<tod by the author himself, 358- 
9 ; Aristotle’s ductriuo of the cor- 
rect, 301-2 ; I’achjTncres, 362-3 ; Ka- 
mos, ^>3 ; Deroilon, 303-4 ; the Col- 
lege of Alcala — their error noticed, 
304 ; certain vulgar errors on, i*e- 
fciToil to, ^k>5 ; FoccioUti, 3<i5 ; Lam- 
bert, lk>5-0 ; strictness on Lamliert's 
doctrine, 3<»d ; his doctrine adopWd by 
certain sul)se<4UCDt German lopicians, 
tA; his doctrine old, and well invalidated 
by the commentators of Louvain, 300-7: 
nsimilnrdocdrinc to that of Lambert hold 
by \’cr*t»r, Arnuldus <lo Tungeri, and 
Ijimbcrtusde Monte, 3«j7; (.'rnkantborpo 
held that Induction can only l>o recalled 
to a hy^Mithctical syllogism, 307-8 ; 
Material, its character, 308. 

Inference, moaning of the term, L 279 ; 
distribution of, ii. 3»>9-72 ; its two grand 
classes, Meiliato and Immediate, lA; 
all inference hyjiothotic, - 71 ; 
authors by whom tide maintaincHl, 370 ; 
the distinction of as Commutative, Kx- 
iilicativo, an<l Companitivo, 370 - 72 ; 
Mediate Peremptory, and Mediate Al- 
tomativc Inference, 3 74. 

Infinite, its name and notion, L P>2 ; 
expru-sseil by negRtivo terms, ln3 ; how 
distinguisbo<i from the Indefinite, t7i. 

Iiistniction, its end, L metlusls of 
writleti and oral instruction dillerent, 
12 ; »rf Knowledge, lK>ctrino of the 
Acquisition an<i Perfecting of. 

Integrity, Criticism of, ga* Testimony. 

Interpretation, or Exegesis, Art of, tee 
Testimony. 

Inluitiun, the terra, its moaning, L 127 ; 
ambiguously translates the German 
A lA. ; what, ii. 7]^ tee 'I'ruth 

ainl Krror, Doctrine of. 

Intuitive and Symliolical Kiiowle«lgo, tee 
t’lUK-epts, Quality of. 

Intuitive, the term, souse in which used 


by licibuitz and the Continental philo- 
sophers, L 171. 

Involution of Concepts, tee Concepts, Re- 
lations uf. 

Isendoorn, Gi.sl>crt ab. L 51-4 ; 325. 

Isitlonis, quoted on Figure of Syllogism, 
ii. 425, 

jAKOn, ii. 174. 

Jerome, St, (juotod on the superior effect 
of the living voice, iL 212. 

Judgments, Doctrlueof, L 22.5-67 : a Judg- 
ment, what, 226-7 ; how distiuguishol 
from A l^ruposition, 226 ; what is 
in)plic<l in imlgmeiit, 226-7 ; condition 
untler whicn notions are judgo<l con- 
gruent, 227-8 ; a judgment must contain 
three notions— vix. of Subject, Predi- 
cate, Cupula, 228 : these constituents 
illustrated, 229 ; pro}>ositions of the 
Third Adjacent, and of the Second Ad- 
jacent, 2^U) ; concepts and judgments, 
how far they coinciiie and diner, 230-31 ; 
judgments, how divided, 2lil ; L From 
the relation of subject and predicate ns 
reciprocally whole mid <>art, judgments 
arc divided into Comprehensive and Ex- 
tensive, 231-2 ; this distinction founded 
on the comprehension and extension of 
ctmeepts. 2:t2-3 : 11. From the difference 
in the relation of detcrniination between 
subject and predicate, divided into Cate* 
guncal, and Cunditiunal, including Ily- 
pothetical. Disjunctive, andDilemmatlc, 
233-4 ; categorical judgment explained, 
2^14 et te<i/. ; the term cnfeijorieal u.sed 
by Aristotle in the sense of ajUt'tu- 
atiee, it. ; in its second signification, 
OK opposed Uj conditional, pn>bably first 
applieil by Theophrastus, VA ; in this 
cmjdoymont the terms abiolnte and 
}>erhrt belter expressions, 2:i3 ; nature 
of a categorical jiulgrnent, 2^15-6 ; con- 
ditional judgments, 236-42; these com- 
prise three siiccies, 236 ; L lijqxithe- 
tical, Ht. fi seq. ; variations in regard to 
the application of the tenns couiiitioHat 
and hfipothetical, 2-Vi-7 ; a hy}x>thotical 
judgment, what, 2 <7 ; appellations of 
its constituent elements, ; not com- 
posite, 238-9 : not convertible into a 
categorical, 233; IL Disjunctive, 2 .’ft) 
ei teq. ; not in reality coni|x>sito, and uni 
convertible into a categorical, 241 ; iL 
Dilemmatic, or ily {Kithctico- Disjunc- 
tive, 241 el teq. ; indivisible, and not 
rc<luciblo to a jilurality of categorical 
judgments, 242 ; these various kinds of 
judgments may be cotisideroil in refer- 
ence to Quantity, Quality, and Relation, 
lA ; a. In relation toQuantity, lA et»eq. ; 
the common doctrine of the divlrion of 
judgments according to their quantity, 
242-3 ; the <loctrine of the author on 
this ]Hiint, 243-4 ; all judgments are, 
occoniing to the author, cither Ikdinite 
or Imlcfimte, 243 : I>cfinitc includes I ni- 
versal and individual judgments, 244 ; 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


493 


Inilofmiio iocludefi Parliculnr jntipf- 
iiivntH, iiu ; jfro|M>ftiLlons arc either I*rv- 
or Pruinduaignato, th. ; com* 
inun doi.'trino orra by taking into lu^- 
count only the quantity of the subjoct, 
ib. ; thu^ doctrincA explicatc<l, ‘^4.'* e< 
tfff. ; Uuivercil judgmentN, what, il. ; 
Singular or Individual judgmenU, what, 
ilh ; Particular judgmonta, what, ‘2-1 o ; 
wonlH which nerve to mark out quan* 
tity in univornal, individuiU, and piu*- 
ticiUiu* pro|H)siliun8, ib. ; distinction 
of univorsul and imlividual from (Kirti* 
cular judgmouta, 240-7 ; cutogoriail 
judgments alone, according to the lo* 
gichinx. admit of all the fonns of tpum* 
titv. ‘J47 ; thUiloctrine orronoous, '-Ms ; 
b. In relation to (Quality, juilgmonU are 
dividol into Atfirinative and Negative, 

; generality of the dcfmitiuu of 
prcflication and of attimmtion and 
negation, as given by the author. ; 
nfHrmative umi negative pruiiositiuoa, 
¦ib. ; tlmt negation dues not cx;long to 
tho copula held by mimo logicians, ; 
the opposite doctrine maint^untxl by 
the author, ; origin of the <x>utro- 

vcixy regunling the phice of negation, 
the |K)!wU>iJity ofcmincmting nega- 
tive prupositiuus, in an ullirmative, and 
nifirinjitivc pro|>ositioDs in a negative, 
form, tho occasion of much perverse re- 
finement among logicians, ; nega- 

tive terms, how designated by Aristotle, 
•2T»d ; by Ikiethius, lL. ; by tho School- 
men, Ul. ; jfrofHjsltioiir^ tHfiMtUr of the 
Schoolmen, 2o4 ; Kant's division of 
judgmeuts into Affirmative, Negative, 
anil Limitative unfounded, ib. ; ju«lg- 
menU divi<led according to their quan- 
tity and cpiulity taken together, into 
I’niversal Affirmative, Universtd Nega- 
tive, Particular Affirmative, Particular 
Negative, 255 ; tlioso bow symlndisod, 
ib. ; circular diagrams illustrative of, 
ib. ; divi.don of projKisitions into Pure 
and M o^Utl, 25ii ; this distinction futile, 
257 ; division of Mo«lal pru|K>»itions by 
logicuuis os Nccesfciry, ImjKiHsiblc, ( 'on- 
tingont, anil Possible, cxtmiogical, y>7, 
25 > ; WhatclvijuoUKl on this distinction, 
and criticiso^l, ; the terms .ijun- 
buy, ProbUmaiu', A /HHitiefu", or/^rmo«- 
itraficf in relation to proiHstitions, ex- 
plaiue<J, 2t»i> ; c. Uy lielatiun to each 
other, juilgments divided into Identical, 
Different, Relatively Identical, Dispa- 
rate, Disjunct, Subalternant, SuUdter- 
nate, ; out of Relation arises tlio 

Opposition of judgments. 2t)l i op}K>si- 
tion either of contradiction or of con- 
trariety, ib. ; Congruent Judgments, ib. ; 
Sub-contrary op|K)sition, what, ib. ; not 
a real op|>osition, ib., $*e Opj>osition ; 
conversion of, 2t>2-5, Conversion; 
certain distinctions of, not strictly logi- 
cal, cx|>lained — vix. Theoretical and 
Practic;d, ludemoustruble and Demon- 


atmble, Axioms and Postulate«<, Thoo- 
rums and J’roblems, Coirolarios, Kx|h*- 
rimentid PnqMwitions, UyjHjlhesc^s, 
I^ommato, Scholia, 2<>5-7 ; $<e l*ixqm»i- 
tions. 

Justin, case cited from, illustrating tho 
power of Association, iL 12a. 

Kuou KMh¥ ctfjy, tho proverb, 

its origin, L 4ds. 

Kiuit, L 5y^ his Applied identical 

with tho Author’s Modi6c«l Lt»gic, ; 
his employment of tho jihnuie censtire<l, 
01 ; ; * a2 ; 121 ; lo9 ; hu* employ- 

ment of the term cnte>ior»i, 197 ; 241 ; 
his thro«.‘fold division of pro|>ositions as 
Affirmalivo, Negativo, and Limitative 
groundless, 254 *>0 ; rejected Sub-c«»n- 
tmriety as a spocios of opposition, liliii*. 
|U1 ; his doctrine of Figure Uirrowe*! 
by tho Author, 431 : Ids ^K'culution 
foundoil on the genend relations of dis- 
tance Initween Uio ]>Iuoets, ii. 47j hU 
arg^iment from the law of duty for 
human lilnsrly, and tho existence of n 
Moral Uovomor, valid, 5^ 174 ; quoUsl 
on i 'rusius* supreme canon of Syllogism, 
1^0 ; quoted on Canons of Syllogism, 
>¦ 

Keckenuann, L 30d ; 325 ; 342 ; 352 ; 
il 1^ ^ 213. 

Kicsewotter, L 247 ; 342 ; ii. 1 1**2 ; quotcnl 
on canons of syllogism, 

Kirw'an, Dr Richarrl, ii. 1 1 L 

Knowle«lgo, D«)Ctrino of tho Acquisi- 
tion and PerfiKsting of, ii. 152-225 ; the 
means of perfecting knowlwlgo are, in 
general, two, — the Acquisition and tho 
Corainunication of knowlcslgc, 1 .52 ; tho 
the first mean, — tho Acquisition of know- 
ledge.- -considensl, Ib'lettff.; thismust 
l»e viewed in rulation to tho ditlbrent 
kinds of know)o<)gu which are two, as 
of contingent and of necessary matter, 
152-3 ; consista of two |>arts— acqui- 
sition through Ex|>erience, and through 
Intelligence, 153 ; in what sense all 
knowldlgo may l>o ca)Io«l nrqutrttl, ib. / 
L The ductrino of Ex|>urieDco, 154 ei 
; exj»orienco <»f two kinds, 154 ; L. 
Personal, ib. ; this in general, what, 
155 ; explic.ate>l, 155 ft sfq. ; cununon 
and scientific, 1 50 ; Ol»scr>'ation, what, 
ib. ; of two kinds - t)l*servation proper 
ami Experiment, l.Vi-7 ; pnecognita of, 
157 et tfo. ; First, The object of obser- 
vation, 1 57-^>9 : this fourfold, 1 57-3 ; I'*, 
What tho phxcnomcna are in their indi- 
vidual i>eculiaritie8 and contrasts, and 
as. under determinate genera and 
8i>ccicH, 158 ; 2*', What tho conditions of 
tlieir reality, 159 ; 3’, What their 
causes, 159 -ti» ; 4'*, What the or*ler of 
their ounsecutiou ; Second. The manner 
of observation, HlO-413 ; 1®, Proper state 
of tho ol»serving mind, Idl ; 2'*, Con- 
ditions of the question to bo determined 
by observatiuD, lbl-3 ; Third, The 


liiized by Google 


494 


INDEX. 


moans by which tho data of obnorra- 
tiun aro to 1>o reduced to systom — viz., 
HyiKithcsis, Induction, ami Analogy, 
Ht those wonls ; ^ Korei^ 
oxperionco, 175 et it-n. ; this realised 
tiirou(fh testimony, i7^ testimony, 
what, 175»(> ; oral and rocor<lo<i, 175- 
i^>l, »t/: Testimony; II. Sjtcculation — 
the second means of ac4|uirin(; and ^ler- 
feeling knowledge, 2<il-3 ; principal 
distinctions of empirical and noetic 
cognitions, 2< >3 ; H I. Communication 
—tho last mean of ac<]uiring and per- 
fecting knowledge, 2t>4-25 ; this an 
important mean of perfecting know- 
ledge in the mind of the communicator, 
; man naturally determined to com- 
munication, and hiH knowledge of tho 
object of his thought is thereby ren- 
<lercd clearer, \b. ; this fact noticed by 
Plato, '2\ >5-0 ; by Aristotle, Themistius, 
Lucilius, Persius, Cicero, Seneca, 2ut>-7 ; 
tho modes in which communication is 
cuuducivo to tho perfecting of know- 
ledge are two, ‘.^>7 ; L By reciprocally 
determining a higner energy of the 
faculties, a. Through symiMithy, b. 
llirough opposition, 207-8 ; Plutarch, 
and J. C. Scaliger, (|Uotcd on the 
benefits of opposition ami depute, 2o8 ; 
2. By im}>osing the necessity of obtain- 
ing a fuller consciousness of knowledge 
for ourselves, 2U8-9 ; influence of com- 
])ogition and instniction in i)crfecting 
our knowledge, 2<>lj ; Godwin <|uotod 
to this eifoct, 2tH>-10 ; and Aristotle, 
Plato, Seneca, Clement of Alexaixlria, 
Biouysius Cato, Scholastic Maxim.s, 
Vivos, Sanderson, 21U-11 ; influcncu of 
the communication of knowledge on 
those to whom it is addrossed, 211 et 
; A. Unilateral Corrimunication or 
Instruction Oral and Written, 211-24 ; 
Oral, its advantages, 211-3 ; a, More 
natural, therefore nioroimpresHivo, 212 ; 
Theophrastus, tho younger Pliny, V'alo- 
rius Maximus {1), St Jerome, cited to 
this effect, ih. ; b, Less jwminnent, 
therefore more attended to, ih. ; c, 
Hearing a social act, 212-3 ; testimony 
of Menage and Varillas to tho a<lvan- 
tagos of conversation, 213 ; reading, a 
su)»stituto fur oral instruction, its ad- 
vantages, a, More easily accessible, b, 
More comprehensive, c, More jHjrma- 
nont, 213 ; its <lui:idvnntagcs as an ox- 
clusivo moans of acquiring knowledge, 
21.1-4 : Written Instruction, and its 
omploymoiit as a means of ^lerfecting 
knowledge, rules for, 214-5 ; 1. 

(Quantity to bo read—nilo, Ucmimuoh, 
but not nmny works, lUii ; testimoiiios 
U» this rule by Solomon. Quintilian, tho 
younger Pliny, Seneca. Luther, Sander- 
s*>n. Lonl Burleigh, Herder. 21u 7 ; end 
of reeling, 217-8 ; 2. Qtmlity of wlmt 
is to bo re ail — first rule, Uoml by 
selection, 213 ; — second rule, Begin 


witli tho general, 21S-P ; Gibbon 
quoted to of^t of socond rule, 22ll ; — 
third rule, Study a scionco as it is« 
before proceeding to its chronological 
development, 220-21 ; — fourth rule. 
Road difforent works on the same sub- 
jetd, 221 ; — fifth rule, Study works 
which cultivate tho understaoiling, and 
also those which cultivate tho tosto, 
221 ; ^ Manner of reading, 221 et ; 
— first rule. Road that you may re- 
member, but especially that you may 
understand, 222 ; — sooond nilo, Seek 
to compass tho general tenor of a work, 
before judging of it in dotful, ih. ; — 
third rule, Accomo<lato the intensity 
of the reading to tho im{>ortaDoe of tho 
work, \b, ; Lectio eurmria, and Lectio 
sUxhiria, 2'22-3 : Bacon qmitod on this 
distinction, 223 ; Johann Von Muller 
quoted on the samo, iL ; — fourth rule, 
Regulate, on the same principle, tho 
extracts from tho works you read, ilu ; 
H. Mutual communication, or confer- 
ence, 224-5 ; of two kimls— Dialogue 
and Formal Dispute, 224 ; 1, Dialogue, 
ih. ; Disputation — oral and written, 

224-5 ; Academical, ib. 

Kilppon, L 354. 

Kpitris and KpjVc»», rarely used by tho 
Greeks, ami never liy Aristotle, an 
technical terms of Logic or of Psycho- 
logy, L 225- 

Krug, W. T., referred to on tho form of 
tbuvigbt as the exclusive object of I.A>gic, 
L 17 ; on the laws of thought as 
thought, 1& ; roforrod to for definiUoiis 
of Logic, 3^ referred to and quoted 
AS to Logic being merely a formal 
instrument of the sciences, 3ti-7 i 
quotc<l as to tho sense in which Login 
can 1 h> styles! the Ma/ictHe o/ tiu Mind, 
37 ; 45 : quoted on tho utility of Login 
as serving to guard against error, 4S ; 
51 ; 53 ; not aware of tho original dis- 
tinction of L<Mrica docem and Lo*jir<t 
53^ flOj 77i 80 ; 32 ; 34 ; quoted 
on the distinction of Reason and Conse- 
quent, and ('auso and Effect, 35-6 : ro- 
fcircsl to as to Concejition and Reanon- 
Jmlgmcnt, 118 ; 
inH: lfe‘8: IHP ; 

207 ; quoted oil 
gular Difference. 208 ; 
2111 ; 213 ; qiiotod ou tho Opf>osition of 
C’oncepta, 2 H-8; 217 : 227 ; quoted on 
tho Copula, 229-30 ; quotorl on Hyi>o- 
theticai Judgments, 2-18-9 : quotecl on 
Disjunctive .fudgmentji, 239-41 ; miotcxl 
on quantity of Hy{>othotical and Dis- 
junctive Judgments, 247 ; 2.54 ; 202 ; 
2 t»7 ; 28.8 ; 3o4 : 3 < h> ; quoted on tho 
first rule of Do«luctivo Extensive Ca- 
tcg*>rical Syllogism, 3<*^>-7 : quoted on 
(Juntn'Hto tenniHonniif J107-8 ; ; 311 ; 

q^uoted on thinl rilo of Dobictivo 
Extensive Categorical syllogi.snis, 311- 
12 ; 321 ; quoted ou tfio firat rule of 



ing, involving 
142; U6: 147 ; 
191 ; 

vidiial and Sin 


INDEX. 


495 


tho Pinjiinctivo SyHogi«m, ; 

<|uoto<l on Hypothetical S>llo);^sin in 
^'onoml. ‘1-19 !ill ; «|iioto<l on tlio 
Application of tho principle of Hoason 
nnd (^>ono<ptcnt to tho H\')>othoti- 
cal : nu«to<I <»n lie- 

diictir>n of HypotheticnlH, ; »>n 

f’onvorKion of Hy|K)thclioal« from ono 
form to Another, o H ; .‘Uo ; <}uotod »»n 
tl»o thin! nilo of Hypothetical Syllo- 
frixmA, H4i>-r>t> ; <pioto<l on tho dcHifj- 
nations of the ilyi>othL*tic<>-<lisjiinc- 
tivo Syllojfism, on tho mles for 

8iflin(r a pn»|H)jH«l (iilemma, ; 

quoUsI on cliiHses and dcsi^'^nations of 
ruiatti<l Kvlloyisms, 3i«3-4 ; .199 ; 437 ; 
4h** ; 4r>«' ; 4|iiotc<j on a catejforical 
syllogism with four capital notions, 
4.Vi-7 ; 4.18 ; quotc<l on fallacies of 
on Unreal I'nivorsalit^, 4il8-9 ; i]uote<l 
on tho Innani Itnttn, 4>i’2 ; quoted 
on vice oi Ignaxa /f<dm, : quotwl 
on Snithi*uia tjzeteMti**^ 4>>4-5 : 4*^* ; 
ntiouxl on chantcter of tho SupitUnux 
hfiertiZfirf^oM, 4t><)-7 ; ii. ^ iptote<l 
on tho constituents of liO^rical Motiio* 
doloify, 1(^ 11 ; 12 ; quoted on Nomi- 
nal, lltal^ nml (ionetic definitions, 12-3 ; 
14 ; 15 ; quoted on tautoloj^ca! defini- 
tion. 17-8; quoted on tho rule of defini- 
tion which n^juircs it to lie precino, 
18-19 ; quote<l on the nccossitv for a de- 
finition liein/j fierspicuous, I 9-2<1 ; on 
definition in the looser sense, 20-1 ; ; 

ipioted n^inst complexity of division, 
3 2-3 ; 42 ; 4.5 ; 51 ; quoted on the circle 
in prolxition, 55 ; 57 ; quotoil on the 
MnUitio AVfacAi, 57-^ quoted on con- 
ditions of the adequate activity of Hx- 
temal Perception, 1 14-5; on precautions 
against orroni of the Sonsen, 115-d ; 
118 ; 120 ; qiioto<i on tho I^aws of As- 
sociation, 122 ; 123 ; 1J13 ; 134 : quotc<l 
on error as lyin^f not in the condi- 
tions themselves of tho bii;hor facul- 
ties, but in their ap|>lications, 135-d ; 
145 ; r{uotod on reme«ly f<ir error aris- 
Inp from langtu^fo, 149-.V1 ; 151 ; HmI ; 
1 C8 ; 171 ; 172 ; quoted on Induction 
and Analogy, 172 3 : 170 ; 178 ; 192 ; 
205 ; 215 : '225 ; his doctrine of Syllo- 
gism, 437-9. 

Lasibfrt, L 60 ; employed paraliol linos 
ns logical notation, 2.V> ; l v25 ; it 174 ; 
his doctrine of the ultra-totaT quantifi- 
cation of tho middle term. 'i51-3; quoto<l 
on Imluction, .915-6 ; stricturoH on his 
doctrine of, quoted on Figure of 
Syllogism, 428-33. 

Lainlnirtus do Monte, his doctrino of In- 
duction, ii. 367. 

lionge, L ii!L 

Langius, it 212. 

Language, its relation to tliought, and tho 
infiuonco which it exerts on our mental 
o(>erations, L \^et ttq. \ unnecessary in 
oorlain montal operations, 138 : indis- 


pcnfwhl© in certain other montal opera- 
tions, and its relation to these, 13'^iiil ; 
Has man invented it ?— ambiguity of tho 
question, it 1 4D ; in what KeiiNO natural 
to man, 141-1 ; w.-ui tho first langnngo 
actually s|¥»kon, tho invention of man, 
or the insniration of tlio Deity ? L4I ; 
tho latter hypothesis considcrtKl, 142 ; 
difficulty of the question, Hl. \ Uoussoaii 
citc^l on, i5, ; iangu.ago has a gencml 
ami a sjxicial character, 142-3 ; no Inn- 
guiigo is a perfect imstriimont of thought, 
143 ; signs no»'ossary f<ir tho internal 
Of>cmtion of thought, 144 ; and for its 
communication, 145; inumations of tho 
voice, the only adequate sjTnbols of 
thought and of its communication, iL, ; 
these inarticulate and articuUto, «5. ; 
the latter constitute l.angu:ige Pro|>or, 
I’A. ; the vocabulary of any language ne- 
cessarily finite, 147 ; wonls lu-o merely 
hints to tho mind. 147-8; liAnguago ns 
a source of l^ror, 1 4.5, sre Error, Causes 
of. 

liUToquo, quoted on canons of syllogism, 

ii. 33.5-7. 

LAri ilf Pfntrr L 

35 ; its study rocommended, 79 ; il. 
lUi ; authors of very nearly took tho 
distinction between notions as (Tear 
and ObMctire, Distinct and Indistinct, 
i. 162. 

Latin Schoolmen, viewed I>>gic as a 
science, i, ^ their views as to tho ob- 
ject-matter of Logic, 27-8. 

Laurcmliorgms, P., L 35.. 

l.<aws of Thought, stx Fundamental Ijaws 
of ThougliL 

Lo (’lore, L 

and Lfdin StniarUi^ ii. 222- 
jwr Knowledge, Ihjctrine of the Ac- 
quisition and Perfecting of. 

Leibnitz, on tho princmies of Identity and 
Contratliclion, L 89 ; did m*t always 
distinguish tho principles of Identity 
and Contradiction, 92 ; called attention 
to law of Sufficient Reason, i>3 ; foutid- 
e<l hU philosophy on tho principles of 
Sufficient Reason and Contradiction 
^including Identity), ih. ; did not suffi> 
cicntly discriminate tho law of ('ausality 
fn>m tho law of Sufficient Reason, ib. ; 
gave various names to tho jirinciplo of 
Sufficient RoAson, ib.\ controversy bo- 
tween, and (.'lorko on province of Suffi- 
cient Reason, 94 ; his distinction of 
Intuitive and S^mihidicAl Knowledge, 
noticed, 121 ; to him is owing the dis- 
tinction of ('oncepts into Clear and 
Distinct, 159-62 ; tno first to take tho 
di.stincUon of Intuitive and Symbolical 
knowlotlgo, 179 ; unocqu.'untance of tho 
philosophers of this country with tho 
doctrines of. 180 ; manner in which he 
gave his writings to tho world, iA. ; his 
jiaiKir /> CVjy«»0'o«r, VeritHtt, (t IdrU^ 
quoted fh}m on Intuitive and Symlioli- 
cal Knowledge, ii. 181-2 ; 174 ; quoted 


Digitized hv GfxjgU 


INDEX. 


4f)() 


on canon of Syllf^Rin, 319 ; rc*fcrro<l 
to on siniplicily of Koritos, L 

LoMcnfrortt, mnintainod all thought to bo 
at n calculation, L 279. 

Lonuna, namo for the nmjt»r I 'remise or 
Sumption of a Syllof^sm, L 

licmmata, what, L 2<>7. 

Iax t'tu\lrmiicXoriar*im,, jn'lncivium 0 »»* 
/nu/tVcMhim, itsoxteusion in tliu schools, 

L liL 

Lobkowits, Joannes Cammucl, L 202 ; 
roferreii to on various kinds of wholes, 
ii. 2IL 

Locko, John, totally misajiprohendcd the 
nature of Lt^c, l 29 ; on the principle 
of Contradicti«)n, £S; his real merits in 
relation to tho ilUtinctions of Ideas, the 
doctrine of Definition, fcc., 1H2 ; antici- 
pate<l Hume in remaricin^ the employ* 
ment of terms witho»jt distinct mean- 
m ; quoto<l on tl»is point, 177-9. 

Lojric, the tiret seven lectures of tho 
Aiithor’s Metaphysical Course delivered 
as a general introduction to the course 
of, L ]_1 uiotlo in which its consideration 
ought to be conductcti, system of, 
consists of two fiarts, viz,: — Introduc* 
ti<in to the Science, and lk>dy of Doctrine 
constituting the science itself, 3 ; ques- 
tions to be answered in tho Introfluc* 
tion to Lr»gic, 2 \ L Definition 

of, 4-‘W, ahf> ii. 2iiii-33 ; the Science 
of the Laws of Thought as Thot»ght, 4 
H uq.\ this definition oxplaino<l in <ie- 
tail, ih.\ L The word Lot/te, a. Its his- 
torj', 4 d frq. ; tho term (KoyuHi) as 
marking a psHicular scionco not so old 
as tho science itself, ib. ; not useil in 
this sense by Aristotle, b acconling 
to Hoothins, first applietl to tho wicnco 
by the ancient Peripatetics, £ ; useil In 
the wide sense by AVxander of Aphru- 
disias, ih.; but previously to Alexamlcr 
a common designation of tho science, 
us ap]K*ara from Cicero, ^ b. Its 
ilcrivation ajnl meaning, from Atfyos, 
signifying h>th thought and its expres- 
sion, ii ; this nnihiguity favoured tho 
rise of two counter-opinions regarding 
tho objoct-matter of, ^ 32 : this two- 
fold moaning how contradistingviishcd 
in cx]irossiun by Aristntlo. ia. ; by 
others, i7/.; ap|>cllaUoiis of the science 
aftorwanla called Ix>gic, 1_\ vacillation 
in the application of the term by tho 
Stoics, Kiocure^ins, and other ancient 
schools of philosophy, ^ 2. tho Genu-s 
of Ix>gic, — whether science or art, 2 
ft x'y,, zrx also ii. ; a science 

acconling to Plato and tho Platonists, 
but Dialectic with them equivalent to 
tho liOgic and Metajihysics of tho Peri- 
j^teticH, 2 ; denied to 1 h> cither science 
or art by the Greek Aristotelians anrl 
many philosopers since tho revival of 
letters, %l >. ; a science aooonling to tho 
Stoics, ih. ; and acconling to the Ara- 
bian and Latin schoolmen, ib. ; main- 


tained to bo an art in more morlem 
tinies by many Arist^)lclians, tho Ka- 
mists, and a majority of tho Cartesians, 
ih. ; Ijoth science and art, acconling to 
others, ib. \ in (lonnany, since Leibnitz, 
regarded as a science, ib. ; the <}uestion 
futile, ^ 10 ; errors of VV'hately on this 
iM>int, ^TT; what is implied in defining 
l/>gic as a'^ence, II . 12 ; held by some 
to be a science, ii. ; and either S{ie- 
culativc science, ih. ; or I'mctical, •.i.u ; 
or l>oth SjKJCulativo and Practical, 7^ 
an art, 234-5 ; scionco and art. 2't5 ; 
neither science nor art, but instm- 
inent, organ, habit, or instrumental 
discipline, 6 ; that, Ifjoscly taking 
the terms, is either art, or science, or 
both, 236 ; that at once scuonce (j»art 
of philosophy) and instniraent of philo* 
sophv, i^ that question, whether jwt 
of pfiilosophy or not, an itlle question, 
ih. ; that question, whether art, scionco, 
&c., only verbal, 237-8; Kugenius quoted 
to lhi.s effect, 237-H ; 2* Its Object-mat- 
ter, L 12 f ((/. ; a. TTionght, what, ih. H 

*fq.\ in its wiclcr meaning, Thought is 
denotes every Cognitive act, and oven 
every mental mo<lification of which we 
are conscious, 12 ; in the more limited 
meaning, Thought (Thought pnqier) 
denotes only tho acts of the Cnder- 
Rtanding, Faculty of (\>mpari.son, Ela- 
borative, or I>iscur»ivo Faculty, 12-14 ; 
in the more limited meaning, Thought is 
the object-matter of Ix^c, 12 ; nbjeets 
that lie beyond the sphere of L^c, ih \ 
b. TTlimight as thought, what, 14 d sry. ; 
Matter and Form of Thought, distin- 
guished. 12; Logic pro{*orly conversant 
only with the Form of Th»>nght, 12 d 
ffu- \ this shown by a consMemtion of 
the nature and conditions of tho thing 
itself. 16-7 ; c. Jjaws of Thought as 
Thought, II ft tfo.; these tho pni|>cr 
object of Logic, 1/, 1^ fff atm 19-24; 
how di.stingfiishcHi fn»m Empirical or 
Historical Psychology. ^ ns tno science 
of tho Ix\w8 of Thought os Thought, is 
the scionco of tho necessary Forms of 
Tho»ight, 24, 259 ; necessar}' form of 
thought implies four conditions — • L. 
I>ctonnined by the nature of the 
thinking subject itself ; 2* Original ; 
2. Universal ; 4. A Law, 24-5 ; hence 
tho object-matter of Ix>gic explicitly 
enounced, in saying that Logic is tho 
science of tho Uiws of Thought as 
1’hought, or of tho Formal Ixiws of 
Thought, or of tho Iaws of the Form of 
Thoug!\t, 2.5-d. jM'#'rt/jroIt8-40; hence ana- 
logy between, and Mathematics as lx;th 
formal sciences, 43-4 ; general historical 
retrospect of views in reganl t»i the 
object and domain of, '2Hd $fq. ; merit 
of tho authoFs view of, 2ti ; Aristotle's 
relation U> view's of tho nature and 
tlomain of, ih^ views <»f Greek Aris- 
tolulians and Latin schoolmen regaol- 


Dig: ¦. :i . Google 


INDEX. 


497 


injj, in pnnoral correct, 27 ; views of 
tho tihjoct-umttcr of, iu tlio Loibniti*>- 
Wolftun ami Kantian schools, 2s ; iU 
nature most c<^mplctcly mid i^norally 
mijoinderst«xKi in IJrcat Britain, 21^ ; in 
certain res{>cct8 wholly misconceivcsl 
l>y Bacon, lA.; totally misai»|»rohcn«Io<l 
by LiKrke, »'A. ; jjoncral clmractcr <if 
Whately’s hUf%urhU u/, 29 ; his viow of 
the object-matter an<l domain of, statofi 
and critici.sod, ite Whntoly : 11. 
riility of. ^ (t $fq , ; Utilities falsoly 
altrihutcHl to, 111 et ; sunposed tu 
l»e an instrument of sciontitic discovery, 
.*14 ; henco calle<l nn or /a- 

$irumf'Htal fiC., U4-5 ; sup- 

jK*so<i to l>o tho infalliVilo cturoctor of 
our intellectual vices, its desiuma- 
tions on this sup{H>sition, i7/., ii. 2u ; in 
M'luit res^^t an instrument of the 
Rcioncos, i Vi-d, 45 ; not pr«»f>crly an art 
of discovery, 4.5 ; in what sense to 
1 h 3 styled the midicint tif thi mind, d7, 
4.5 ; the laws of, tho nofrativo condition 
of truth, £!_: its utility tliat of a fenual 
instrument, or mean by which know- 
!e<Jj;e, already acuuirtsi, may 1 k> mo- 
thtsiuicd into tho lunn accouuKlated to 
the conditions of the undorstandin^', 
useful as {^vin^ us, to n certain extent, 
dominion over our thouphts, 4d-7 ; as 
supplyinp, in part, tho criterion of 
Truth fr»)in Krror, 47-H ; ns inviporatinp 
tho underHtanding7 ~48 ; as atTording a 
scientific noiiionclature of the laws hy 
which thinkinp is govomo<l, ami of tho 
viiilation of these laws, liiiiL__LLL Its 
Divisions, iii tt ttt aUo iL 2ilO-:W: 
division of into Natural ami Artificial 
inept, 5]j its Kimls, or Species, and 
Parts, 51 ft $eq . ; 1", Hy relation to tho 
mind, is Objective ami Subjective, — S^»- 
tffHiUtca and //af/ilmtih, ,5 1 2 : both of 
IhtsHo to be pru|K>sed as tho end of in- 
atniclion in, .52 ; 2', Hy relation to ob- 
jects, is Abstract or (lenoral, and (.*on- 
creto or Special, ^ aI»o iL 2^11 -2 ; 
these kinds of, bow designated by tlio 
Greek Aristotelians, ami by tho Arabian 
and Latin schoolmen, if *. ; this division 
of, remounts to Alexander the Apbro- 
disian, ih. ; his illustration of the dis- 
tinction, 5.*b4 ; other illustrations of this 
<li vision of, LLL ; Genoml Ijopio is alone 
one, Special liopic is manifold, and iiart 
nf tho science in which it is appfic«l, 
55-6 ; the distinction of ItOffim 
and Loijira ^Uh* mistaken by somo 
moilern* authors, 58-9 ; d , Hy reference 
to tho circumstances under which it can 
oomo into exorcise by us, is divitled into 
Pure and Movlifie<l, 5fi ft ft'i- ; Pure 
Logic, what, fkJ; Mislifioil tx>gic, what, 
ih. ; nomonelaturo of Mixlitiod Logic, 
6<>-2; this identical with the Applunl 
Ix>gic of Kant and others, fill; not pro- 
|»oriy an essential part of, 62-‘l ; (Ain- 
sfioctus of tiio present course of, 63-8 : 


Formal and Material I/»gic contraste<i, 
ii. 2^12-3 ; division, varieties, and con- 
ten tiToL detail, 231»-43 IV. Jlis- 
U»ry of, postiKmeil, Hki — V. Hibliogra- 
phy of, 69 ; this shortly notictvl, C9 71 ; 
first great divisit«n of,— Pure Ix>gic,— 
considerod, 72- 4u8, ii. 1 • 59 ; Part 1., 
Htoicheiulog}', L 72 - 46^ ; Section T]j 
Noetic, or of the Fumlamontal Iwiws 
of Thought, 72-116 ; in what asjKH't 
Thought is viewed by, 73 ; tho true rela- 
tions of Is)gic overhxikod on two sides, 
HKl ft $fq . — L Erroncouslv held to 
nffbrtl tho positive standari( of truth, 
1()6 — 2. Itepudiate^l as affunling no 
criterion of truth in relation to tho ab- 
solute by some philst»i»hcrs, 107-8 ; its 
Postulates, 114, tff aUu iL 2.52 5 : of 
these only one signalise* I, — To beailowe<l 
to stato explicitly in language all that 
is implicitly conLiined in ihotight, (A, 
»ft nho it 2.5< > : this aumot be rofuso<l, 
ib . ; is implied in what Aristotle states 
of the doctriiio of Syllogism, H.5 ; Sec- 
tion II. — Of tho Products of Thought, 
I16-46.s; L Ennocm.atic,— Of Concepts or 
Notions, 116-224. see Concepts, Doctrino 
of; iL AiMiphantic, or tho Doctrino of 
Jmlgments, 225-67, sef '«Iu*lgmcnts, 
Doctrine of; on tho sup{KMition that 
liOgic takes cognisance of tho modality 
of objects, the sciouce can have no ex- 
istence, 2:»9 ; iii. Doctrino of Hoi\Hon- 
ings, 2tks-468, sfe Koasoningn, Doctrino 
of ; Port 11. Methodology, Section L 
Methwl in genera), Section ii. Istgical 
Moiho«lol4>gy, ii. 1 • .59 : Ix>gicnl MothmI- 
ology, what, ^ 3, ^ U ; consists of Ihreo 
parts, — 1®, 'Hjo I)octrin© of Definition, 
2'. Of Division, ^ Of Pnibation, his- 
torical notices o7~Logical Methmlology, 
lA ; 1®, IX»ctrino of Definition, lb-21, 
see Definition, Doctrino of ; 2% Of Doc- 
trino of Dnision, 22-^^>. see Division, 
D«>ctrine of; 3®, DtKtrine of Pn>l>a- 
t;on, 37-59, ste Prolxition, Doctrino 
of; second great division of, — Modi- 
fie*l Ix)gic, 60-225 : its object, — the 
conditions to which thought is subject, 
arising from the empirical circum- 
stances, external and mtcmal, under 
which man's faculty of thinking is mani- 
fostoil. 6b: its problems three, 1®, What 
is Truth, an«l its contnulictory opjK>site, 
Error? 2% What are tho causes ot Error 
an<l tho Im{>ediments to Truth, an<l 
what aro tho monns of thoir Removal ? 
3®, What aro the Subsidiaries by which 
Human Thought may bo strongthened 
ami guidcsl in the exercise of its func- 
tions? 61 ; tho first two qucfstions be- 
long to the Stoicheiology of Mmlifiod 
Logic, tho thinl to its .Mcthodolog}', lA ; 
Part L M«wlifiod Stoicheiology, fif-ird ; 
Section L Doctrino of Tnith an*l Error, 
fib-.SS ; Section ii. Error, its Causes luul 
Kemoilios, 89-151, see Tnith and Error, 
lX>ctriiic of ; Modified Metho<lology, 


'jigitU-: i by _-»^oglc 


498 


INDEX. 


Section l Of the Means by which our 
Knowie(l{Vo obtains the cliaracter of Per- 
fection, — the Ac4|uisitiun nn<l (’oraniu- 
nication of Knowletijrc, urt 

Knowle<l(;re, Doctrine of the Acquisition 
and Perfecting of. 

JLo*nca IfiKtHM, equal to Abstract or Gen* 
oral Lo^c, see ix>^c. 

Habitualis, see 

liOjTica SvKtonmtica, see Lo^c. 

Lfif/ira tUens, ocjual to Concrete, orS|x>cuil 
l»gic, see I»(pc. 

Logical revision, see Division. 

Logical Induction, see Induction. 

Ix>(ncal I«aws, see Fundamental Laws of 
Thoufjht. 

Ijo^ical Metho<loloffy, see Lojnc. 

Lo^cal Perfection and Imperfection of 
CoDCcpU, jrrr Concepts, Quality of. 

Lo^cal Truth, ste Truth and Eiror, Doc- 
trine of. 

Lopcal Affinity or Continuity, Law of, 
nilc^rod by Kant, hut rejected by the 
Author, L 211. 

Lopcal Notation, that by circular din- 
^mmii as illustrating propositions, L 
the first cini>loyinont of these im- 
properly ascrU>otl to Kulor, ^^(3 ; to bo 
bmnd in Weisc, ih. ; that by parallel 
linos of different lengths ^Lambert's), 
partially antici[iatcti by Alstodius, 

; circular diagrams illustrativo of 
reasoning. 271 ; circular and linear, 
for Syllogisms m Extension and Com- 
prehension, ^^>4-5 : objection to no- 
tation by circles, 3<>4 ; diagrams, cir- 
cular and linear, illustrativo of the 
Sorites, 307 ; tho Author’s, for pro- 
)>oititi(»ns, ii. 277 ; circular for tho 
same, >A.; LanihoK’s linear scheme 
of, critici.HO*l, 4dO-fi2 ; Maaaa’ schemo 
of, criticisod, 4d3-4; tho Author’s 
acliemo of,- No. L IJncar, 4d4-H ; Au- 
thor's scheme of, — No. II. Unft^re<l 
nml Fig\iro<i syllogism, 4^>9 : No. III. 
Figural syllogism, — table of Syllogistic 
Mc^s, in each figure 12 nffinnativo 
and 24 negative, in all 3d. 475. 

I..ogical fan<l I)ialectical)~Iloasoning, its 
meaning in Ari.slotlo, L & 

Ix»gical terms, chioHy borrowoil from 
Mathomatics. L 279, 298. 

Aoyotbj, A<ryiic4j, how employed by Aris- 
totle, L ^ ^ by Alexander of Aphro- 
disias, 5 ; by the siibsoqucot Anato- 
tolians,”*?#. 

A6yos, its two -fold moaning. --thouglit 
and its oxprc.s.<qon, e<piivalent to tho 
ratio and oratio of tho liotins, L fi ; 
thc«K> moani ngs hoa* con trad ist 1 ngu ish^ 
by Aristotle, lA. ; by others, ih, ; A^oi 
irpoifHipiKhs^ and \($yor ^rSiddtBot, pro- 
liohly originated with the Stoics, if/, 

Lovanienses, or Masters of I/ouvain, L 
4()fi ; 409 ; 413 ; quoteil on quantifica- 
tion of prodicato, ii. 311-12; quoto<l on 
error regarding Induction, 3w-7, 3*93 4. 


Lucian, L 4^4. 4fi6. ^ 

Lucilius, ii 2<KI. •* 

Luther, quotc-1 on Knowledge and Belief, 
ii 70; quoted on reading, 21«i. 

M.vah 5», Professor, of Halle, hisodition of 
tho Pneeefita of Wyttonlwch noticed 
and cciLsurcd, L 20 ; in his edition of the 
Praeefita of Wyttenl*ach rovcrso^l the 
author's meaning on analysis and sym- 
tliOHis, ii. ^ 

Ma^utinus, L 338 ; ii. 2.'»d; 2S6 ; varia- 
tion of historians os to tho ago in which 
he lived, 3.53. 

Maginis, ii, 

Maimon, ^ referred to on schemes of 
logical notutiun, ii 4d0. 

Major prtniosiiion, see Promise. 

Muko ae Kurek-Gode, Paulus, i ^ 

M.ilobmncho, quotc<i on tho infiuenco of 
Self-Ijovo, ii H)4-.5, 

lilanilius, quoted, ii 22 ; 134 ; quoted on 
Die nature of experience, Uki 

Mariotte, referred to for correct doctrine 
of tho Aristololic onthymemo, i 

Masters of Ixmvain, tho, see Ixivanionses. 

Masters Regent in tho College of St 
lAuronce in Cologne, their doctrine of 
Induction, ii 3^)7. 

Material Induction, see Induction. 

Mathematical Truth, Truth and Error, 
Doctrine of. 

Mauritius, refers to St Augustin ns au- 
thority for quotation n.s to lx>gic being 
tho Ars arfiMin and NriVwfj'a scuHtia- 
rum, i 35L 

Mazure, quoted on tho office of the natu- 
ral sciences, ii. 2iL 

Moinors, ii. 5i2» 

Molanchthon, L 3fi7 : his doctrine that 
there is a greater force in tho negative 
particle aof a»y, than in tho 

nffirmatlvo aff, ii. 73 ; thi.s doctrine 
shown to bo ornmeous, VA. ; ^198 ; 

quoted on Figure of Syllogi.sm, 426. 

Menage, L 462 ; 465 ; ififi ; quoUkl on tho 
benefit of Conversation as a moan of 
Knowleilgo, ii. 213. 

Mendoza, Hurtado de, quoted on proxi- 
mate and remote matter of Syllogism, 
L 288, 294 ; his ground of the <lis- 
crimination of major and minor terms 
in tho Second and Third Figures, 

ii. 409 * 

of Aristotle, its probable 
moaning, ii. 386. 

Metaphysics, tho Author’s Course of Lec- 
tures on, tho first seven wore dolivoroil 
by the author as a General Introduction 
to tho course of Logic proper, L 1 ; re- 
ferred to, 124 ft alittf. 

Metaphysical Truth, see Tnitli and Error, 
Doctrine of. 

Methml, in general, what, li. ^ 3 ; authors 
referred to on, 3 ; in reference to 
science, what, 3, 4 ; c«>nsidcr©d in its 
integrity Is twofold — Analytic and Syn- 


D* ¦ — - . 


Google 


INDEX. 


409 


tlictic, what, ih.f 1 ; tlic Ansilytlc, what, 
ib. \ tho Synthetic, what, ih ; confu- 
sion in rc^fard to the application of the 
terros Ana!^/ti$ an«l ^ 6 ; 

authors reformi toon this confusion, K\ 
tbeso counter prot;esHcx as app!ie<i to 
the ci'untor wholes of compreheusiun 
unci extension correspond with each 
other, 5-0 ; tho Synthetic method has 
been called tho Pro^^ressivo, ami tho 
Analytic tho Uej^ressivo, 7j these do- 
Bi^mtiona wholly arbitrary and of 
various application, 7-8 ; in prenera), 
Synthesis has been dos4rnate<l tho Pro- 
grcsBivo, and Analysis ihe Kogressivo, 
process, 

Metbotloloirv, «« Logic, Method. 

Metz, ii. 174. 

Micnelius, L 119. 

Minor Prciposition, sef Prcniiao. 

Mirundiilanus, Jo. Picus, L 

M iranduIoutiB, J . F. Picus, L 

Mnemonic Vcrsca, those embracing tho 
ditTcront kinds of propositions in ro- 
foroDco to quantity and Quality com- 
bined, “ Assorit A," &c., L 255 ; 4uJ • 
author’s English metrical version of 
these, i5. ; previous English metrical 
vencions of tho same, i5., a/sn ii. H57', 
forConveraion.L lilLLii; for Disjunctive 
Syllogisms, 827 ; for Hypothetical Syl- 
logisms, 838 ; for Figure of Syllogism, 
397. 

Modi6ci1 Logic, sfe Logic. 

BlotinauM, rpiotod on moaning of tho Lrx 
Co/tt/’it'/i^onuru/H, L 91 ; 325 ; 342 • 
ii. 3 ; 5. 


Monl>od(lo, Lord, quoted on tho distinc- 
tion of {>otontial and actual in relation 
to notions, L 205-t) ; his error on this 
point, 2<K). 

Montaigne, quote*l on illustration of Pre- 
cipitancy, ii. 97-8 ; quoted on ^>reeipi- 
tate dograati.sm and scepticism o.s 
phases of tho same dUiJosition, ^ 

Mood of Syllogism, doctrine of, oc- 
conling to logicians, L 40l >rq. ; 
name for tho arrangement of tho throe 
]>ropoccitions of a syllogism, with desig- 
nation of quantity and quality of cnen, 
401-2 ; tho Greek logicians, looking 
merely to the two premises in combi- 
nation, called these •Syryc/ex, 4i>2 ; in all 
sixty-four nnKslK.40.3-4 ; nut only cloven 
valid, lb . ; of the six in each figure, in 
all twenty-four, only nineteen useful, 
ib. ; these, accopiling to doctrine of 
author, may be still further simplified, 
i5. ; tho doctrine of, explicated, 4M et 
; tho possible combinations of pre- 
mises tested as to their validity In* tho 
general laws of tho Categorical Syllo- 
gism, 403-4 ; these laws give eight (k>s- 
siblc mcKxls of a legitimate syllogism, 
4^)4 ; these eight moods being fuithor 
test^l bv the special rules of the First 
Figure, loaveonly four legitimate moods 


in that figure— vi*. Parbara, Celorcnt, 
Darii, Ferio, 4»»5-<l ; examples witli 
diagrams of the legitimate moods of 
tho Firat Figure, 4o7-8; in tho Second 
Figure, there are four legitimate hukkU 
— viz. Cesare, Camestres, Festino, ba- 
roco, 4<>8-li> ; examples of those with 
diagrams, 41D-11 ; in the Third Figure, 
there are six legitimate moods-— viz. 
Darapti, Felaptou, Din;imi.s, Datisi, 
Bocardo, Forison, 412-1 1 ; examples 
of these with diagrams, 411-18; some 
ancient lo.dcians made two moixls of 
Darapti, 414 ; in the Fourth Figure, 
there are five legitimato moods — vix. 
bramantip, (.-'amenos, Dimaris, Fesap**, 
Fresison, 418-2<> ; oxamples of these 
w'ith diagrams, 42n-22 i what is true of 
mood in Extension holds also of it 
in Comprehension, 422-3 ; Latin and 
Greek mnemonic versos for moofls — 
bist4)rical notice of, 431-2 ; tho Latin 
duo to Petrus Hi.s]>aniis, 431 : tho 
Greek loss ingenious than tlio Latin, 
and, acoofling to author’s latest view', 
prol»ably copied from tho latter, 432 ; 
roductiou of the moods of the .Second, 
Thin!, and Fourth Figures to those i>f 
tho First, 4 *14 -45 ; direct aixl indirect 
moods, — their principle, ii. 449-5J ; di- 
rect and indirect moo«l8 in First and 
Fourth Figures, 449 ; indirect mood.s of 
logiciaas of Secontf and Third Figures, 
445-d ; those im[K)ssiMo, L**? ; now 
moods, 457-fiO ; Author’s table of moods, 
4IiL 

J/ori, moff, Stc.f the prodosignations, va- 
rioiujly refeiTOtl to universal, jMirticulor, 
or to neither quantity, 3.54 ; authors re- 
ferred to on, i6. ; (.'orvinus, ib. 

Muller, Johann von, his practice in read- 
ing, ii. 22^1. 

Murotus, refcrrcii to on a spurious f>03s- 
ago of Aristotle's Wieturic, L 3. 

MurmcUiu.s, mnemonic verses of, com- 
prising tho Ten Categories, L 197 ; his 
mnemonic verses, quoted of objects 
not included under the Ten Categories, 

m 

Mutatio Eleuebi, Prol^tion. 

NkCEHHITAS CoNSEQCKNTI^ ET NECES8I- 
TAsCoNaEqUENTl.**, authors referred to 
on dUtinction of, ii. 370. 

Negation, controversy regarcling the place 
of, i. 2.53 ; negative terms liow desig- 
nated by Aristotle, boethiiw, tho School- 
men, 253iJ.; particula x^tiHUauSy what, 
ib. ; prvptxsiUontJt itijiuxtie, what, 254. 

Xexc Analytic of Logical For>n$, proposed 
Essay by tho author on, ii. 249 ; ex- 
tract from Prospectus of, 249-51L 

Noetic, Logic. 

Noldiusy L 2»>3 ; referred to, on History 
of Fourth Figure, 424 ; his re<luction 
ofjBaroco, 440-4.5 ; called the mood bo- 
cardo Docnniroc. 


VOL. II. 


2J 


Digitized by Google 


500 


INDEX. 


Xomonclaturc, scicntifio, irniM>rtanco of, 
L4y. 

Nominal Definition, tfe Definition. 

Non*C'oiitradiction, principle of, Con- 
tmdiction. 

Son. tM what, L 7d-7. 

Notion, see ('oncopL 

NunnesiuB, ii. ^ 

OnjEcTivK Logic, 

Oh«ervation, see Knowlcrlj^o, Doctrine of 
tijo AcfjuiHition and Pcrfcctinf? of. 

Occam, \V illiani, his tise of ('nneeptuSf L 12. 

OU>orM, bis Rprciilation founded on tho 
^ncral relations of distance between 
tho planets, ii. IL 

Ojnnion, set Truth and Error, Doctrine of, 

Opposition, or Incoroposibility, of Jinl^- 
znonta or Propositions, what, L ^>1 ; 
citlter of Contradiction or of Contrariety, 
i7>. ; Subcontrary oj>|>ositi<>n, what, ih. ; 
not a real < pjK>sitiotj, 201-2 ; ibis de- 
scribed by Aristotle ne an op)K>sition in 
lanc:ua^, not in reality, ; distinction 
between [ndefiniludo and Semi-defini- 
tudo or Definite indofiniiutie, ii. 2M : 
the author's doctrine of, cvolvo<l out of 
this (ii.stinction, 2^2 ; Suixiltemation and 
Subcontrariety as ft>rms of, rejected, ib . ; 
Incoosistencv introduced, ib. ; Contra- 
dictory and Contrary opposition nmonp 
propositions of different quality, what, 
282 ; Inconsistency among propositions 
of tho same quality, ib. \ sulmivisions 
of Contra^liction, Contrariety, and In- 
consistency, ib. ; differences in Corn- 
possibility of the two scliomes of In- 
licfinito and Detinito Particularity, 2S2- 
2$3 ; tabular scheme of, 284. 

OrpanoMy nanm In^stowod on the collection 
wc {K>ssess of tho lexical treatises of 
Aristotle, L Mi Aristotle 

himself, ib. ; aa thus applied, contri- 
buted to tlie erroneous supiH>sition that 
ijogic is an inatrmnent of discovery, ib, 

Ovid, quoted, ii. 210. 

PACHYMEnK5, or Pachymcrius, (jooi^us, 
L Jllil ; quotoi on Induction, ii. 382-3. 

Pacius, Juliu.s, L M ; 279; 342 ; ; 

^vo tho Regressive TomproEontivo 
nt'rites before Ctoclonius, 383 ; referred 
to, on Figure, 4(H» : (juoted on error of 
phrase ii. 50 , 

Paralogium, see Fallacies. 

Hart, see. Whole. 

Particular Propositions, L 243, see Judg- 
ment.«, Pro|K>aitions. 

Partition, see Dirihion. 

Pasc}\l, <|m»ted on the dignity of man as 
consisting in thought, L il ; quoteil on 
tlio power of custom, ii. 82. 

Passion, as a source of error, tee Error, 
CnUHcs of. 

Paul, St, quoted, ii. f»2-3. 

ricpiox^> not use<i by Aristotle, but the 
verb wcptv'xcn', in relation to notions, L 
141. 


Peripatetics, their nomenclature of tho 
t«irts of tho Hypothetical Syllogism, 
1. 340. 

PensiuK, quoted on Chrj'sippu.s, as inven- 
tor of tho Sophism Boritos, L 376 ; 
quote<l, 3s2 ; ii. 2C<». 

Petersen, referred to on historj' of Cate- 
gories in antiquity. L 2Q1. 

Petitio Pnncipiiy what, ii. .10 ; error of 
tho phrase, ib., see Probation. 

Petrus a ComiVuis, satirised by Buchanan, 
Beza, and Itabelais, L 3;j3. 

Philo, L fi. 

PbilojKinus, or Ctrammnticus, Joannes, L 
54 ; on tho principle of Contradiction, 
^ ; 279 ; 294: 3^ 3^ 414 ; 

ii. ^ referroa to on anal^s of Geo- 
motrj*, 7_; <or Ammonius), his defini- 
tion of conversion, 25*> ; qtiuted, on 
order of Premise.^. 4u2-3 ; quoted on 
Figure of Byllogism, ii. 420-4. 

Philosophical or Logical Presumption, 
principle of, ii. 16.1 ; the foundation of 
Induction and Analogy, ih. 

Philosophy of Common Sense, the. what, 
ii. 21 ; well stated by Aristotle, iV». 

Pbocylidcs, Greek epigram by, L 393. 

Piccartus, L 279. 

Phvtina, referred to on death of Petros 
Hispanus, L 432. 

Plainer, Ernst, rcforrwl to, on Logic being 
a formal iiiHtrument of the sciences, L 
y ; 350 ; ii. 174 ; «)uotcd on Figure of 
Syllogism, 432-4. 

Plato, his use of tho term DinfertiCy L Li 
(and the Platonists) considered dialec- 
tic ( 1 . e. Logic and Metaphysics) as a 
science, 9_i frequently employed tbo 
laws of Excluded Middle and of Con- 
tradiction, 87-90 ; hU (alleged) Seeand 
Alcibiades spurious, 29 ; recognised the 
law of Reason and Consequent or Suffi- 
cient Rea-Hon, 92 ; employetl, in refer- 
ence to this principle, tho ambiguous 
term oirla, 93 ; ii. S ; guilty of tho vice 
of eireulas in demunstrando, in his proof 
of the immortality of tho soul, iL 55 ; 
ipioted to tho effect that man is natu- 
rally determined to communication, 
205-6 ; 

Plato, Pseudo, quoted on teaching os a 
mean of self-improvement, ii. 210. 

Platonists. the, ruferred to on knowledge 
and belief, ii. 

TIAdros, its moaning in relation to con- 
cepts, L 141. 

Plautus, quoted on tho s\ipcriority of im- 
mediate to mediate testimony, ii. 17S. 

n»ny, the younger, quoted »>n tho greater 
tendency of hearing to rouse the atten- 
tion, ii. 212 ; his maxim regarding 
(juantity to bo rca<l, 21 tl 

Plotinus, his employment of tho term 
c«^«v/ory, L 1 97 ; referred to on Cate- 
gories,*^;^ reforrctl to on analysis of 
Geometry, il. 1, 

Plrnicquet,*Godfrey, L 6£Ll referred to on 
I’ostulate of Logic, ii. 252: quoted on 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


501 


Convoreion, ^7.** : rt fciro*! to on quan- 
tilication of pmlk'utc, ; bin )^nc- 
ral canon of Syllogism, Uh>. 

Plutarch, L tl ; :ltii ; cited on tbo bonefUa 
of opposition, ii. 

Ponciufl, refurreci to for acholostic theories 
of the object- matter of Ltufio, L lii 

I’opo, Alexander, him borrowed from Sor* 
Kount, ii. 411. 

Purf»hjT>', L 111 : 147 : quoted on tho rela- 
tion iKitwcon tho llroatitli and Ilepth of 
notions, ih. ; iWt ; nmdo two moods of 
Diirnpti, 414. 

Porsun, Hichard, his imitation of an epi* 
jfram of Phocylidos os applied to Her- 
mann, L 

Port Itutfol Looicy see L' A ri lU J*eHSrr. 

Postulates of bopic, #*« Lt‘pic. 

Postulates, what, L 

/‘rtniintfitm fit ftiitm prfrdim- 

turn stt/Jfctiy the canon of Doductive Ca- 
tepoiical Syllogisms in fomprehensiou, 
i, : how otherwise expressed, i'4. 

Precipitancy, Error, Causes of. 

Pre<lesipnato and Pruindcsipnato Proyiosi- 
lions, what, L 244, s^e Judgments, 
Prop(>8itions. 

iVedioato, of a jurlpmont, what, i. 228 ; 
in Aristotle the predicate incliulcs tho 
copula, ilt. ; called tho (rrm or fjrtrtiue 
of a proposition, ib.\ Quantification of, 
date of Its discovery by atUhor, ii. 248 ; 
its results specified, 2.'i0-51 ; 2fU)-74 ; 
considorctl in detail, 2.~«.s-fi4 ; estab- 
lished, 1% That the predicato is ns cx- 
toimive as the subject, 2.^1* ; That 
ordinary lan^io^ quantifies tho pro<li- 
cato so often as this determination is of 
imjK)rtanco, ; this done either di- 
rectly, or by Limitation or Exception, 

: 3*, Tho <i^>ctriuo of tho non- 
<)uantificaiinn of, only an example of 
the passive sequacity of the logicians, 
2»»2-3 ; 4% Tbo non quantification of, 
given tip by logicians themselves. In 
certain cases, 2>i:t ; logicians (but lutt Ar- 
istotle) asscrlo^I that in atlinnativo pro- 
positions in which subject and predicato 
aro ()uantiHcd to their full extent, tho 
predicate is di.stributcd in virtue of its 
matter, 272 ; logicians wrong in their 
doctrine that in negative priq»<*sitions 
tho predicate is always (Ustnbuteil, 273 ; 
objoction.s to the doctrine of the quanti- 
fication of. Considered, 2SL> ft nof. ; L 
GonoraJ, •— objections foundo«l on the <lis- 
tinction of Formal am! Material consi- 
dercMl, 289-1(4 ; LL Siwcia!.— 1% That it 
is false. 2 :‘.i-7 ; 2’, Useless, 297-8 ; histo- 
riad notices rcganling quantification 
of, 298-317 ; Aristotle, 298-303 ; Alex- 
ander Aphrotitsiensis, .K')3 ; Ammonius 
Herniiicj, 299, 303-6 : Boethius, 306-9 : 
Avorroes, 309 : AUiortus Magnus, 309- 
10 : Levi Ben Oorson, 310-11 ; Masters 
of Ix>uvain, 311 2; Titliis and Ridigor, 
312-5 ; Omlfrey Ploucquet, 315-6 ; Ul- 
rich. 316-7 ; authors referred to on tho 


doclrino that tho oxtenlion of predi- 
cate is always reduccil t4> exUnsion of 
subject, 317 ; authors refcrroil to on tho 
dtK'trino that prc<licato bos quantity as 
well ns sulijoct, xU. ; l•efcl•onces to Aris- 
iotlo for use of distributed predicate, 

ih. 

Prejudice, authors referre<l to on, ii. 

Mr 

Prelection, Author ’ a Methml of, L 2, 3 ; 
same as that prevalent in Germany and 
Holland, Ii 

Prcmi.HC, Proinises. of Syllogism, what, L 
2**1, 2>^2, : Major and Minor Pre- 

mise or Proposition, ih. ; objections to 
those terms as denominations of the pm- 
p*.»sitions of aKyllogi.Hiu, 2il ; theirdesig* 
nations, ih. ; best nniiu^ for, aro jS«w/»- 
t4on and Stt/^s4//n/tfio/t, 'JSiM order of, 

ii. 4i)l-2 ; Philopouus quoie<l on, 4u2-3; 
instances and authorities for the onoun- 
cemont of syllogism with the minor pro- 
mise stutoti first, 4< >3 .'!¦ 

Pro-»ciHion, what, L 1 23. 

Presentative Faculty, as a source of Error, 
#!¦< Error, f'auses of. 

l^revost, ii. 174. 

Primary Iaws of Thought, see Funda- 
mental Laws of Thought. 

Primtnn Vo'fnituniy controversy regarding, 
L 22L 

Print'ipimn ContrailicoAiuM, see 
trail ifiorinnott. 

Probation, Hoctrinoof, ii. 37-59 ; its char- 
acter and elements, 37-8; those expli- 
cated, €t ; tenns omployeil for 
Prolwition, — .4 riiHtnrnUUion, 
i)*mihtJi(raiioKy Lfitiltug of Pr<»if 38»9 | 
in general what, 32 ; how diKtinguUhod 
from SyllogLsm, ih. ; wheron depends 
tho logical value of, 39-49; ground of 
PpM>f cither al>solute or roliilive, 40 ; 
distinctions of proy>ositions in respect 
of tho (^encml form of a sy.stem of, 
40-12; divisions of Prol*ations, 43-4 ; tho 
dilTcrences of proliatioos dc|>end partly 
on their matter and yiartly on their form, 
43-4 ; L In respect of their Matter, 
they are Pure and Empirical, 43-5 ; this 
distinction of Prolxitions not taken into 
account !»y I^gic, 46-7 ; 2. In respect 
«>f their Form this is Intcnuil and Ex- 
ternal, 45 ; Ppibations are in respect of 
Internal Fonn. a. Direct and Indirect, 
45-7 ; principle of indirect proof, 47-8 ; 
differencos of Imlircct or .\pagogieal 
Probations, 48-9 : b. I>c<luctive and fn- 
ductivo, 45 9; c. Hjmlhoticand Analytic, 
45. 49-,50; in rosjiect of External form, 
they are D, Simy»le and ComjHisito, 2\ 
PeKect and Imperfect, 8% Kogidar am! 
IrroguKar, 4 1 -.5 ; Ii In rc.q>cctof thoir 
I>cgreo of Cogency, they arc 1®, Apo- 
deictic or Demonstrative atul IVobable, 
45 ; 2^, Universally and Partieiilarly 
Valid, lA. ; tbo formal legitimacy of, 
determined according to the logicians 
by five rules, 50-51 ; those rules reduced 


Digitized by Google 


502 


INDEX. 


to two, r»l-2 ; tho Cvo ruleg ozplicatcil, 
ILi tt ; first nilc, Nolliit^j is to bo 
bcfnroti, borrowed, or stolen, 50-2 ; its 
violation nffords ibo PttUit} PnHcipii^ 
fiO ; Umitati<>n under wliicli thU nilo is 
to bo understooii, 53-4 ; second rule, 
That no projK^ition is to be cm[>loyed as 
a principle of pi\H>f, tho truth of which 
is only to be evincod os a conscquenco 
of the proposition which it U cmplnyed 
to prove, 51-4 ; iU violation affords the 
vice of tartpov xpdrtpoy^ 51 ; thir»l nde, 
That no circular probation is to be made, 
51-5 : its violation nffonls tho vice of 
tVrr«/w.* tn tlfmuuttrttuUo, 51 ; regres- 
sive and progressive proofs not to bo 
confounded with tho tautological circle, 
65-(3; fourth rule, That no leap, no hiatus, 
must bo made, 51 -fi; its violation aflunis 
tho vice of SiUn/t in •ffmofttlran'Io, 51. 
M-7 j fifth rule, Tho sco{>e of the protm- 
tion IS not to bo changed, 51-7 ; this rule 
admits of throe degrees, 57 ; L MnUitlo 
KUhrhi^ 57 -8 ; 2. I*rovingtoo littio, 53 ; 
IL IVoving too much, 5S-i». 

Problem, tho, what, L 2S1.± 

Problems, what, L 200. 

IVoclus, reforrod to on Knowlo'lge and 
Belief, ii. 72. 

Progressive Method, set Method. 

Proi>f, Kt Proliatiou. 

l*roportion, Analog)* or Identity, law of, 
a.safund.amonta) niloof svll(^sms, :13& ; 
made by some logicians tfio on© supremo 
canon of syllogism, ib . ; logici.'vns by 
whom this law is confoundod, or mmlo 
co-ordiuato with tho Dictum do Omni, 
ib.\ names given by logicians ib.\ 
cmmeouslv suppose*! to Ixi employe*! 
by Aristotle os a fundamental rule of 
syllogism, 1141 ; terms un*lcr which 
enounced, Syrbiiia thought that 

this law, unless limited, is false, 342 ; 
$u Syllogism. 

ProjMKiiio ContlitimmlU uihll jyonitinfMf 
tho rule, its origin, i. 2;{H. 

Proposition, The, name for major premise, 
L 233 ; but ambiguous, 2x5. 

Pro]x)sitioD,wbftt.i. 225 ; it“ synonyms, ib . ; 
called by Aristotle an iuU ri'nl. biaaTnua, 
22i* : how divided by tho logicians, in 
n*sj>oct of tpiantity, 243 ; proiM»sitions 
distinguishes! by the author into Pre»lo- 
signate (Definite), and Preindosigmato 
(Intlefinito), according as their qumitity 
is nr IS not marked out by a verbal sign, 
244. M<( Jiulgmonts ; distinctions of, in 
resjKH't of the general form of a system 
of priM*f, ii. 4«>-42, tee uho L 2ii5 tf $fn, ; 
terms of, only terms as terms of a rela- 
tion, ii. 257 ; these only comjiarod o-s 
quantities, iA. ; of no conscouence logi- 
cally whether subject or preuicate of, Ikj 
j:laccd first, 25H. 273 ; in common l.iu- 
fpmgo ]>ro<licato often nhico*! first, t'A. ; 
simply an cr^untion t»f two notions in 
rcsjHJct of their cx U*nsiou , 271. 273, 27 1> ; 


now propositional forms resulting from 
tho doctrine of a <piantificd predicate, 
277 tt Afj. ; $ft u/m) 2*‘=b-7 ; these, with 
tho old, in all eight, 277, 2Ni 5 ; their 
litoral symbols, iL ; their notation, tb. ; 
quantity of, 27 K r/ iter/. ; Indefinite prc»fx)- 
sitions (of Uie logicians), Isittcr iHdtsKj- 
htitt oT Prritukxiijnattj 27S ; various opin- 
ions as to their cla**sificati<»n, iih ; authors 
reforrod to on this subject, 27S-9 ; pre- 
valent uncertainty in reganl to Particu- 
larity and its signs, 279 ; two meanings of 
cither Semi-tiefinilc, and equivalent 
to jvmroa/y, or Indefinite, and e*juivalent 
to anme a( letmt, lL. ; how these may l )0 
8ym>>oli»e<l, 2^0: Aristotle and logicians 
recognised only the latter of these mean- 
ings, 279-80 ; reastms of tliis, 2M>-82 ; 
Dotinitu<Io or Non-jiarticularity of three 
kinds, 279-80 ; how these forms may l>o 
symlHiUsed, t'A, ; effect of tho definite 
ailiclo and its absence in different Ian- 
languages in reducing the definite to the 
indefinite, ib. ; to what the Indofinitoe 
of Aristotle corros|>ond, 280 ; logicians 
who have marked tho quantities by 
definite and imlefinite, 280-81 ; tho three 
possible rolationsof the terms of, JL Toto- 
total coinclusioD, 2. Toto-total coexclu- 
sion, 2. Incomplete coinclusion, involv- 
ing Incomplete coezclusion, 2S.5 ; tho 
whole order of best and worst quantifica- 
tion of tho terms of, throughout the two 
qualities of Aflinuntiun and Negation, 
2 sb.87 : sfr Judgments, Doctrine of. 

PropofUiouts Urtii ailjarenth^ or lertii ad- 
juit, what, L ; how designated by 
the Greeks after Aristotle, 228-30 ; h- 
ail/iurntts, wliat, 230. 

ProfMtsdioHUJt KTfiUHibi/ej. the doctrine of, 
as given by logicians, ii. 201-2, see Ex- 
clusive and* Exceptive Particles. 

np6<T\r)^is, of Theophrastus, its probable 
moaning, ii. 3S0. 

np6racis, its use by Ari.stotlo, L 22(1. 

Protagoras and Eunthlus, the case of, 
quoted, i. 407-S. 

ProrrHa, The Rx)k of, citofl, ii. 207. 

Psellus, Michael, the Spnoftsis of thf Dn/n- 
wm attributed to, in all probability a 
translation from Hispanus, L 432. 

Psychology, Empirical or Historical, how 
distingtiishod from Lc»gic, L 2£ 2L 

Ihirchot, referred to on ( 'utogories, L 20<'»; 
mnemonic verso for Disjunctive Syllo- 
gism from, 327 ; his formula for tho 
Figure of Syllogism (in Extension), 397 ; 
rofemxl to on the pre<lesignation of tho 
predicate by afl collectively, ii. 317. 

Pure an<l ApfUied, as \isually employed in 
op]K>sition in Gcnnan philosophy, not 
pro|>orlj’ relative and correlative to each 
other, L. ti)i J /*«>*< and mixed, upplud 
and Huapptitd, pn»j>crly oorrel.ative, ii. 

Pun? and Mmlal Proi»<»8ition8, L 25d, see 
Judgments. 

Ihiro i>ogic, see Tx»gic. 


p:-. - -H 1,. Google 


INDEX. 


503 


Qualities, or Mmlcs, what, L 76-7 ; thoir 
sym*nym«. Z2. 

Quintilian, L ; his cinployiuent of tho 
t*;nn Kuthifun'me, his maxim 

rcganiing (quantity to bo road, ii. 'iltL 

Rabelais, L 22a. 

Ramists, maiotiiin logic to l>o an art, L 2^ 

Ramus, rcfcrro*! to on genus of Logic, L 
U ; 2< >0 ; his illustration of tho distinc- 
tion between Abstract or (jonoml, and 
Concreto or S[»ocial Ix>gic, !j5 ; referr- 
ed toon Method in lA)gic, ii. 11 ; reforrixl 
toon postulate of Ixigic, quoted on 

Induction of Arintotlo, 3>)3. 

Rapin, referrod to on canon of syllogism, 
1l 31 S-2. 

Reading, sef Knowledge, Doctrine of tho 
Aenuisition and Perfecting of. 

Ro.al lleHnitiun, Sfe Definition. 

Real Induction, Induction. 

Real Truth nv Truth and Error, Doctrine 
of. 

Rc.'wm an»l Consequent, Law of, ste Suffi- 
cient Reason. 

Reasoning, see Reasonings, Doctrine of, 
Syllogism. 

Reasoning-^. Doctrine of. L the 

act of Reasoning, what,~2!SIST~ this 
illustrated by an example, 2611-70 ; tho 
example mvon is a reasoning in the 
whole of Extension, and may Ikj repro- 
sontetl by three circles, 270-1 • tho 
reasoning of Extension may be oxnibit- 
od in Cumprohension, 272-4 ; tho copula 
in extension and comprehension of a 
counter meaning, 274 : dclinition of tho 
process of Hcasoning with tho jinncipnl 
donominations of process and product, 
274-5 ; these explicated and iUtLstrate<l, 
275 et sff/.’f L The Act of Reasoning,— 
a reasoning is one organic whole, 275- 
6 ; errors of logicians on this point, 
5Tt)-7 ; utility of the process of reason- 
ing, 277 : 2. Terms by which tho pro- 
cess of reasoning is donominateii, — 

JleasitniHfff JtaliocinattnRf 
Ar^nmenltUioHf An/ftMent, lHjtrenc€f 
To court ude, tUmrlusiou^ To stflUtgUtf 
CollectlOf VoKujrre, 27t^W : general con- 
ditions of Reasoning or Syllc^ism, 2N). 
see Syllogism ; reasoning may proceed 
in the quantity of Extension, and in 
that of Comprehension, 2B5 et ; 
reasonings in these opjK/site quantities 
explicitly compared and contrastcil, 
2y # et fetf . ; logicians have overlooked rea- 
soning in ComprohensioD, and have thus 
given nanxtw and erroneous definitions 
of tlio major, middle, and minor terms 
2il7’8. see also 217 H setj.; difficulty in 
regard to the doctrine that all reasoning 
is either from tho whole to tho i>art, or 
from tho ports to tho whole, stated and 
obviated, H55, see Infoi'cncc, Syllogism. 

Reciprocating PnqKiHitions, common doc- 
trine of logicians that predicate in these 


(Uiantificd vi )«a/»W<e, ii. 272. 204. 206 ; 
this incorrect, 23tl ; authors reforred to 
who hold that they may he simply con* 
verted. 275: Pocius. Alexander Apbrodi- 
siemsis rofori'ed to on, »A.; Fonseca citc<l 
against their quantification vi maieri<rt 
21*4. 

Rodi, his anecdotes of two Peripatetics, 
iL ma. 

Roiluction of Syllogisms, tho whole of tho 
rules given by K»gicians for, unphiloso* 
phica), L 433 ; those suiicrseded, 43^1- 
4.1 ; itflueiio ad imintssitnle applied to 
Baroco and B<K*anlo, but awkwanl on<l 
perplexing. 4CtS, 440. 

Regressive Method, see Method. 

Reid quotc<l on Conception. L iriO-12 ; 
hU mist.'ikcH regarding, 112-13 ; not, 
however, open to Dr (Ilcig's censure on 
this point, 113. 

Reimarus, IL ^ anecdotes cited from, of 
the influence of passion on opinion, ii. 
10.3; quoUul on canons of Syllogism, 


Roinhold, ii. 51. 

Koniiniscencc, as a source of Error, see 
Error, Causes of. 

Represri^atfoii {reftresentatlo)y the term, 
sense in which it has been usc<l on tho 
Continent since tho time of Leibnitz, L 
P2fi ; want in English of a term to ox- 
press what is thus fimproperly) denoted 
by rtpresentationf ih. ; sense in which 
used by tho author, ib. 

Repugnance, of Notions, equivalent to 
(,’ontnulictory Opposition, L 214. 

Rcusch, or Rouscliius, L 142 ; 342 ; 364 : 
437 ; his reduction of Baroco, 440 ; 
4ii ; 445 ; ii. ^ 16(1 : 174 : quoted on 
canons of Syllogism, 3 1 D-2( >. 

RJutvrictoA /ezrt«</e'r,authorof, hiscm])loy> 
mont of the term entk^meme^ 1 390. 

Richter, Heinrich, reforre<l to, as to Logic 
not being properly an art of Discovery, 
L 37 ; «piote<l on tho dominion which 
Ix^c gives us over our thoughts, L 46- 
7j ^ 25.9 ; ii. QiL 

Ridigor, L 264 ; noticed the error of those 
who make Soiitos only of compro- 
hensive whole, 379 ; erroneously attri- 
buto<l introduction of Fourth Figure 
to Galen and Scotus, 424 ; quoted and 
criticised on quantification of jirodicate, 
ii. 312-35 ! syllogistic forms propoimdoci 
by, SU-f). 

Romagnosi, L 71. 

Rlisliug, L IL 

Rousseau, cited on tho difficulty as to tho 
origin of Language, ii. 142. 

Ruiz, Didaous, referred to, on history of 
di.<ttinction of Sensns Co>h/k«//i et Jjicisif 
L 456 ; ii, Ii3; 75. 


Salltts in demonsfra»do, what, ii. .51-6 ; 
only a special c.'we of tlio J*ditio Rnn- 
cijui, 56, see Probation. 

Sundoi-son, Bishop, ipiotcd on objects not 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


50-t 


included under the ton catc^riett, L 
19S ; roferrod to on nnme^ of proposi* 
lions in conversion, 2iil ; quote<l 
on importance of teaching as a moan of 
selMmprovcmcnt, iL 211 ; his practice 
in rca«lint', 

Hauler, L CtU ; <pioU‘d on canons of Syllo- 
it. 327. 

Savonarola, quotetl on canon of Syllogism, 
iL a:»4. 

Scaligor, J. C., quototl on the benefits of 
tliscussion, it. •2iiS. 

Schciblor, L 2dl ; 21*8 i 300 ; quote<l on 
what constitutes a Disjunctive Ueason- 
ing, 32>* ; 33S ; rcferrc<l to on Aristotle 
and Plato’s views of Method, ii. 8; refer- 
rc<l toon Method in Logic, ^ : 17<> ; 

quoted on Pn»p<^sttionca Exjtonihiles, 
2i)l-2 ; referred to on opposition of Sub- 
alternation and of Subcontrariety, 281. 

Scheidler, ii. 21.*i : 22U : 22:L 

Schelling, repudiate*! the principles of 
Contradiction and Excluded Middle in 
relation to the A!»solute, L Uli ; respect 
in which his treatment of tho principle 
of Contradiction difforwi from that of 
Hegel, ih. ; piaco<l the law of Idcutity 
as tho j»riniary principle of all know- 
led]^, l»2. 

Schmuldors, ii. 1^ ; 171. 

Scholia, what, L 2ii7. 

Scholiast on Hermogencs, his doctrine of 
the Hnthymomo, L iliil ; 4d8. 

Schottus, Andrcas, L 4di8. 

Schramm, ma^lo tho Inductive Syllogism 
de<luctivc, L 324. 

Schuler, referre<l to for scholastic theories 
of the object-matter of Logic, L 28. 
Schulxe, (f. E., L 77 ; 80; 84 ; 124 ; 

147 : 230; 247 ; 2T>4 ; 251) ; 270; 3<Ki; lilL 

Schweitfhteuscr. L 3«>51 njfcirod to on 
true rciwling of Epictetus, 40.^t. 

Science, definition of, Ii. ^ ^ its perfec- 
tion of two kinds— F’onnal and Mate- 
rial, 4 ; distingtu.Hho<! as Heal and 
Eormair 00 ; under tho Real Sciences 
arc included the Mental and Material, 
07 ; divided into two groat l>ranchc8, 
accortling as it is conversant, 1® About 
objects known, or 2!! Abo\it tho man- 
ner of knowing them, 22D-30 ; theso 
branches callerl respectively Direct 
Science or Science Simply, and Reflex 
Science, tho Science of faience, the 
Method of Science, 2:10 ; the latter falls 
into two groat branches, as it U con- 
versant, LI Alnmt tho laws tinder which 
the human mind can know, or 2' The 
laws under which what is pro]>o.sed by 
the human mind to know, can l» known, 
</>¦ ; the former is L<*gic jtroperly so 
called, tho latter not namc<l. ih. ; but 
in its parts, civile*! //ettretie, .drr/*iV««f- 
tonir, if}. ; these sciences, resj>ect»voly 
dovoIo|>c<l by Aristotle, and by Bacon, 
231 ; not inconsistout, but correlative 
and dcjKmdcnt, iV». 


Scotus, John Duns, referred to as to 
genus of Logic, L 9j referred to for 
scholastic theories on the object-matter 
of Logic, 27 ; (or St Augustin) quoted 
as to lx)gic boiug the .Jri aW/ina and 
firientia scieutiarnm, 34-5 ; 58 : 321 : 401* ; 
allegod ns defending tHoFoiulh Fi^re, 
423, 124 ; tliis erroneous, ifj. ; hob! rcri- 
son, Bocardo, and Felapton as useless, 
because concluding indirectly, 44.^ ; bis 
ground of the discrimination of major 
and minor terms in tho Second and 
Thin! Figures, ii. 4£iiL 

Second Figure, gte Figure. 

Seguy, quoted on canons of Syllogism, ii. 
327-8. 

Self-Love, »ee Error, Causes of. 

Seneca, example of Sorites from, L 383 ; 
457 ; quoted on Division, iL 33 ; quoted 
on evil influence of nrecipitavicy, 96 ; 
quoted on the hope of dying old, ns on 
illustration of precipitate juilgment, 
97 ; quote*! on sloth ns a r*<utco of 
error, 99 ; 206 ; 2U7 ; quoted on teach- 
ing as a mean of self improvemont in 
knowledge, 210 ; his maiiim regarding 
tho quantity to !>o read, 216 ; 4i:fl. 

Sergeant, John, notice of, ii. 411 ; his 
doctrine of the Second and Third 
Figures, 411-2. 

Sextus P3mpiricus, L ^ 2.82 ; ii. iL 

'S Gravesando, cited on influence of Asbo- 
ciatioD, ii. 128. 

Sigwart, referred to on what truly con- 
stitutes a Disjunctive Reasoning, L 328, 
46H: ii. 14: 59: 79. 

Simplicius, L ^ referred to on genus of 
Logic, 9 : 95T 

Sloth, sff Error, Causes of. 

Smiglecius, referred to on genus of Logic, 
L 9 ; referred to for scholastic tbcH>riea 
of the object-matter of Logic, ^ 58. 

Smith, Adam, quoted on influence of As- 
sociation, ii. 126. 

Snell, ii. 192 ; 2Ul. 

Society, influence of, os a source of Error, 
gee Error, C'uuses of. 

Scx'mtes, his saving regarding the extent 
of his knowltnlgo, iL 8sL 

Solomon, ii. 216. 

Sopater Aparaoensis, L 30Q. 

Sophism, grf Fallacies. 

Sorit«*, *>r Chain Syllogism, L 36^2-85 ; tho 
a*K'ond variety of Complex Syllogism, 
3*9i ; what, lA. ; its formulic in Compre- 
hension and Extension, if*. ; Progressive 
ami Uegreasive, 3t>6-7 ; auth*>rH on, in 
general, referred to, 3*>7 ; diagrams, 
circular and linear, illustrative of, (A. ; 
concrete examples of. 3<)7-9 ; the formal 
inference equally necessury in, as in 
sinqdo syllogism, 369 ; resolvable into 
simple syll<»glsms, iA. ; this illustrated, 
370-71 ; (Mjually natum) ns simple syllo- 
gism. liZi : may bo either Categorical 
t>r Hyi>othcli*»l, t A. ; laws of these 
forms of, 37 ! -2 ; formula of Hypo- 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


505 


tbotical Sorites, 872 ; resolution of 
Hypc«thctical Sorites, projfn'ssivo ond 
rc^'remive, into simple syllo>;i(»ms. 878; 
a Disjunctive Sorites |K>ssii>le after a 
sort, 874 ; but complex and unservice- 
able, 374-0 : historical notice of the 
lo^ncal doctrine of, 875 H uttj. ; neither 
name nor doctrine found in Aiistotlo, 
375 ; but tho principle of, driven in 
Arisbitlo's first antiprcdicamcntal rule, 
ifi. ; the term never applU**! by 

uny aticiont writer to desij^ato a cer- 
tain fnnn of rea-Honinjf, tft . ; with them 
denoted a particular kind of sophism, 
37 d ; tirst used in its prestnit accepta- 
tion by Lsiurentius Valla, 3H ; the pro- 
cess of, described in the of 

of Trebisond, tho contem|*nrary 
of Valla, lA. ; tho doctrine of lotrieians 
refifanlinjr, llluslmtcs their oiic-.side<i 
view of tho nature of reasoning in j;eno- 
ml, 378 ; the Sorites of extension over- 
lo<«ked, and that of comprehension, the 
pro^rressive, alone contcmnlatod by lo- 
gicians, 37‘* ; dilForenco between tho 
two forms <Tf, »A. ; prolviblo reason why 
logicians ovcrlookcil, in the case of 
Sorites, tho reasoning In extension, 3''1- 
2 ; examples of, in comprehension and 
extension, 3H2 3 ; the Gocleninn, or 
Kogressive t'ompreliensive Sorites, 3^3 ; 
names given to, 3>4 ; before Valin, 
called vaguely comphx »&. ; 

as a polysyllottUin, comfiarativcly 
simple, may bo drawn in any 

figure, 44S ; c»bscrvations on, ii. 3tt5 ; 
correction and amplification of the 
common doctrine of, 3U5-7 ; diagrams 
illiLstrativo of, 3*.<7. 

BoriUrs, tho sophism, its derivation and 
meaning, L 37t» : it* nature, 37fi-7 ; said 
to have l>oen~lnvontod by tho Stoic 
Chrysippus, 373 ; l>y Eu^lidcs, ih. ; 
call^ ettfruji, ift. ; called 

(nrymitu by t'icero, /A. ; its character, 
434-5 ; its various designations, 435 ; 
well defined by Ulpian, if*. ; exempli- 
fied, 435-3. 


Space, or Extension, os absolutely bound- 
e<l, unthinkable, L 101 ; as unlimitc<l, 
inconceivable, bccaui-e contradictory, 
l32 ; as an alsiiolute minimum, or as in- 
finitolv divitlod, inconceivable, 104. 

Special l»gic, ffr Ijogic. 

SjKjcial or Concrete l^gic, ttf liOgic. 

S|ieciea, Genus. 

S]>eculation, as a means of knowlc<lgc, «’<* 
Knowledge, Doctrine of tho Acquisition 
and Perfecting of. 

Stattlor, L : quotc<l on canons of syllo- 
gism, ii. 323 7. 

Stcplianus, L 1 19 ; his imitation of 
an epigram of Phixrylidcs, 3U3. 

Btownrt, Dugnld, quoted on the liability of 
notions to vagueness and ambiguity, L 
174-7 : refers to Hume ami CamplHd), 
lA. ; his unfavourable strictures on the 


alleged mcMkm origin of certain techni- 
cal logical language, groundless, 2i <3, 
27U ; ii. IIU : quotcii on influcnoo of 
association, 124-3. 137-^. 

Sb>icheiology, or Doctrine of KU raenU, 
D>gic. 

Stoics, viewed Ijogic a* a science, L 9; 
their nomenclature of tho part* of the 
HyiM*thctical Syllogism, 340 ; the ex- 
cogitation of the ««jphism A/aum liafio 
attributed to, 432 ; but this doubtful, 

m. 

Stralsi, L 393. 

SlrigeliuB, ii. 273. 

Suarez, on the principle of Contradiction, 
L ^ 99 : ; referrerl to on classifica- 

tion of the categories, 2tHt 

Subject, of A Judgment or Pn>jswtion, 
what, L 22S ; called frrm or rxtremf, lA., 
sr^ Judginoiits, Pn»position. 

Subjective Logic, /re Logic. 

Subsidi.iries or .\ids of thinking, Doctrine 
of, Logic. 

Suhonlinntion of Ccmcepts, fff Concepts, 
Pciation.s of. 

Sufficient Kcason, or Itenson and Conse- 
quent, principle of, a fumlamoiital law 
of thought, L Z9 (Aa< 9€t 83) ; what 
and how exprc.ssed, 84 ; relations be- 
tween Ke.x'on and ConstHjuent, 84-5 ; 
logical significance of, h5 ; discrimin- 
ated fivnn the principle of Cause and 
Elfect, S5-t> ; lot/lral and mfiapk^stcal 
ami eouMfitirut^ iA, ; these l>oth 
included under tho terms conditioK 
and rtntddion^d, 83 : this law should 
bo cxcluiic*! from Ix>gic, iA. ; rccog- 
niseil by Plato, 93 ; by Arlsbdle, lA. ; 
bv both under tho ambiguous teim 
curfa, oTtiov, (cituf*), ih. ; but tho 
principle of Kiiowlcslg© dlscrimiii.ited 
py Aristotle from tho principle of Pro- 
duction, ih. ; comprehended iiy Cicero, 
and by tho sc’hoolmcn, un<ler the for- 
mula htAii $iht cattfa, ih. ; but under 
that discriminated, ih. ; in modem 
times attention called to it by TiCibniU, 
ih. ; but not adequately discriminated 
by him, ih. \ controversy bcewoen 
Leibnitz and Dr Samuel Clarke on this 
law, among other jKdnts, ; ossumcil 
by Leibnitz os the foundation of Natu- 
ral PhiU*Rophy, ih. ; the form of tho 
Hyi»othotical Syllogism deUrmino<i 
)»v, 337 ; how enounced by Wolf, 94 ; 
discussion rcganling tho l/cibnitiao 
principle of, 9 1 5 ; law of, regulates, in 
conjunction with that of excIudcHl 
middle, Hypotholico-disjunclivo syllo- 
gisms, 291 ; only another expression 
of Aristotle’s law, that the whole is 
necessrtrily conceived os prior to tho 
part, 357 ; authors rcferro«i to on, ii. 
2 48 ; that can bo de<luce<i from law of 
Contra<Hction, ih. ; that cannot l>o so 
doduc<‘d, /A., Kun'inincntal Laws of 
Thought. 


Digiiized by Google 


500 


INDKX. 


Suidan, i, 4>>^. 

Sumption and Subsumption, host names 
for the ])rcmisos of a nyllo^Bm, L ; 
their oinploymont vindicate!, 28d-d ; 
not constitulotl by the more order of 
enunciation, 310 ; what truly consti- 
tutes these, 31U-I1. 

Suter, ipiotod on canon of Svlloj^sm, ii. 
327. 

Syllogism, original n^oaning of the term, 
L 271i ; borrowotl from Mathematics, 
ih . ; E»tgi*nioa, Hloinmidas, and Zubar- 
©Ua quoted on import of, tj^ 282. et $eff . ; 
general conditions of, ; the {virts of 
which compose*!, and their denomina- 
tions, 2^(>-2 ; these cxplicatotl. 2»s2 rtfe */. ; 
Promises, major and minor, ib. ; Sump- 
tion, Subsutnption, (.'onclusion, l>cst 
names for tho tliroo propositions of, 
283 ; Lemma, Hyi>olemma, ib. ; As- 
sumption, 2>4 ; objections to tho do- 
nominations of the propositions of, in 
onliuarj' use, 284»5 ; tho use of Stnnp- 
(40H and sanctioned by pro- 

codont. 285-d ; i)ivisions of, 2Sii af i>ey. ; 
first division of Syllc^:isro8, compre- 
hending all tho others, into Extensive 
and Comprohensivo, 2 m>- 7 ; matter and 
fomi of, ^7-»8 ; proximate and remote 
matter of, 2^8 ; the form affords the 
next grand distinction of, lA. ; the form 
of, two-fold — Internal and External, 
2.S8-9 ; L Acconling to Internal or 
Elssential Form, Syllogisms are divido<l 
into four classes, as regulated by tho 
laws— 1% Of Identity and Coiitnuliction, 
2", Of Exclude*! Middle, Of Reason 
and ('onsequont, nn<l, 4', Of Exchulotl 
Midiilo and of Reason and Consequent, 
viz. Categorical, Disjunctive, llyjK>theti- 
cal, and liyqHjtlieticodisjunctivo, or Di- 
lommatic. 291.3 8<>9-72. and In* 

foronco) ; those four classes comprised in 
two genera. Simple and Conti it ional ,293, 
CatoTOrical, Hypothetical, Disjunc- 
tive an*! Hyjiothctico-disjunctivo Syl- 
logism ; Categorical Syllogism, tho one 
class under the genus Simple Syllogism, 

; its general nature, ; may pro- 
ceed in the (piantily of Extension, and 
in that of Comprehension, 2Ho ; exam- 
ples of the Extensive, and of tho Inten- 
sive or ComprohenRive Catogtjrical Syl- 
logism, 296 ; these reasonings or syllo- 
gisms explicitly compared an*l contrast- 
eil. 2i>7 ti ; logici.ans looking only to 
tbo reasoning in Extension have given 
narrow anti orrt>ncous tlchnitionsof tho 
Major, Middle, anti Minor terms, 21^7- 
8 ; Aristotle’s definition of these will 
apply to both tpiantitics, 299-3lK\ »e< 
also 218-9, st f Terms of Sj'llogism ; 
most convenient rntnlo of stating n 
syllogism in an abstract form by tho 
letters S, P, M, 390 {but set ii. 469, 473, 
476) ; divide*! into special classes oc- 
conling to the application of the l.aws 
of Iilcntity and Contratliction, under 


tho relation of whole an*l part, 3Q1 fl 
sey. ; this relation may lye regarded in 
two points of view, and thus affords 
two classes of Reasonings, viz. Deduc- 
tive oml Inductive, 301-2 ; L Deductive 
Categorical Syl)t>gism, character of tho 

i iroccss in, 302 tt srq. ; its canons, in 
ntension and in Extension, 30.3-4 ; con- 
nection of the propositions ami terms 
of, illustrated by sensible sj'mbols, 304- 
fi ; j>roximnte rules of, L Extensive — 
Three Rules, 305-0 ; first rule of, illus- 
trated, 3ut)-8; second niloof,illu8tmtc*l, 
308-1 1 ; misconception in regard to de- 
finition of Sumjition in second rule 
obviated, JiOy-ll ; third rule, 31 1-2 ; 
Z Intensive, three rules, iili et uq. ; 
first rule illustrated, 315 ; second rule 
illustrated, 315-7 ; grounds of the rules 
regarding Sumption and SuKsumption 
in Extensive an*i Comj»r©hcnsivo Syllo- 
gisms, 316-7 ; thini rule illustrated, 
317-8 ; II. Inductive Categorical Syl- 
logism, what, 31 H ; views of Ic^- 
cians roganiing the nature of this i*oa- 
soning erroneous, 319 et stq., see In- 
Induction ; canons of tho Dc<hictivo 
and Inductive Syllogisms equally for- 
mal, 321 ; thu.'^ reo-sunings illustrated, 
321-2 ; objection obviated, 322-3 ; 
formuho for Inductive Syllogisms in 
Comprohension and Extension, 32.3-4; 
Whatcly and others orronoou-slv make 
tho iniluctivo syll<^sm dcsiuctivo, 
324 ; doctrine of tho older logicians 
different, an*l correct as far a.** it goes, 
324-5 ; though tho Categorical Syllo- 
gism is H|>ociHlly regulate*! by the laws 
of Identity an*l Contradiction, still tho 
other logical laws also o^>erative in, 
y>3-4 ; Divisions of acconhng — II. To 
External Form, 362-44S ; A. Complex, 
— Epichoirema, and Sorites, 362-85; 
relation of syllogisms to each other, 
3&3 ; clns.scs ami designations of related 
svllogi.sms, ib, ; Monusyllogism, what, 
ii. ; Polysyllogism, what, ib . ; this 
Analytic and Synthetic, 3<i4 ; Progyllo- 
gism, ib . ; E]»lsyllogism, t‘A., see Epi- 
choirema, Sorites ; pirobablo reason 
why logicians, in the case of simple 
syllogisms, overlooked the reasoning 
of Compirehension, ; divisions of, 
acconling to Kxtcm.al Form, B. 
Defective, — Enthyraemo, 38*>-94. aa. 
Knthymemo ; C. Regular and Irre- 
gular, 394-4-IH. see Figure, Mood, Ro- 
duction of f^'lWisms ; irregular by 
relation, 1^ To tho transj>o.scd order 
of its Propositions; 2', Of its Terms; 
3 . Of lK)th its Propositions and 
Terms, 395-6 ; d*H'trino of logicians 
regarding tho r*‘gularity an*l irregular- 
ity of, in resj>octof the onlcrof ilspiro- 
{Kisilions, 395 ; this one-si<lod and erro- 
neous, ib. ; in rc^s|Toot of its Terms, a 
syllogism is regular or irregular, ac- 
cording to the ]>lacc which the Middle 


Digilized by (juugle 


INDEX. 


507 


Torin bold)* in tho premiscfl, ifK ; regu- 
lar and irre^ilar onler of, in C’miipro- 
hension and Extension. ; tho re- 

lative fM>8itii>ii of tho Middle Term in a 
Bvlln^risra conatitutoH ita F'ignro, \i\hi ; 
tho Four Fijotre** of. «/''• ; mnemonic 
%'cit‘cs for Fijrurcs, 81*7. Fi>^ir« of 
Syll<i>fi«m : rojftilurity and irretfuLarity 
of, explicated, .K*7 et sr^/. ; irrvi^ularity 
in extonml fonn of, ariain^ from trans- 
position t>f tho Projosiiions, 8l>7-400 ; 
can 1 h) pempicioualy expnw»c<i by any 
of the Hvo irrcjrtilar consecutions of ita 
pro]K>sitions, 81*7-9 ; trio doctrine of 
consecution of syllogism, which U 
either Synthetic, tho premiscM l»cinjf 
placed 6rst, tho conelnsion last, or 
Analytic, tho conclusion prcccdini^, tho 
prenuHos fiillowiiiM'. 399-4<K) ; sc'cond 
ffround of roj^ilarity and irrcipilarity 
of. — llio natuni) nmi transiKjsod onicr 
of tho Sylloifistic Terms, 4<K» tt 

Figure of Syllogism ; all tho va- 
rieties of, divide*! into classes, accord- 
ing to their Validity, vix. into Correct 
or True, and Incorrect or False, 4iii ; 
tho mooning of those terms ns applied 
to syllogisms detennino<l, 450 5 1 ; in- 
correct, divi*!e<i into Paralogisms and 
Sophisms, 4 19-452 : this distinction 
not of directly logical import. 45'i ; but 
not altogether without logical value, 
ih. ; incorrect, vicious, cither in respect 
of their form, or of their matter, or in 
rcsj>cct of both form an«l raatWr, 450- 
2 ; syllogisms incorrect in rc«f>oct of 
inoir matter lie beyond tho juriwlic- 
tii*n of liOgic, 452 ; syllogisms formally 
incorrect, to l>e judgo<i by an applica- 
tion of the rules of syllogism, 452. see 
Fallacies; how distinguished from Pro- 
bation. ii. dli ; on the mutual relations 
of tbo terms of, in quantity and qua- 
lity, through the ai>plication of tho 
di>ctrine of a (piantificd predicate. 285- 
9 ; general canon of, 285 ; tho throe 
)K>ssiblo relations of terms, — 1. Toto- 
total 1 'oinclusion ; 2» Toto-total Coex- 
clusion ; Ih Incomplete Coinclusion, 
involving Incomplete Cocxclusion, ib. ; 
the first is tho best, the second tbo 
worst, tho third intermediate, ib, ; tho 
whole order of l>ost and worst quanti- 
fication throughout the two qimlitics, 
2^S<^•7 ; application of this doctrine in 
special oases of tho general canon of, 
in tho 12 affirmative and ^ negative 
mootls, 287-9; C-anons of, general histo- 
ricalnoticcs regarding, ii. 317-44; quota- 
tions fnira various logicians on, 31 7-1^; 
Donxlon rofernxl to in, 317-8; Kapin, 
318-9 ; Leibnitz, 319 ; Kcusch, 319-20 ; 
Crusius, 320-22 ; Hutcheson, 322-4 ; 
Savonarola, 324 ; Alex. G. Baumgtirten, 
324-5 : Iteimarus, 325 ; Waldin, 325-0 ; 
Stattlor. 320-7 : Souter. 327 : Suter. 
327 ; Soguv, 327-8 ; Hoflbauor, 32H-9 ; 
Kant, 329-6 o ; Cbriatian Weiss, 330-31 ; 


Fries, 331 -.5 ; Kicsovrottcr, 335 ; Tvir- 
roqiio, li‘15-7 ; Galluppi, 3^177 Buffier, 
337-8 ; V’ictorin, references to 

authors on fundamental laws of, 339-41 ; 
enunciations of, 34 1-3 ; Dictum de 4<mni 
et nullo, crilicisod, 342-3 ; general laws 
of, in verse, 343-4 ; criticism by tbo 
author of the special laws of, 344-^ ; 
tlie authors supremo canons of. ;150 ; 
drK'trine of, attockc<l, as involving a 
jiriHripUt ; how this ob- 
jection IS to 1 h> mot, 398, 4ul ; this ob- 
jection made by Stewart and refuted by 
GaMuppi, 41il ; its enouncomont Ana- 
lytic ami Synthetic, 388-9 ; these mo- 
thixls of onoiincement comimrod, 3^ 
4ul ; Unfiguroti and Figured, 4U4-5 ; dii- 
fereneo of Figure of, of no account, 
405-0. 

Sj'mliolical and Intuitive Knowledge, see 
Concepts, Quality of. 

Synthesis, ii. ^ see Method. 

Tacitus, quoto«l, ii. 133. 

Tartorotus, Petrus, commentator on Hia- 
panus, L 0^ ii. ‘107. 

Tcnncmann, i, 2<K). 

Toniis of a Pro]K>sition. iee Proposition. 

Terms of Sj’llogLsm, Major, ^nno^, an<l 
MUldle, what, L '294-5 ; b»>rrowo<l from 
Mathematics, 29S ; their synonyms, 
29H-9 ; in Extension tho prcxlicate of 
tho conclusion the greatest whole, and, 
therefore, tho major term, the subject 
tho smalloKt nart, and, therefore, tho 
minor terra, 295j in Comprehension, tho 
subject of tho conclusion is the greatest 
W'holo, and, therefore, the major term, 
tho predicate tho smallest i>art, and, 
therefore, tho minor term, lo . ; narrow 
and erroneous definitions by logicians 
of. 297-8; Aristotle’s definition of, 299 ; 
his definition of tho mi<ldle term as 
niiddle by position not applicable Ut 
the mode in which subsequent logicians 
enounce tho syllogism, ib. ; but anpli- 
caiile to tho reasoning in Comprohon- 
sioD, 291*-3tn> : possible to state a 

reasoning in Extension in which tho 
major term shall staud first, the mid- 
<Uo second, and the minor last, 300 ; 
what U firoporly to bo rogardoii as u 
term of syllogism, 3o6-7. 

Testimony, what, ii. 17.5 ; explicated, 173 
et seq.\ its proper object, 177-8; tho 
obioct of, called the Fact, 178 ; tho 
valiility of, called Uistoricnf Credibilit^f 
iL. ; either imniodiato or mediate, ib. ; 
on immediate witness stylo<l an eye- 
vitHess, ib. ; a mediate an <ar-ir//HeM, 
ib. ; \.\ifi*tuai'aHtee, what, i6. ; testimony 
may be Partial, Complete, Consistent 
Contradictory, >5. ; division of the sub- 
ject: — I. Cr^ibility of Testimony in 
goneml, lllii et $eq. ; 1% the object of 
tho testimony— its absolute poOTibility, 
179-81 ; phyrical and metaphysical pos- 
sibility, 1 80-81 ; iU relative possibility, 


Digili, 


Google 


508 


INDEX. 


ISl ; 2’, Tho subject of, or personal 
tniKlwurtliincHs <>f the witness, l?5l-2 ; 
this consisu of two oicmcnts, a. 
Honesty or veracity, liS2-3 ; the pre- 
sumption of tho honesty of n witness 
enhanced by certain circumstances, I S3; 
b. C’-ompotcncy of a witness, ih. \ circum- 
stancoH by which tho presumption of 
competency is enhanced, ib. ; the cre- 
dibility of Testimony not invaliiiatcd 
)>ccatiso tho fact tostifie<l is one out of 
the onlinarj' course of exi^ricoco, 1S.3- 
^ munmary ro^fimUog’ the crodihi- 
Iity of testimony in Koneml, 184-5 ; 
II. Testimony in Special, as immefliato 
and mediate, 185 D, Immediate, 
1S5 : conditions <»f ills credibility, ih. ; 
whether all these ounditions aro ful- 
filleil in tho ciiso of any immediate tes- 
timony, cannot Imj diret.*tly ascertained, 
l?<5-6 : when t^tiinony attains tho 
hi)fhcst ilcyroo of probability, ; 
negative ami fM»sitive tliscropancy, 1S7* 
^ 2'', Mc<liate, ; metliaie 

witnos-sea arc cither proximate or re- 
mote, and either in(io{>cndcnt or do- 
Mndcnt. ; Rumour, Tradition, IW ; 
iiecorded Testimony, et ; Criti- 
cism and Intcrprot'Uion, what, U»l-2: 
these explicated, liid tt ; tho exami- 
nation of a testimony twofold —of its 
Autlienticity and Integrity, an<l of its 
Moaning, 1*J3; tho fonuor the problem 
of Criticism {Critica), tho latter of In- 
terpretation or exposition {lUruifntu* 
tica, Kxftjttirii), 193 ; L Criticism con- 
Kidorcsl in detail, UM-9 ; its problems, 
194 ; Universal an<i Special Criticism, 

ih, ; Universal (’riticism alone within 
the sphere of Logic, iV>, ; this divide<l 
into Higher anil I»wer Criticism, or 
the Criticism of Authenticity an<l the 
(’riticism of Integrity, ih. ; L Criticism 
of Authenticity, 19 .')-d ; a. Intoriial 
Grounds, these of themselves not suffi- 
cient to establish tlic autlienticity of a 
writing, 195 ; hnt omnipotent to dis- 
tirove an alloged authenticity, ih. ; b. 
tixtoma) fj'rouinls, lth> : 2^ (Mticism of 
Integrity, llffi-9 : cmenflation of tho 
text of two kinds — viz. Historical and 
O'nioctural 197 : historical, of two 
kinds, External and Intoi-nn), 198 ; 
Conjectural, 1 99 ; II. InU^rpretation, 
199-201 ; General and Special, 199 ; 
sources of int«r{>retation, 2> lo-’iul. 

Toxt-Rook, its use in a systematic course 
of Lectures, L 2. 

Themistius, rfferre*! to on genus of Logic, 
L 9 ; ii. 

Theophrastus, referred to on u.so of tho 
termca/oA>riV<i/, L 234 ; 245 ; hi.s nomen- 
clature of the narts of the Hy|H>theti- 
cal Syllogism, olO ; quoted on hearing, 

ii. 212 ; ramie two moods of Darapti, 
158 ; this opinion ntloptod by Porjihyry, 
ih. ; and bv Hoothius, ih. ; butop|)oso(l 
by tho author, ih. 


Theorems, w'hat, i. 23d. 

Tliinl Figure, fft Figtii-c. 

Thomasius, Jacobus, bolds that simple 
apnrehensioo is im];>ossib)6 without 
judgment, L ll'^. 

Thought, tho Pmdiicts of, Coneepts, 
Judgments, Reawmings. 

Thought, what, L 12 r/ tftj. ; in its wider 
moaning, equivalent to every cognitive 
act, or oven to every conscious mental 
moditication, L2 ; in its narrower mean- 
ing .a.H thought proper, denotes tho acts 
of tho Understanding projior, 1^ 1^ Hi 
in tho latter sense, the object-niatlor of 
Logic, Matter anti Form of, dis- 
tinguished, 15^ fihrrnomena of formal, 
of two kinds, contingent and nocossary, 
24 ; necessary form of, imtdlos four 
Conditions, — L Dctomiinwi by tiio 
nature of the thinking subject itself, 
2. Original, iL Universal, L A law, 
21-5 ; iU subject, form, and matter 
discnmiiiatod, 73 ; as tho object ro- 
pj»ectively of Psycbologj* and of Ix»gic, 

73- 4 ; a mediate and complex cognition, 

74- d ; the vamms ti?rms by which tho 
modes of thought, or cogitable exist- 
ence, aro designated, 7<*-7 ; what is in- 
volved in thinking an object, 77 ; tho 
attribution implied in, regulated by laws, 
7\ jif<* Fundamental I^aws of Thought; 
distinction of Positive and Negative, 
lirj : its priKlucts are of three kinds, — 
Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, 
Hiirt atihi ; these are all products of 
com{>aris4m and all luodincations of 
Judgment, 117-18. Concepts, Judg- 
ments, Reasonings; its forma! or logical 
jKjrfoction consist.^ <»f tlirco virtues, — 
Clearness, Distinctness, and Harmony, 
ii. ^9. 

Timplor, L 51j I9.'t ; referred to on whole 
and i>^.~ ^2 ; 2<i7 : ii. 3_L fl- 

Titius, (fottliob Gerhanl, roferre<l to on 
a]>plication of quantiheatiou of predi- 
cate to the H\q>othetical Projiosttion. ii. 
2.^.1 ; his doctrine of Conveniion pro- 
ccoils on tho doctrine <if a quantified 
proilicate, 2Z1 ; quoted on quantifi- 
cation of pre<licate, 312 ; hU doctrine 
of IlyiKithcticnl Syllogism an proceed- 
ing on tiiu npplicatii>n of the princiiilo 
of a quantified predicate, 375 -8 ; nis 
doctrine of Disjunctive Syllogism, 378 : 
hold both forms merely to be tho matter 
of regul.ar Sylli^i.sm, ih. ; his doctrine 
of tho Figure and Mood of Syllogism, 
44>-ll. 

Tittel, ii. UL 

Topir, employed by Aristotle to denote a 
particular part of Logic, L is. 

Toussaint, ii. 1 H- 

TrahsrghfUkt and Ti'anscduitnitaf^ their 
original application, ami use bv Kant, 
L lii8. 

Trendelenburg, F. A., reforreil to on tho 
title On/anon for the logical treatises 
of Aristotle, L 34 ; referred to for the 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX. 


500 


cloctrinoa of the PlatoniflU arul Stoii** 
oil tho CatogoricA, ‘JOl ; ; ii. 

il 

Troxior, L HI ; ii. 5. 

Tnith, iU division into I>>gical and Meta* 

f ihysical, criticised, L lliii; what, 107 ; 
oiricnl discriminated from absoluto, 
4;iii.7>l. ,Seg Tnith and Error, Doctrine 
of. 

Truth and Error, Doctrine of, ii. ; 

Truth and Certainty, what, 1IL2 ; 
Truth is defined tho correspondence or 
agreoniont of a cognition with it« ob- 
ject, ^ ; Uii.H definition duo to tho 

schoolmen, t>3 ; Aquinas (piotod to this 
efTcct, ih. ; philosupliors ngroed os to 
tho definition of truth, questions 
in (lobato regarding, — whether truth bo 
attainable, and whether wo |m)8scm.s any 
criterion by which wo can bo assurtsl 
of its atUunment, (i4 ; for man only 
two kinds of, — Formal and Real, if*. \ 1. 
Formal Tnith, the harmony of Thought 
with tho form of Thought, iff.; Foniml 
Tnith of two kinds, — IjOgical and 
Mathematical, ; II. Real Truth, — 
tho Imnnitny between a thought anil 
its matter, fill ; Heal and Formal 
Hcicnccs, (ki-7 : I low can wc know that 
there is a corTos|K n loiico between our 
thought and its object? 67-S : subdivi- 
sions of Real Truth,- - Metaphysical, Psy- 
chological, Physical, fiS ; various appli- 
cations of tho term trutA, ; the 
criterion of,— tho nccosisity dotormino<l 
by tho laws which gt>vcm our faculties 
of knowledge, ; Certainty, the con- 
sciousness of this necessity, ih.; truth 
considered in relation to tho degree and 
kind of certainty is distinguished as 
Knowledge, Rtdicf, ami Opinion, Bi- 
ll}; KnoH'ledgeand Belief, — their differ- 
onco, Zii ; that the certainty of all know- 
ledge is ultimately resolvable into a 
certainty of belief maintuinocl by Lu- 
ther, if*.; bv Arisstotlo, 70-'2 : by tho 
I’latonisU, Zi; by David Hume. 72-3 ; 
tho manifestation of Belief involves 
knowledge, 73 ; Intuition, what, if*. ; 
the question as to the relation of l>clief 
and Knowloilgo iiru|K>rly metaphysical, 
73 ; Pure and Empirical Truth, distin- 
guished, 73-4 ; Error, iU chanteter and 
sources, Z5 ; this exp)icato<l, 75 ft nf/f. ; 
OH the opposite of truth, consists in a 
want of agreement between a thought 
and its object, 7f> ; distinguished as 
materia}, ih. ; as Formal, 7B-7 ; when 
closely scrutinised is found to arise 
from the want of adequate activity of 
the cognitive faculties, TTj discrirni- 
nnttHl from Ignorance, 77-8 ; from Illu- 
sion, 78-9 ; tef Error, Causes of. 
TschimhatLsen, L 3^ 

Twosten, L ;^»4 ; ii. til ; 75 ; quote«I on the 
nature of Error, 7B-7 : quoted on Ignor- 
ance, Illusion, jwc., 78-9. 


Ui.Pr.\N, hisdoctrino of tho Enthymomo, 
L 3H1 • hisdeBnition of tho Sorites, 4b5. 

Ulrich, L iilil ; 4>>>i ; quotoil on quantiHca- 
tion of prc<licato, iL 316-7. 

Ultra-total Quantification of Middle Term, 
Lambert's doctrine of, ii. ;k71-3 ; this 
doctrine criticised, 351 ; author’s doc- 
trine of, ;i5.3-7. 

Universal ProiH)8itions, L 243, eft Judg- 
menu. 

*'*t<mpov irpSTtpoy, see Probation. 

Valla, Lacuentius, 201 ; 367 : first to 
iwe tho term •Seri7« in its present appli- 
cation, 37Z ; quotoil on Conversion, 
ii. 274 ; his doctrine of tho Second and 
Thinl Figures, 41U-11. 

Valerius Maximus <?>, quoted, ii. 212. 

Vullius, Puiilus, quot^ on Conversion, ii. 
275. 3»8. 

Varillas, ii. 213. 

Versor. his doctrine of Induction, ii. .367. 

VicUirin, ii. ^ 14 : quote«l on canons of 
Syllogism, 

\rictorinu8, bis doctrine of tho Enthy- 
mume, L 322. 

Stff*rt‘f>tioMii, what, ii. 133. 

Vivos, Ludovicus, L 2^<2 ; his opinion re- 
garding silent meditation as a mciuisof 
intellectual improvement combated by 
Bcaligor, ii. 2 uh ; quoted on importance 
of teaching as a mean of solf-improve- 
mont, 211. 

Voet, or Voetius, Gisl>ert, his comlucL 
cited as an instance of the Influence of 
passion on opinion, ii. 103. 

Vossius, Geram John, rcfontxl to on 
genwB of Logic, L roforrod to for 
scholastic theories of the object-matter 
of Logic, 28 ; Hh. 

WaITZ, quoted regarding Xtryisij iLvopla^ 
L iVM 2^ 27^ m 

Walcb, L 507 ; ii. 147. 

Walilin, quotc<I on canons of Syllogi.sm, 
ii. 

Wallis, Dr John, his /HStitHtio lAtgirtr, L 
20 ; referred to on names of proposi- 
tions in Conversion, 263 ; referred to 
on character of Hvjxithotico- Disjunctive 
Syllogi.Ara, 35<) ; his English version of 
Die I^iAtin mnemonics for the four kinds 
of pro|>o8itiuns, 4u3. 

Walz, L 

Watts, Dr Isaac, L 35 ; his fjoyic, Til 

Wegelin, ii. 25t5 ; 3tX). 

Weise, Christian, employetl (before Enler) 
circular diagrams os logical notation, 
i. 25<». 

Weiss, Cliristian, L 239 ; quoted on canons 
of Syllogi.sm, ii. 3:{0-.31. 

SVerenfelsius, his he Logomachiit Erudi‘ 
torum referred to, U. 14S. 

Wbately, Dr, his definition of Ix>gic quot- 
<xl and criticised, L 11, ^ general 
character of his EfemenU r*J~L<Hjic. 2^ 
his view of the object-matter ana do- 


Digitized by Google 


510 


INDEX. 


main of Lo^ic, stated and criticised. 

; proptises to I»( 2 :io different and 
contrariicton,' object-matter, Qo ft ; 
the operation of Rca^^nincr not the 
oiijoct-matter of Lo^o, o« affirmed by, 
SI ; orroncou-Hly an<i contradictorily 
makes Lon^age the object-matter of 
Logic, SL2 ; the tnio nature of Logic 
more corroclly undcrsUKHl by the schol- 
astic logicians than by, 32<3 ; his Jilt' 
iuenU of Logic, 70; omits the doctrino 
of Concepts from bis KUwenti of Lo»tir, 
118 ; abufUTely employ's the terms Ex- 
tenaiun and Comprehension as convert- 
ible, 119, 2*11 ; follows Altirich in his 
abusive employment of the nhraso ywo- 
poxHio ex( 0 $ita, 2<i3 ; his amisive em- 
ployment of the terms hgpoOictical and 
co^ditionol , 23t>; »piote<l on the mcHlnlity 
of pro|K>sitions, 258 ; his doctrine crili- 
cise<l, 258-9 ; his roiluctioD of the rules 
of Cntcgoriciil Syll(^ism to six, 305 ; 
ii. 171. 

Whole and Part, what, L 202 ; whole 
H, an<i whole i>er aroVfgwj. 2< '2-3 ; whole 
$e dividen into, 1% Logical or Po- 
tential, 2% Motaphysica) or Actual, ^ 
Physical, 4% Mathematical, 6“, Collec- 
tive, 2<»3-4 ; the terms tuf»Jccf und /w/>. 
jertirf as applied to the Ixigical Wbolo 
and Parts, ‘^>4 ; the term f otential as 
a]>plicd to denote the Ixigtcal Whole, 
2!J& ; Ix>rd Monbo<ido quoiotl on jxttcn- 
tiaf, 205-0 ; Stewart's strictures on the 
tioHsagc from Monl>oddo rebutted, 200 ; 
MonlxHldo wrong in ascribing the 
authorship and application of the term 
potential to Kugenius, ; l>oth term 
and application to bo found, with few 
exceptions, in all the older systems of 
Logic, ib. ; Burgersdyk quoted as an 
example, 2fMl-7 ; the difference of the 
Potential and Actual Whole noticed by 
Aristotle, 2ti7 ; all reasoning under the 
relation of, 270-71. 801 ; this rotation 
roav bo roganlod in two jmints of view, 
and thus affonls two classes of Hea.son- 
ings,~ Deductive and Inductive, 3(^l-2; 
difficulty in connection with Hypothe- 
tical Hyllogisms in regard to tLo doe- 
iriiio that all reasoning is either from 
the whole to port or from the jKvrts to 
the whole, — considonxl and otiviato<l, 
H.55 ft $e */. ; Antccoilent an«l Consequent 
iu Hypotheticals eijuid to Condition 


and Conditionctl, 350 ; hence the rea- 
son or condition must contain the con- 
sequent, 35t»-7 • the law of Reason and 
Consctjuent only another expression of 
Aristotle's law, Thai the whole is neces- 
sarily conceived as prior to the }virt, 
357 ; Aristotle’s law criticised, 357-9 ; 
Whole and Parts ros^iectirely may be 
viewed in thought either as the con- 
ditioning or os the conditioned, 358 ; 
a|iplication of this doctrine to the solu- 
tion of the difficulty previously stated, 
3.19. 

Wilson, his English metrical version of 
the Latin mnemonics for the four kinds 
of Propositions, i. 403. 

Wolf, Christian, misapplied the terms 
J^ogicfi doctM and Logon vtens, L 5S-0 ; 
hU division of lK>gic into Theoretical 
and tactical, 5U ; used the phrase ex- 
clusto medii inter ctintradictoria, 91 ; 
calleil the principle of Identity princi^n- 
Mm certitudinif, 1*2 ; did not sufficiently 
discriminate the principles of Identity 
an<l Contnyliction, ih. ; his formula fur 
the law of Sufficient Reason, 94 ; 
blamed the schoolmen for not distm- 
l^shing rraios (ratio) andravse (ravsu), 
lb. ; attempted to demonstrate the law 
of Sufficient Reason by that of Contra- 
diction. 9.5 ; quotetl on Intuitive and 
Symbolical Knowlo<lgo, 184-6; 254 ; 
321 ; made the inductive syllogism do- 
ductive, 324 ; 3^48; 342; 367 ; his re<luc- 
tion of Raroco, 440 ; jj. J 3 ; 166 ; 174. 

Wolfians, some, distinguished juilgmenU 
as Limitative, L 254 ; followed by Kant, 
ih. ; the ilistinctiou groundless, Ul 

Words, srr l.angungo. 

Wyttonltfich, Daniel, L 6j his Logic re- 
commonde^l, 7^, 4*>5 ; referred to on 
Analysis and S^thesis, ii. 144. 

Zarareli.a, Jacobus, referred to on genus 
of Logic, L ii ; referred to for scliolastio 
theories of the object-matter of l»gic, 
27 ; quoteil on im|K>rt of the term ouA- 
\oyiefi6$, 279 ; ij25 ; 414 ; held Cesar© 
and Camestres to 1»o the same svllo- 
gism, 4-16. Mc€ id to 4I4 ; ii. ^ ^ loL 

Zodlor, ii. 174. 

Zeno, the Stoic, said by I.acrtius to have 
purchased Uie knowlo<lge of seven spe- 
cies of the argument K6yos $epi^eey for 
two hundred mina*, L 463. 


I * 

TlAC, 

uigiiizsd by Google 